<doc id="488083" wikidata="Q639219" url="?curid=488083" title="Theory of mind">
<text>In psychology and philosophy, theory of mind (often abbreviated to ToM) refers to the capacity to understand other individuals by ascribing mental states to them. A theory of mind includes the understanding that others&#x27; beliefs, desires, intentions, emotions, and thoughts may be different from one&#x27;s own. Possessing a functional theory of mind is crucial for success in everyday human social interactions. People utilize a theory of mind when analyzing, judging, and inferring other people&#x27;s behaviors. 

Theory of mind was first conceptualized by researchers evaluating the presence of theory of mind in animals. Today, theory of mind research also investigates factors affecting theory of mind in humans, such as whether drug and alcohol consumption, language development, cognitive delays, age, and culture can affect a person&#x27;s capacity to display theory of mind.

It has been proposed that deficits in theory of mind may occur in people with autism, anorexia nervosa, schizophrenia, dysphoria, addiction, and brain damage caused by alcohol&#x27;s neurotoxicity. Neuroimaging shows that the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), the precuneus, and the amygdala are associated with theory of mind tasks. Patients with frontal lobe or temporoparietal junction lesions find some theory of mind tasks difficult. One&#x27;s theory of mind develops in childhood as the prefrontal cortex develops.

== Definition ==
The &quot;theory of mind&quot; is described as a theory because the behavior of the other person, such as their statements and expressions, is the only thing being directly observed; no one has direct access to the mind of another, and the existence and nature of the mind must be inferred. It is typically assumed others have minds analogous to one&#x27;s own; this assumption is based on three reciprocal social interactions, as observed in joint attention, the functional use of language, and the understanding of others&#x27; emotions and actions. Theory of mind allows one to attribute thoughts, desires, and intentions to others, to predict or explain their actions, and to posit their intentions. It enables one to understand that mental states can be the cause of—and can be used to explain and predict—the behavior of others. Being able to attribute mental states to others and understanding them as causes of behavior implies, in part, one must be able to conceive of the mind as a &quot;generator of representations&quot;. If a person does not have a mature theory of mind, it may be a sign of cognitive or developmental impairment.

Theory of mind appears to be an innate potential ability in humans that requires social and other experience over many years for its full development. Different people may develop more or less effective theories of mind. Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development maintain that theory of mind is a byproduct of a broader hypercognitive ability of the human mind to register, monitor, and represent its own functioning.

Empathy—the recognition and understanding of the states of mind of others, including their beliefs, desires, and particularly emotions—is a related concept. Empathy is often characterized as the ability to &quot;put oneself into another&#x27;s shoes&quot;. Recent neuro-ethological studies of animal behavior suggest that rodents may exhibit empathetic abilities. While empathy is known as emotional perspective-taking, theory of mind is defined as cognitive perspective-taking.

Research on theory of mind, in humans and animals, adults and children, normally and atypically developing, has grown rapidly in the years since Premack and Guy Woodruff&#x27;s 1978 paper, &quot;Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?&quot;. The field of social neuroscience has also begun to address this debate by imaging the brains of humans while they perform tasks that require the understanding of an intention, belief, or other mental state in others.

An alternative account of theory of mind is given in operant psychology and provides empirical evidence for a functional account of both perspective-taking and empathy. The most developed operant approach is founded on research on derived relational responding and is subsumed within relational frame theory. Derived relational responding relies on the ability to identify &quot;derived relations&quot;, or relationships between stimuli that are not directly learned or reinforced; for example, if &quot;snake&quot; is related to &quot;danger&quot; and &quot;danger&quot; is related to &quot;fear&quot;, people may know to fear snakes even without learning an explicit connection between snakes and fear. According to this view, empathy and perspective-taking comprise a complex set of derived relational abilities based on learning to discriminate and respond verbally to ever more complex relations between self, others, place, and time, and through established relations.

==Philosophical and psychological roots==

Discussions of theory of mind have their roots in philosophical debate from the time of René Descartes&#x27; &quot;Second Meditation&quot;, which set the foundations for considering the science of the mind.

Two differing approaches in philosophy for explaining theory of mind are theory-theory and simulation theory. Theory-theory claims that individuals use &quot;theories&quot; grounded in folk psychology to reason about others&#x27; minds. According to theory-theory, these folk psychology theories are developed automatically and innately by concepts and rules we have for ourselves, and then instantiated through social interactions. In contrast, simulation-theory argues that individuals simulate the internal states of others to build mental models for their cognitive processes. A basic example of this is someone imagining themselves in the position of another person to infer the other person&#x27;s thoughts and feelings. Theory of mind is also closely related to person perception and attribution theory from social psychology. 

It is common and intuitive to assume that others have minds. People anthropomorphize non-human animals, inanimate objects, and even natural phenomena. Daniel Dennett referred to this tendency as taking an &quot;intentional stance&quot; toward things: we assume they have intentions, to help predict their future behavior. However, there is an important distinction between taking an &quot;intentional stance&quot; toward something and entering a &quot;shared world&quot; with it. The intentional stance is a functional relationship, describing the use of a theory due to its practical utility, rather than the accuracy of its representation of the world. As such, it is something people resort to during interpersonal interactions. A shared world is directly perceived and its existence structures reality itself for the perceiver. It is not just a lens, through which the perceiver views the world; it in many ways constitutes the cognition, as both its object and the blueprint used to structure perception into understanding.

The philosophical roots of another perspective, the relational frame theory (RFT) account of theory of mind, arise from contextual psychology, which refers to the study of organisms (both human and non-human) interacting in and with a historical and current situational context. It is an approach based on contextualism, a philosophy in which any event is interpreted as an ongoing act inseparable from its current and historical context and in which a radically functional approach to truth and meaning is adopted. As a variant of contextualism, RFT focuses on the construction of practical, scientific knowledge. This scientific form of contextual psychology is virtually synonymous with the philosophy of operant psychology.

==Development==
The study of which animals are capable of attributing knowledge and mental states to others, as well as the development of this ability in human ontogeny and phylogeny, identifies several behavioral precursors to theory of mind. Understanding attention, understanding of others&#x27; intentions, and imitative experience with others are hallmarks of a theory of mind that may be observed early in the development of what later becomes a full-fledged theory.

Simon Baron-Cohen proposed that infants&#x27; understanding of attention in others acts as a critical precursor to the development of theory of mind. Understanding attention involves understanding that seeing can be directed selectively as attention, that the looker assesses the seen object as &quot;of interest&quot;, and that seeing can induce beliefs. A possible illustration of theory of mind in infants is joint attention. Joint attention refers to when two people look at and attend to the same thing. Parents often use the act of pointing to prompt infants to engage in joint attention; understanding this prompt requires that infants take into account another person&#x27;s mental state and understand that the person notices an object or finds it of interest. Baron-Cohen speculates that the inclination to spontaneously reference an object in the world as of interest, via pointing, (&quot;Proto declarative pointing&quot;) and to likewise appreciate the directed attention of another, may be the underlying motive behind all human communication.

Understanding others&#x27; intentions is another critical precursor to understanding other minds because intentionality is a fundamental feature of mental states and events. The &quot;intentional stance&quot; was defined by Daniel Dennett as an understanding that others&#x27; actions are goal-directed and arise from particular beliefs or desires. Both two and three-year-old children could discriminate when an experimenter intentionally or accidentally marked a box with stickers. Even earlier in development, Andrew N. Meltzoff found that 18-month-old infants could perform target tasks involving the manipulation of objects that adult experimenters attempted and failed, suggesting the infants could represent the object-manipulating behavior of adults as involving goals and intentions. While attribution of intention and knowledge is investigated in young humans and nonhuman animals to detect precursors to a theory of mind, Gagliardi et al. have pointed out that even adult humans do not always act in a way consistent with an attributional perspective (i.e., based on attribution of knowledge to others). In their experiment, adult human subjects attempted to choose the container baited with a small object from a selection of four containers when guided by confederates who could not see which container was baited.

Research in developmental psychology suggests that an infant&#x27;s ability to imitate others lies at the origins of both theory of mind and other social-cognitive achievements like perspective-taking and empathy. According to Meltzoff, the infant&#x27;s innate understanding that others are &quot;like me&quot; allows them to recognize the equivalence between the physical and mental states apparent in others and those felt by the self. For example, the infant uses their own experiences, orienting their head and eyes toward an object of interest to understand the movements of others who turn toward an object; that is, they will generally attend to objects of interest or significance. Some researchers in comparative disciplines have hesitated to put too much weight on imitation as a critical precursor to advanced human social-cognitive skills like mentalizing and empathizing, especially if true imitation is no longer employed by adults. A test of imitation by Alexandra Horowitz found that adult subjects imitated an experimenter demonstrating a novel task far less closely than children did. Horowitz points out that the precise psychological state underlying imitation is unclear and cannot, by itself, be used to draw conclusions about the mental states of humans.

While much research has been done on infants, theory of mind develops continuously throughout childhood and into late adolescence as the synapses in the prefrontal cortex develop. The prefrontal cortex is thought to be involved in planning and decision-making. Children seem to develop theory of mind skills sequentially. The first skill to develop is the ability to recognize that others have diverse desires. Children are able to recognize that others have diverse beliefs soon after. The next skill to develop is recognizing that others have access to different knowledge bases. Finally, children are able to understand that others may have false beliefs and that others are capable of hiding emotions. While this sequence represents the general trend in skill acquisition, it seems that more emphasis is placed on some skills in certain cultures, leading to more valued skills to develop before those that are considered not as important. For example, in individualistic cultures such as the United States, a greater emphasis is placed on the ability to recognize that others have different opinions and beliefs. In a collectivistic culture, such as China, this skill may not be as important and therefore may not develop until later.

===Language===
There is evidence that the development of theory of mind is closely intertwined with language development in humans. One meta-analysis showed a moderate to strong correlation (&quot;r&quot; = 0.43) between performance on theory of mind and language tasks. Both language and theory of mind begin to develop around the same time in children (between ages two and five), but many other abilities develop during this same time period as well, and they do not produce such high correlations with one another nor with theory of mind.

Pragmatic theories of communication assume that infants must possess an understanding of beliefs and mental states of others to infer the communicative content that proficient language users intend to convey. Since spoken phrases can have different meanings depending on context, theory of mind can play a crucial role in understanding the intentions of others and inferring the meaning of words. Some empirical results suggest that even 13-month-old infants have an early capacity for communicative mind-reading that enables them to infer what relevant information is transferred between communicative partners, which implies that human language relies at least partially on theory of mind skills.

Carol A. Miller posed further possible explanations for this relationship. Perhaps the extent of verbal communication and conversation involving children in a family could explain theory of mind development. Such language exposure could help introduce a child to the different mental states and perspectives of others. Empirical findings indicate that participation in family discussion predicts scores on theory of mind tasks, and that deaf children who have hearing parents and may not be able to communicate with their parents much during early years of development tend to score lower on theory of mind tasks.

Another explanation of the relationship between language and theory of mind development has to do with a child&#x27;s understanding of mental-state words such as &quot;think&quot; and &quot;believe&quot;. Since a mental state is not something that one can observe from behavior, children must learn the meanings of words denoting mental states from verbal explanations alone, requiring knowledge of the syntactic rules, semantic systems, and pragmatics of a language. Studies have shown that understanding of these mental state words predicts theory of mind in four-year-olds.

A third hypothesis is that the ability to distinguish a whole sentence (&quot;Jimmy thinks the world is flat&quot;) from its embedded complement (&quot;the world is flat&quot;) and understand that one can be true while the other can be false is related to theory of mind development. Recognizing these complements as being independent of one another is a relatively complex syntactic skill and correlates with increased scores on theory of mind tasks in children.

There is also evidence that the areas of the brain responsible for language and theory of mind are closely connected. The temporoparietal junction (TPJ) is involved in the ability to acquire new vocabulary, as well as to perceive and reproduce words. The TPJ also contains areas that specialize in recognizing faces, voices, and biological motion, and in theory of mind. Since all of these areas are located so closely together, it is reasonable to suspect that they work together. Studies have reported an increase in activity in the TPJ when patients are absorbing information through reading or images regarding other peoples&#x27; beliefs but not while observing information about physical control stimuli.

===Theory of mind in adults===
Adults have theory of mind concepts that they developed as children (concepts such as belief, desire, knowledge, and intention). They use these concepts to meet the diverse demands of social life, ranging from snap decisions about how to trick an opponent in a competitive game, to keeping up with who knows what in a fast-moving conversation, to judging the guilt or innocence of the accused in a court of law.

Boaz Keysar, Dale Barr, and colleagues found that adults often failed to &quot;use&quot; their theory of mind abilities to interpret a speaker&#x27;s message, and acted as if unaware that the speaker lacked critical knowledge about a task. In one study, a confederate instructed adult participants to rearrange objects, some of which were not visible to the confederate, as part of a communication game. Only objects that were visible to both the confederate and the participant were part of the game. Despite knowing that the confederate could not see some of the objects, a third of the participants still tried to move those objects. Other studies show that adults are prone to egocentric biases, with which they are influenced by their own beliefs, knowledge, or preferences when judging those of other people, or that they neglect other people&#x27;s perspectives entirely. There is also evidence that adults with greater memory, inhibitory capacity, and motivation are more likely to use their theory of mind abilities.

In contrast, evidence about indirect effects of thinking about other people&#x27;s mental states suggests that adults may sometimes use their theory of mind automatically. Agnes Kovacs and colleagues measured the time it took adults to detect the presence of a ball as it was revealed from behind an occluder. They found that adults&#x27; speed of response was influenced by whether another person (the &quot;agent&quot;) in the scene thought there was a ball behind the occluder, even though adults were not asked to pay attention to what the agent thought.

Dana Samson and colleagues measured the time it took adults to judge the number of dots on the wall of a room. They found that adults responded more slowly when another person standing in the room happened to see fewer dots than they did, even when they had never been asked to pay attention to what the person could see. It has been questioned whether these &quot;altercentric biases&quot; truly reflect automatic processing of what another person is thinking or seeing or, instead, reflect attention and memory effects cued by the other person, but not involving any representation of what they think or see.

Different theories seek to explain such results. If theory of mind is automatic, this would help explain how people keep up with the theory of mind demands of competitive games and fast-moving conversations. It might also explain evidence that human infants and some non-human species sometimes appear capable of theory of mind, despite their limited resources for memory and cognitive control. If theory of mind is effortful and not automatic, on the other hand, this explains why it feels effortful to decide whether a defendant is guilty or whether a negotiator is bluffing. Economy of effort would help explain why people sometimes neglect to use their theory of mind.

Ian Apperly and Stephen Butterfill suggested that people have &quot;two systems&quot; for theory of mind, in common with &quot;two systems&quot; accounts in many other areas of psychology. In this account, &quot;system 1&quot; is cognitively efficient and enables theory of mind for a limited but useful set of circumstances. &quot;System 2&quot; is cognitively effortful, but enables much more flexible theory of mind abilities. Philosopher Peter Carruthers disagrees, arguing that the same core theory of mind abilities can be used in both simple and complex ways. The account has been criticized by Celia Heyes who suggests that &quot;system 1&quot; theory of mind abilities do not require representation of mental states of other people, and so are better thought of as &quot;sub-mentalizing&quot;.

=== Aging ===
In older age, theory of mind capacities decline, irrespective of how exactly they are tested. However, the decline in other cognitive functions is even stronger, suggesting that social cognition is better preserved. In contrast to theory of mind, empathy shows no impairments in aging.

There are two kinds of theory of mind representations: cognitive (concerning mental states, beliefs, thoughts, and intentions) and affective (concerning the emotions of others). Cognitive theory of mind is further separated into first order (e.g., I think she thinks that) and second order (e.g. he thinks that she thinks that). There is evidence that cognitive and affective theory of mind processes are functionally independent from one another. In studies of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, which typically occurs in older adults, patients display impairment with second order cognitive theory of mind, but usually not with first order cognitive or affective theory of mind. However, it is difficult to discern a clear pattern of theory of mind variation due to age. There have been many discrepancies in the data collected thus far, likely due to small sample sizes and the use of different tasks that only explore one aspect of theory of mind. Many researchers suggest that theory of mind impairment is simply due to the normal decline in cognitive function.

=== Cultural variations ===
Researchers propose that five key aspects of theory of mind develop sequentially for all children between the ages of three and five: diverse desires, diverse beliefs, knowledge access, false beliefs, and hidden emotions. Australian, American, and European children acquire theory of mind in this exact order, and studies with children in Canada, India, Peru, Samoa, and Thailand indicate that they all pass the false belief task at around the same time, suggesting that children develop theory of mind consistently around the world.

However, children from Iran and China develop theory of mind in a slightly different order. Although they begin the development of theory of mind around the same time, toddlers from these countries understand knowledge access before Western children but take longer to understand diverse beliefs. Researchers believe this swap in the developmental order is related to the culture of collectivism in Iran and China, which emphasizes interdependence and shared knowledge as opposed to the culture of individualism in Western countries, which promotes individuality and accepts differing opinions. Because of these different cultural values, Iranian and Chinese children might take longer to understand that other people have different beliefs and opinions. This suggests that the development of theory of mind is not universal and solely determined by innate brain processes but also influenced by social and cultural factors.

=== Historiography ===

Theory of mind can help historians to more properly understand historical figures&#x27; characters, for example Thomas Jefferson. Emancipationists like Douglas L. Wilson and scholars at the Thomas Jefferson Foundation view Jefferson as an opponent of slavery all his life, noting Jefferson&#x27;s attempts within the limited range of options available to him to undermine slavery, his many attempts at abolition legislation, the manner in which he provided for slaves, and his advocacy of their more humane treatment. This view contrasts with that of revisionists like Paul Finkelman, who criticizes Jefferson for racism, slavery, and hypocrisy. Emancipationist views on this hypocrisy recognize that if he tried to be true to his word, it would have alienated his fellow Virginians. In another example, Franklin D. Roosevelt did not join NAACP leaders in pushing for federal anti-lynching legislation, as he believed that such legislation was unlikely to pass and that his support for it would alienate Southern congressmen, including many of Roosevelt&#x27;s fellow Democrats.

==Empirical investigation==
Whether children younger than three or four years old have a theory of mind is a topic of debate among researchers. It is a challenging question, due to the difficulty of assessing what pre-linguistic children understand about others and the world. Tasks used in research into the development of theory of mind must take into account the &quot;umwelt&quot; of the pre-verbal child.

=== False-belief task ===
One of the most important milestones in theory of mind development is the ability to attribute &quot;false belief&quot;: in other words, to understand that other people can believe things which are not true. To do this, it is suggested, one must understand how knowledge is formed, that people&#x27;s beliefs are based on their knowledge, that mental states can differ from reality, and that people&#x27;s behavior can be predicted by their mental states. Numerous versions of false-belief task have been developed, based on the initial task created by Wimmer and Perner (1983).

In the most common version of the false-belief task (often called the Sally-Anne test), children are told a story about Sally and Anne. Sally has a marble, which she places into her basket, and then leaves the room. While she is out of the room, Anne takes the marble from the basket and puts it into the box. The child being tested is then asked where Sally will look for the marble once she returns. The child passes the task if she answers that Sally will look in the basket, where Sally put the marble; the child fails the task if she answers that Sally will look in the box. To pass the task, the child must be able to understand that another&#x27;s mental representation of the situation is different from their own, and the child must be able to predict behavior based on that understanding. Another example depicts a boy who leaves chocolate on a shelf and then leaves the room. His mother puts it in the fridge. To pass the task, the child must understand that the boy, upon returning, holds the false belief that his chocolate is still on the shelf.

The results of research using false-belief tasks have been called into question: most typically developing children are able to pass the tasks from around age four. Yet early studies asserted that 80% of children diagnosed with autism were unable to pass this test, while children with other disabilities like Down syndrome were able to. However this assertion could not be replicated by later studies. It instead was concluded that children fail these tests due to a lack of understanding of extraneous processes and a basic lack of mental processing capabilities.

Adults may also struggle with false beliefs, for instance when they show hindsight bias. In one experiment, adult subjects who were asked for an independent assessment were unable to disregard information on actual outcome. Also in experiments with complicated situations, when assessing others&#x27; thinking, adults can fail to correctly disregard certain information that they have been given.

===Unexpected contents===
Other tasks have been developed to try to extend the false-belief task. In the &quot;unexpected contents&quot; or &quot;smarties&quot; task, experimenters ask children what they believe to be the contents of a box that looks as though it holds Smarties. After the child guesses &quot;Smarties&quot;, it is shown that the box in fact contained pencils. The experimenter then re-closes the box and asks the child what she thinks another person, who has not been shown the true contents of the box, will think is inside. The child passes the task if he/she responds that another person will think that &quot;Smarties&quot; exist in the box, but fails the task if she responds that another person will think that the box contains pencils. Gopnik &amp; Astington found that children pass this test at age four or five years. Though the use of such implicit tests has yet to reach a consensus on their validity and reproducibility of study results.

===Other tasks===
The &quot;false-photograph&quot; task also measures theory of mind development. In this task, children must reason about what is represented in a photograph that differs from the current state of affairs. Within the false-photograph task, either a location or identity change exists. In the location-change task, the examiner puts an object in one location (e.g. chocolate in an open green cupboard), whereupon the child takes a Polaroid photograph of the scene. While the photograph is developing, the examiner moves the object to a different location (e.g. a blue cupboard), allowing the child to view the examiner&#x27;s action. The examiner asks the child two control questions: &quot;When we first took the picture, where was the object?&quot; and &quot;Where is the object now?&quot; The subject is also asked a &quot;false-photograph&quot; question: &quot;Where is the object in the picture?&quot; The child passes the task if he/she correctly identifies the location of the object in the picture and the actual location of the object at the time of the question. However, the last question might be misinterpreted as &quot;Where in this room is the object that the picture depicts?&quot; and therefore some examiners use an alternative phrasing.

To make it easier for animals, young children, and individuals with classical autism to understand and perform theory of mind tasks, researchers have developed tests in which verbal communication is de-emphasized: some whose administration does not involve verbal communication on the part of the examiner, some whose successful completion does not require verbal communication on the part of the subject, and some that meet both of those standards. One category of tasks uses a preferential-looking paradigm, with looking time as the dependent variable. For instance, nine-month-old infants prefer looking at behaviors performed by a human hand over those made by an inanimate hand-like object. Other paradigms look at rates of imitative behavior, the ability to replicate and complete unfinished goal-directed acts, and rates of pretend play.

===Early precursors===
Research on the early precursors of theory of mind has invented ways to observe preverbal infants&#x27; understanding of other people&#x27;s mental states, including perception and beliefs. Using a variety of experimental procedures, studies show that infants from their first year of life have an implicit understanding of what other people see and what they know. A popular paradigm used to study infants&#x27; theory of mind is the violation-of-expectation procedure, which exploits infants&#x27; tendency to look longer at unexpected and surprising events compared to familiar and expected events. The amount of time they look at an event gives researchers an indication of what infants might be inferring, or their implicit understanding of events. One study using this paradigm found that 16-month-olds tend to attribute beliefs to a person whose visual perception was previously witnessed as being &quot;reliable&quot;, compared to someone whose visual perception was &quot;unreliable&quot;. Specifically, 16-month-olds were trained to expect a person&#x27;s excited vocalization and gaze into a container to be associated with finding a toy in the reliable-looker condition or an absence of a toy in the unreliable-looker condition. Following this training phase, infants witnessed, in an object-search task, the same persons searching for a toy either in the correct or incorrect location after they both witnessed the location of where the toy was hidden. Infants who experienced the reliable looker were surprised and therefore looked longer when the person searched for the toy in the incorrect location compared to the correct location. In contrast, the looking time for infants who experienced the unreliable looker did not differ for either search locations. These findings suggest that 16-month-old infants can differentially attribute beliefs about a toy&#x27;s location based on the person&#x27;s prior record of visual perception.

===Methodological problems===
With the methods used to test theory of mind, it has been experimentally shown that very simple robots that only react by reflexes and are not built to have any complex cognition at all can pass the tests for having theory of mind abilities that psychology textbooks assume to be exclusive to humans older than four or five years. Whether such a robot passes the test is influenced by completely non-cognitive factors such as placement of objects and the structure of the robot body influencing how the reflexes are conducted. It has therefore been suggested that theory of mind tests may not actually test cognitive abilities.

Furthermore, early research into theory of mind in autistic children is argued to constitute epistemological violence due to implicit or explicit negative and universal conclusions about autistic individuals being drawn from empirical data that viably supports other (non-universal) conclusions.

==Deficits==
Theory of mind impairment, or &quot;mind-blindness&quot;, describes a difficulty someone would have with perspective-taking. Individuals with theory of mind impairment struggle to see phenomena from any other perspective than their own. Individuals who experience a theory of mind deficit have difficulty determining the intentions of others, lack understanding of how their behavior affects others, and have a difficult time with social reciprocity. Theory of mind deficits have been observed in people with autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, nonverbal learning disorder and along with people under the influence of alcohol and narcotics, sleep-deprived people, and people who are experiencing severe emotional or physical pain. Theory of mind deficits have also been observed in deaf children who are late signers (i.e. are born to hearing parents), but such a deficit is due to the delay in language learning, not any cognitive deficit, and therefore disappears once the child learns sign language.

===Autism===
In 1985 Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan M. Leslie, and Uta Frith suggested that children with autism do not employ theory of mind and that autistic children have particular difficulties with tasks requiring the child to understand another person&#x27;s beliefs. These difficulties persist when children are matched for verbal skills and they have been taken as a key feature of autism. Although in a 2019 review, Gernsbacher and Yergeau argued that &quot;the claim that autistic people lack a theory of mind is empirically questionable&quot;, as there have been numerous failed replications of classic ToM studies and the meta-analytical effect sizes of such replications were minimal to small.

Many individuals classified as autistic have severe difficulty assigning mental states to others, and some seem to lack theory of mind capabilities. Researchers who study the relationship between autism and theory of mind attempt to explain the connection in a variety of ways. One account assumes that theory of mind plays a role in the attribution of mental states to others and in childhood pretend play. According to Leslie, theory of mind is the capacity to mentally represent thoughts, beliefs, and desires, regardless of whether the circumstances involved are real. This might explain why some autistic individuals show extreme deficits in both theory of mind and pretend play. However, Hobson proposes a social-affective justification, in which deficits in theory of mind in autistic people result from a distortion in understanding and responding to emotions. He suggests that typically developing individuals, unlike autistic individuals, are born with a set of skills (such as social referencing ability) that later lets them comprehend and react to other people&#x27;s feelings. Other scholars emphasize that autism involves a specific developmental delay, so that autistic children vary in their deficiencies, because they experience difficulty in different stages of growth. Very early setbacks can alter proper advancement of joint-attention behaviors, which may lead to a failure to form a full theory of mind.

It has been speculated that theory of mind exists on a continuum as opposed to the traditional view of a discrete presence or absence. While some research has suggested that some autistic populations are unable to attribute mental states to others, recent evidence points to the possibility of coping mechanisms that facilitate the attribution of mental states. A binary view regarding theory of mind contributes to the stigmatization of autistic adults who do possess perspective-taking capacity, as the assumption that autistic people do not have empathy can become a rationale for dehumanization.

Tine et al. report that autistic children score substantially lower on measures of social theory of mind (i.e., &quot;reasoning about &quot;others″&quot; mental states&quot;, p. 1) in comparison to children diagnosed with Asperger syndrome.

Generally, children with more advanced theory of mind abilities display more advanced social skills, greater adaptability to new situations, and greater cooperation with others. As a result, these children are typically well-liked. However, &quot;children may use their mind-reading abilities to manipulate, outwit, tease, or trick their peers.&quot; Individuals possessing inferior theory of mind skills, such as children with autism spectrum disorder, may be socially rejected by their peers since they are unable to communicate effectively. Social rejection has been proven to negatively impact a child&#x27;s development and can put the child at greater risk of developing depressive symptoms.

Peer-mediated interventions (PMI) are a school-based treatment approach for children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder in which peers are trained to be role models in order to promote social behavior. Laghi et al. studied whether analysis of prosocial (nice) and antisocial (nasty) theory-of-mind behaviors could be used, in addition to teacher recommendations, to select appropriate candidates for PMI programs. Selecting children with advanced theory-of-mind skills who use them in prosocial ways will theoretically make the program more effective. While the results indicated that analyzing the social uses of theory of mind of possible candidates for a PMI program may increase the program&#x27;s efficacy, it may not be a good predictor of a candidate&#x27;s performance as a role model.

A 2014 Cochrane review on interventions based on theory of mind found that such a theory could be taught to individuals with autism but claimed little evidence of skill maintenance, generalization to other settings, or development effects on related skills.

Some 21st century studies have shown that the results of some studies of theory of mind tests on autistic people may be misinterpreted based on the double empathy problem, which proposes that rather than autistic people specifically having trouble with theory of mind, autistic people and non-autistic people have equal difficulty understanding one-another due to their neurological differences. Studies have shown that autistic adults perform better in theory of mind tests when paired with other autistic adults as well as possibly autistic close family members. Academics who acknowledge the double empathy problem also propose that it is likely autistic people understand non-autistic people to a higher degree than vice-versa, due to the necessity of functioning in a non-autistic society.

===Psychopathy===
Psychopathy is another deficit that is of large importance when discussing theory of mind. While psychopathic individuals show impaired emotional behavior including a lack of emotional responsiveness to others and deficient empathy, as well as impaired social behavior, there are many controversies regarding psychopathic individuals&#x27; theory of mind. Many different studies provide contradictory information on a correlation between theory of mind impairment and psychopathic individuals.

There have been some speculations made about the similarities between individuals with autism and psychopathic individuals in the theory of mind performance. In this study in 2008, the Happé&#x27;s advanced test of theory of mind was presented to a group of 25 psychopaths, and 25 non-psychopaths incarcerated. This test showed that there was not a difference in the performance of the task for the psychopaths and non-psychopaths. However, they were able to see that the psychopaths were performing significantly better than the most highly able adult autistic population. This shows that there is not a similarity between individuals with autism and psychopathic individuals.

There have been repetitive suggestions regarding the possibility that a deficient or biased grasp of others’ mental states, or theory of mind, could potentially contribute to antisocial behavior, aggression, and psychopathy. In one study named ‘Reading the Mind in the Eyes’, the participants view photographs of an individual’s eye and had to attribute a mental state, or emotion, to the individual. This is an interesting test because Magnetic resonance imaging studies showed that this task produced increased activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal and the left medial frontal cortices, the superior temporal gyrus, and the left amygdala. There is extensive literature suggesting amygdala dysfunction in psychopathy however, this test shows that both groups of psychopathic and non-psychopathic adults performed equally well on the test. Thus, disregarding that there isn’t Theory of Mind impairment in psychopathic individuals.

In another study using a systemic review and meta-analysis, data was gathered from 42 different studies and found that psychopathic traits are associated with impairment in the theory of mind task performance. This relationship was not regulated by age, population, psychopathy measurement (self-report versus clinical checklist) or theory of mind task type (cognitive versus affective). This study used past studies to show that there is a relationship between psychopathic individuals and theory of mind impairments.

In 2009 a study was conducted to test whether impairment in the emotional aspects of theory of mind rather that the general theory of mind abilities may account for some of the impaired social behavior in psychopathy. This study involved criminal offenders diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder who had high psychopathy features, participants with localized lesions in the orbitofrontal cortex, participants with non-frontal lesions, and healthy control subjects. Subjects were tested with a task that examines affective versus cognitive theory of mind. They found that the individuals with psychopathy and those with orbitofrontal cortex lesions were both impaired on the affective theory of mind but not in cognitive theory of mind when compared to the control group.

===Schizophrenia===
Individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia can show deficits in theory of mind. Mirjam Sprong and colleagues investigated the impairment by examining 29 different studies, with a total of over 1500 participants. This meta-analysis showed significant and stable deficit of theory of mind in people with schizophrenia. They performed poorly on false-belief tasks, which test the ability to understand that others can hold false beliefs about events in the world, and also on intention-inference tasks, which assess the ability to infer a character&#x27;s intention from reading a short story. Schizophrenia patients with negative symptoms, such as lack of emotion, motivation, or speech, have the most impairment in theory of mind and are unable to represent the mental states of themselves and of others. Paranoid schizophrenic patients also perform poorly because they have difficulty accurately interpreting others&#x27; intentions. The meta-analysis additionally showed that IQ, gender, and age of the participants do not significantly affect the performance of theory of mind tasks.

Research suggests that impairment in theory of mind negatively affects clinical insight—the patient&#x27;s awareness of their mental illness. Insight requires theory of mind; a patient must be able to adopt a third-person perspective and see the self as others do. A patient with good insight can accurately self-represent, by comparing himself with others and by viewing himself from the perspective of others. Insight allows a patient to recognize and react appropriately to his symptoms. A patient who lacks insight does not realize that he has a mental illness, because of his inability to accurately self-represent. Therapies that teach patients perspective-taking and self-reflection skills can improve abilities in reading social cues and taking the perspective of another person.

Research indicates that theory-of-mind deficit is a stable trait-characteristic rather than a state-characteristic of schizophrenia. The meta-analysis conducted by Sprong et al. showed that patients in remission still had impairment in theory of mind. This indicates that the deficit is not merely a consequence of the active phase of schizophrenia.

Schizophrenic patients&#x27; deficit in theory of mind impairs their interactions with others. Theory of mind is particularly important for parents, who must understand the thoughts and behaviors of their children and react accordingly. Dysfunctional parenting is associated with deficits in the first-order theory of mind, the ability to understand another person&#x27;s thoughts, and in the second-order theory of mind, the ability to infer what one person thinks about another person&#x27;s thoughts. Compared with healthy mothers, mothers with schizophrenia are found to be more remote, quiet, self-absorbed, insensitive, unresponsive, and to have fewer satisfying interactions with their children. They also tend to misinterpret their children&#x27;s emotional cues, and often misunderstand neutral faces as negative. Activities such as role-playing and individual or group-based sessions are effective interventions that help the parents improve on perspective-taking and theory of mind. There is a strong association between theory of mind deficit and parental role dysfunction.

===Alcohol use disorders===
Impairments in theory of mind, as well as other social-cognitive deficits, are commonly found in people who have alcohol use disorders, due to the neurotoxic effects of alcohol on the brain, particularly the prefrontal cortex.

===Depression and dysphoria===
Individuals in a major depressive episode, a disorder characterized by social impairment, show deficits in theory of mind decoding. Theory of mind decoding is the ability to use information available in the immediate environment (e.g., facial expression, tone of voice, body posture) to accurately label the mental states of others. The opposite pattern, enhanced theory of mind, is observed in individuals vulnerable to depression, including those individuals with past major depressive disorder (MDD), dysphoric individuals, and individuals with a maternal history of MDD.

===Developmental language disorder===
Children diagnosed with developmental language disorder (DLD) exhibit much lower scores on reading and writing sections of standardized tests, yet have a normal nonverbal IQ. These language deficits can be any specific deficits in lexical semantics, syntax, or pragmatics, or a combination of multiple problems. Such children often exhibit poorer social skills than normally developing children, and seem to have problems decoding beliefs in others. A recent meta-analysis confirmed that children with DLD have substantially lower scores on theory of mind tasks compared to typically developing children. This strengthens the claim that language development is related to theory of mind.

==Brain mechanisms==
=== In non autistic people ===
Research on theory of mind in autism led to the view that mentalizing abilities are subserved by dedicated mechanisms that can—in some cases—be impaired while general cognitive function remains largely intact.

Neuroimaging research supports this view, demonstrating specific brain regions are consistently engaged during theory of mind tasks. Positron emission tomography (PET) research on theory of mind, using verbal and pictorial story comprehension tasks, identifies a set of brain regions including the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and area around posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), and sometimes precuneus and amygdala/temporopolar cortex. Research on the neural basis of theory of mind has diversified, with separate lines of research focusing on the understanding of beliefs, intentions, and more complex properties of minds such as psychological traits.

Studies from Rebecca Saxe&#x27;s lab at MIT, using a false-belief versus false-photograph task contrast aimed at isolating the mentalizing component of the false-belief task, have consistently found activation in the mPFC, precuneus, and temporoparietal junction (TPJ), right-lateralized. In particular, Saxe et al. proposed that the right TPJ (rTPJ) is selectively involved in representing the beliefs of others. Some debate exists, as the same rTPJ region is consistently activated during spatial reorienting of visual attention; Jean Decety from the University of Chicago and Jason Mitchell from Harvard thus propose that the rTPJ subserves a more general function involved in both false-belief understanding and attentional reorienting, rather than a mechanism specialized for social cognition. However, it is possible that the observation of overlapping regions for representing beliefs and attentional reorienting may simply be due to adjacent, but distinct, neuronal populations that code for each. The resolution of typical fMRI studies may not be good enough to show that distinct/adjacent neuronal populations code for each of these processes. In a study following Decety and Mitchell, Saxe and colleagues used higher-resolution fMRI and showed that the peak of activation for attentional reorienting is approximately 6–10 mm above the peak for representing beliefs. Further corroborating that differing populations of neurons may code for each process, they found no similarity in the patterning of fMRI response across space.

Using single-cell recordings in the human dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), researchers at MGH identified neurons that encode information about others&#x27; beliefs, which were distinct from self-beliefs, across different scenarios in a false-belief task. They further showed that these neurons could provide detailed information about others&#x27; beliefs, and could accurately predict these beliefs&#x27; verity. These findings suggest a prominent role of distinct neuronal populations in the dmPFC in theory of mind complemented by the TPJ and pSTS.

Functional imaging also illuminates the detection of mental state information in animations of moving geometric shapes similar to those used in Heider and Simmel (1944), which typical humans automatically perceive as social interactions laden with intention and emotion. Three studies found remarkably similar patterns of activation during the perception of such animations versus a random or deterministic motion control: mPFC, pSTS, fusiform face area (FFA), and amygdala were selectively engaged during the theory of mind condition. Another study presented subjects with an animation of two dots moving with a parameterized degree of intentionality (quantifying the extent to which the dots chased each other), and found that pSTS activation correlated with this parameter.

A separate body of research implicates the posterior superior temporal sulcus in the perception of intentionality in human action. This area is also involved in perceiving biological motion, including body, eye, mouth, and point-light display motion. One study found increased pSTS activation while watching a human lift his hand versus having his hand pushed up by a piston (intentional versus unintentional action). Several studies found increased pSTS activation when subjects perceive a human action that is incongruent with the action expected from the actor&#x27;s context and inferred intention. Examples would be: a human performing a reach-to-grasp motion on empty space next to an object, versus grasping the object; a human shifting eye gaze toward empty space next to a checkerboard target versus shifting gaze toward the target; an unladen human turning on a light with his knee, versus turning on a light with his knee while carrying a pile of books; and a walking human pausing as he passes behind a bookshelf, versus walking at a constant speed. In these studies, actions in the &quot;congruent&quot; case have a straightforward goal, and are easy to explain in terms of the actor&#x27;s intention. The incongruent actions, on the other hand, require further explanation (why would someone twist empty space next to a gear?), and apparently demand more processing in the STS. This region is distinct from the temporoparietal area activated during false belief tasks. pSTS activation in most of the above studies was largely right-lateralized, following the general trend in neuroimaging studies of social cognition and perception. Also right-lateralized are the TPJ activation during false belief tasks, the STS response to biological motion, and the FFA response to faces.

Neuropsychological evidence supports neuroimaging results regarding the neural basis of theory of mind. Studies with patients with a lesion of the frontal lobes and the temporoparietal junction of the brain (between the temporal lobe and parietal lobe) report that they have difficulty with some theory of mind tasks. This shows that theory of mind abilities are associated with specific parts of the human brain. However, the fact that the medial prefrontal cortex and temporoparietal junction are necessary for theory of mind tasks does not imply that these regions are specific to that function. TPJ and mPFC may subserve more general functions necessary for Theory of Mind.

Research by Vittorio Gallese, Luciano Fadiga, and Giacomo Rizzolatti shows that some sensorimotor neurons, referred to as mirror neurons and first discovered in the premotor cortex of rhesus monkeys, may be involved in action understanding. Single-electrode recording revealed that these neurons fired when a monkey performed an action, as well as when the monkey viewed another agent performing the same action. fMRI studies with human participants show brain regions (assumed to contain mirror neurons) that are active when one person sees another person&#x27;s goal-directed action. These data led some authors to suggest that mirror neurons may provide the basis for theory of mind in the brain, and to support simulation theory of mind reading.

There is also evidence against a link between mirror neurons and theory of mind. First, macaque monkeys have mirror neurons but do not seem to have a &#x27;human-like&#x27; capacity to understand theory of mind and belief. Second, fMRI studies of theory of mind typically report activation in the mPFC, temporal poles, and TPJ or STS, but those brain areas are not part of the mirror neuron system. Some investigators, like developmental psychologist Andrew Meltzoff and neuroscientist Jean Decety, believe that mirror neurons merely facilitate learning through imitation and may provide a precursor to the development of theory of mind. Others, like philosopher Shaun Gallagher, suggest that mirror-neuron activation, on a number of counts, fails to meet the definition of simulation as proposed by the simulation theory of mindreading.

===In autism===
Several neuroimaging studies have looked at the neural basis for theory of mind impairment in subjects with Asperger syndrome and high-functioning autism (HFA). The first PET study of theory of mind in autism (also the first neuroimaging study using a task-induced activation paradigm in autism) replicated a prior study in non autistic individuals, which employed a story-comprehension task. This study found displaced and diminished mPFC activation in subjects with autism. However, because the study used only six subjects with autism, and because the spatial resolution of PET imaging is relatively poor, these results should be considered preliminary.

A subsequent fMRI study scanned normally developing adults and adults with HFA while performing a &quot;reading the mind in the eyes&quot; task: viewing a photo of a human&#x27;s eyes and choosing which of two adjectives better describes the person&#x27;s mental state, versus a gender discrimination control. The authors found activity in orbitofrontal cortex, STS, and amygdala in normal subjects, and found less amygdala activation and abnormal STS activation in subjects with autism.

A more recent PET study looked at brain activity in individuals with HFA and Asperger syndrome while viewing Heider-Simmel animations (see above) versus a random motion control. In contrast to normally-developing subjects, those with autism showed little STS or FFA activation, and less mPFC and amygdala activation. Activity in extrastriate regions V3 and LO was identical across the two groups, suggesting intact lower-level visual processing in the subjects with autism. The study also reported less functional connectivity between STS and V3 in the autism group. However decreased temporal correlation between activity in STS and V3 would be expected simply from the lack of an evoked response in STS to intent-laden animations in subjects with autism. A more informative analysis would be to compute functional connectivity after regressing out evoked responses from all-time series.

A subsequent study, using the incongruent/congruent gaze-shift paradigm described above, found that in high-functioning adults with autism, posterior STS (pSTS) activation was undifferentiated while they watched a human shift gaze toward a target and then toward adjacent empty space. The lack of additional STS processing in the incongruent state may suggest that these subjects fail to form an expectation of what the actor should do given contextual information, or that feedback about the violation of this expectation does not reach STS. Both explanations involve an impairment or deficit in the ability to link eye gaze shifts with intentional explanations. This study also found a significant anticorrelation between STS activation in the incongruent-congruent contrast and social subscale score on the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised, but not scores on the other subscales.

An fMRI study demonstrated that the right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ) of higher-functioning adults with autism was not more selectively activated for mentalizing judgments when compared to physical judgments about self and other. rTPJ selectivity for mentalizing was also related to individual variation on clinical measures of social impairment: individuals whose rTPJ was increasingly more active for mentalizing compared to physical judgments were less socially impaired, while those who showed little to no difference in response to mentalizing or physical judgments were the most socially impaired. This evidence builds on work in typical development that suggests rTPJ is critical for representing mental state information, whether it is about oneself or others. It also points to an explanation at the neural level for the pervasive mind-blindness difficulties in autism that are evident throughout the lifespan.

===In schizophrenia===
The brain regions associated with theory of mind include the superior temporal gyrus (STS), the temporoparietal junction (TPJ), the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the precuneus, and the amygdala. The reduced activity in the mPFC of individuals with schizophrenia is associated with theory of mind deficit and may explain impairments in social function among people with schizophrenia. Increased neural activity in mPFC is related to better perspective-taking, emotion management, and increased social functioning. Disrupted brain activities in areas related to theory of mind may increase social stress or disinterest in social interaction, and contribute to the social dysfunction associated with schizophrenia.

== Practical validity ==
Group member average scores of theory of mind abilities, measured with the Reading the Mind in the Eyes test (RME), are possibly drivers of successful group performance. High group average scores on the RME are correlated with the collective intelligence factor &quot;c&quot;, defined as a group&#x27;s ability to perform a wide range of mental tasks, a group intelligence measure similar to the &quot;g&quot; factor for general individual intelligence. RME is a theory of mind test for adults that shows sufficient test-retest reliability and constantly differentiates control groups from individuals with functional autism or Asperger syndrome. It is one of the most widely accepted and well-validated tests for theory of mind abilities within adults.

==Evolution==
The evolutionary origin of theory of mind remains obscure. While many theories make claims about its role in the development of human language and social cognition, few of them specify in detail any evolutionary neurophysiological precursors. One theory claims that theory of mind has its roots in two defensive reactions—immobilization stress and tonic immobility—which are implicated in the handling of stressful encounters and also figure prominently in mammalian childrearing practice. Their combined effect seems capable of producing many of the hallmarks of theory of mind, such as eye-contact, gaze-following, inhibitory control, and intentional attributions.

==Non-human==
An open question is whether non-human animals have a genetic endowment and social environment that allows them to acquire a theory of mind like human children do. This is a contentious issue because of the difficulty of inferring from animal behavior the existence of thinking or of particular thoughts, or the existence of a concept of self or self-awareness, consciousness, and qualia. One difficulty with non-human studies of theory of mind is the lack of sufficient numbers of naturalistic observations, giving insight into what the evolutionary pressures might be on a species&#x27; development of theory of mind.

Non-human research still has a major place in this field. It is especially useful in illuminating which nonverbal behaviors signify components of theory of mind, and in pointing to possible stepping points in the evolution of that aspect of social cognition. While it is difficult to study human-like theory of mind and mental states in species of whose potential mental states we have an incomplete understanding, researchers can focus on simpler components of more complex capabilities. For example, many researchers focus on animals&#x27; understanding of intention, gaze, perspective, or knowledge (of what another being has seen). A study that looked at understanding of intention in orangutans, chimpanzees, and children showed that all three species understood the difference between accidental and intentional acts.

Individuals exhibit theory of mind by extrapolating another&#x27;s internal mental states from their observable behavior. So one challenge in this line of research is to distinguish this from more run-of-the-mill stimulus-response learning, with the other&#x27;s observable behavior being the stimulus.

Recently, most non-human theory of mind research has focused on monkeys and great apes, who are of most interest in the study of the evolution of human social cognition. Other studies relevant to attributions theory of mind have been conducted using plovers and dogs, which show preliminary evidence of understanding attention—one precursor of theory of mind—in others.

There has been some controversy over the interpretation of evidence purporting to show theory of mind ability—or inability—in animals. For example, Povinelli &quot;et al.&quot; presented chimpanzees with the choice of two experimenters from whom to request food: one who had seen where food was hidden, and one who, by virtue of one of a variety of mechanisms (having a bucket or bag over his head, a blindfold over his eyes, or being turned away from the baiting) does not know, and can only guess. They found that the animals failed in most cases to differentially request food from the &quot;knower&quot;. By contrast, Hare, Call, and Tomasello found that subordinate chimpanzees were able to use the knowledge state of dominant rival chimpanzees to determine which container of hidden food they approached. William Field and Sue Savage-Rumbaugh believe that bonobos have developed theory of mind, and cite their communications with a captive bonobo, Kanzi, as evidence.

In one experiment, ravens (&quot;Corvus corax&quot;) took into account visual access of unseen conspecifics. The researchers argued that &quot;ravens can generalize from their own perceptual experience to infer the possibility of being seen&quot;.

Evolutionary anthropologist Christopher Krupenye studied the existence of theory of mind, and particularly false beliefs, in non-human primates.

Keren Haroush and Ziv Williams outlined the case for a group of neurons in primates&#x27; brains that uniquely predicted the choice selection of their interacting partner. These primates&#x27; neurons, located in the anterior cingulate cortex of rhesus monkeys, were observed using single-unit recording while the monkeys played a variant of the iterative prisoner&#x27;s dilemma game. By identifying cells that represent the yet unknown intentions of a game partner, Haroush &amp; Williams&#x27; study supports the idea that theory of mind may be a fundamental and generalized process, and suggests that &quot;anterior cingulate cortex&quot; neurons may act to complement the function of mirror neurons during social interchange.

==See also==

* Attribution bias
* Cephalopod intelligence
* Cetacean intelligence
* Eliminative materialism
* Empathy
* Folk psychology
* Grounding in communication
* Intentional stance
* Joint attention
* Mental body
* Mentalization
* Mini-SEA
* Origin of language
* Perspective-taking 
* Quantum mind
* Relational frame theory
* Self-awareness 
* Social neuroscience
* Embodied cognition
* Space mapping
* &quot;The Mind of an Ape&quot;
* Turing test
* Type physicalism
* Interpersonal accuracy
==References==
==Further reading==
* Excerpts taken from: Davis, E. (2007) &quot;Mental Verbs in Nicaraguan Sign Language and the Role of Language in Theory of Mind&quot;. Undergraduate senior thesis, Barnard College, Columbia University.

==External links==

* Eye Test Simon Baron Cohen 
* The Computational Theory of Mind
* The Identity Theory of Mind
* Sally-Anne and Smarties tests
* Functional Contextualism
* Theory of Mind article in the &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* Research into Theory of mind</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="3" end="13" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="18" end="28" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="30" end="44" title="Theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968640" start="140" end="152" title="mental state" label="mental state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="225" end="232" title="beliefs" label="beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q775842" start="234" end="241" title="desires" label="desires"/>
<link wikidata="Q706622" start="243" end="253" title="intentions" label="intentions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="255" end="263" title="emotions" label="emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="269" end="277" title="thoughts" label="thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="396" end="414" title="social interaction" label="social interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q217602" start="454" end="463" title="analyzing" label="analyzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969661" start="465" end="472" title="Value judgment" label="judging"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="478" end="487" title="inferring" label="inferring"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324597" start="603" end="628" title="theory of mind in animals" label="theory of mind in animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330667" start="769" end="789" title="language development" label="language development"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="968" end="974" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="976" end="992" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="994" end="1007" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q290620" start="1009" end="1018" title="dysphoria" label="dysphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="1020" end="1029" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="1035" end="1047" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205193" start="1058" end="1086" title="alcohol&amp;#x27;s neurotoxicity" label="alcohol&amp;#x27;s neurotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="1088" end="1100" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="1116" end="1140" title="prefrontal cortex" label="medial prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q732362" start="1163" end="1187" title="superior temporal sulcus" label="superior temporal sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632835" start="1200" end="1209" title="precuneus" label="precuneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="1219" end="1227" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="1284" end="1296" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940216" start="1300" end="1324" title="temporoparietal junction" label="temporoparietal junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="1430" end="1447" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="1525" end="1531" title="theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636076" start="1919" end="1934" title="joint attention" label="joint attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166043" start="2842" end="2889" title="Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development" label="Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166043" start="2947" end="2961" title="hypercognitive" label="hypercognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="3046" end="3053" title="Empathy" label="Empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="3310" end="3327" title="ethology" label="neuro-ethological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176168" start="3671" end="3678" title="David Premack" label="Premack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111072" start="3784" end="3803" title="social neuroscience" label="social neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="4042" end="4049" title="Operant conditioning" label="operant"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="4074" end="4092" title="empirical evidence" label="empirical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q854502" start="4273" end="4296" title="relational frame theory" label="relational frame theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="4459" end="4469" title="reinforcement" label="reinforced"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="5096" end="5110" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605790" start="5123" end="5140" title="Second Meditation" label="Second Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782405" start="5289" end="5302" title="theory-theory" label="theory-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q861691" start="5307" end="5324" title="simulation theory of empathy" label="simulation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429140" start="5401" end="5416" title="folk psychology" label="folk psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q177603" start="5985" end="6002" title="Social perception" label="person perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="6007" end="6025" title="Attribution (psychology)" label="attribution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="6031" end="6048" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="6120" end="6136" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphize"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="6203" end="6217" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044475" start="6263" end="6281" title="intentional stance" label="intentional stance"/>
<link wikidata="Q854502" start="7134" end="7157" title="relational frame theory" label="relational frame theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783193" start="7388" end="7401" title="contextualism" label="contextualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="7533" end="7585" title="pragmatism" label="a radically functional approach to truth and meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="7972" end="7980" title="ontogeny" label="ontogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="7985" end="7994" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q918343" start="8286" end="8303" title="Simon Baron-Cohen" label="Simon Baron-Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="9569" end="9583" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758101" start="9858" end="9876" title="Andrew N. Meltzoff" label="Andrew N. Meltzoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387795" start="10856" end="10874" title="perspective-taking" label="perspective-taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="12091" end="12098" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="12913" end="12928" title="individualistic" label="individualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="13076" end="13090" title="collectivistic" label="collectivistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940216" start="16218" end="16242" title="temporoparietal junction" label="temporoparietal junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900783" start="17933" end="17948" title="egocentric bias" label="egocentric bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033829" start="18187" end="18206" title="Inhibitory control" label="inhibitory capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q62017165" start="20141" end="20159" title="Stephen Butterfill" label="Stephen Butterfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485635" start="20567" end="20583" title="Peter Carruthers (philosopher)" label="Peter Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="22875" end="22879" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="22884" end="22889" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="23235" end="23247" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="23350" end="23363" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="23914" end="23930" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301707" start="23954" end="23971" title="Douglas L. Wilson" label="Douglas L. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488270" start="24371" end="24385" title="Paul Finkelman" label="Paul Finkelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="24606" end="24627" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572474" start="25254" end="25260" title="umwelt" label="umwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059391" start="25969" end="25984" title="Sally–Anne test" label="Sally-Anne test"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="27270" end="27283" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960297" start="27600" end="27614" title="hindsight bias" label="hindsight bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400476" start="28195" end="28203" title="Smarties" label="Smarties"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="30246" end="30252" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30683" end="30695" title="looking time" label="looking time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33740" end="33764" title="Epistemic injustice#Epistemological violence" label="epistemological violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443721" start="33993" end="34007" title="mind-blindness" label="mind-blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="34466" end="34481" title="autism spectrum" label="autism spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="34493" end="34506" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417880" start="34508" end="34535" title="nonverbal learning disorder" label="nonverbal learning disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q918343" start="34988" end="35005" title="Simon Baron-Cohen" label="Simon Baron-Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707189" start="35007" end="35021" title="Alan M. Leslie" label="Alan M. Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8219" start="35027" end="35036" title="Uta Frith" label="Uta Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="35066" end="35072" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251388" start="37151" end="37160" title="Continuum (theory)" label="continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162335" start="37516" end="37530" title="Sanism" label="stigmatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495037" start="37680" end="37694" title="dehumanization" label="dehumanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="37919" end="37936" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="38483" end="38499" title="Social rejection" label="Social rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q109546940" start="39851" end="39873" title="double empathy problem" label="double empathy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="40517" end="40528" title="Psychopathy" label="Psychopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="41309" end="41321" title="Imprisonment" label="incarcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="42128" end="42154" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="Magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="42650" end="42665" title="systemic review" label="systemic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="42670" end="42683" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="43417" end="43448" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18717" start="43527" end="43547" title="orbitofrontal cortex" label="orbitofrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="43972" end="43985" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="44160" end="44173" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="44562" end="44579" title="negative symptoms" label="negative symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="47398" end="47419" title="alcohol use disorders" label="alcohol use disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="47432" end="47442" title="neurotoxic" label="neurotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="47493" end="47510" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738337" start="47561" end="47585" title="major depressive episode" label="major depressive episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="48015" end="48046" title="Major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder (MDD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313089" start="48182" end="48213" title="developmental language disorder" label="developmental language disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="48929" end="48935" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="49110" end="49122" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="49243" end="49271" title="Positron emission tomography" label="Positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="49408" end="49432" title="prefrontal cortex" label="medial prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q732362" start="49467" end="49491" title="superior temporal sulcus" label="superior temporal sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632835" start="49514" end="49523" title="precuneus" label="precuneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="49528" end="49536" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973087" start="49537" end="49556" title="Brodmann area 38" label="temporopolar cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301901" start="49789" end="49801" title="Rebecca Saxe" label="Rebecca Saxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940216" start="50121" end="50125" title="rTPJ" label="rTPJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q939813" start="50308" end="50319" title="Jean Decety" label="Jean Decety"/>
<link wikidata="Q28445834" start="51357" end="51386" title="dorsomedial prefrontal cortex" label="dorsomedial prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="51411" end="51414" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="MGH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624677" start="52309" end="52327" title="fusiform face area" label="fusiform face area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3872" start="54443" end="54461" title="neuropsychology" label="Neuropsychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="54590" end="54603" title="frontal lobes" label="frontal lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940216" start="54612" end="54636" title="temporoparietal junction" label="temporoparietal junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="54663" end="54676" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="54681" end="54694" title="parietal lobe" label="parietal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="54884" end="54908" title="medial prefrontal cortex" label="medial prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015384" start="55134" end="55150" title="Vittorio Gallese" label="Vittorio Gallese"/>
<link wikidata="Q562048" start="55172" end="55190" title="Giacomo Rizzolatti" label="Giacomo Rizzolatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="55220" end="55226" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="55244" end="55257" title="mirror neuron" label="mirror neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998090" start="55287" end="55302" title="premotor cortex" label="premotor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="55306" end="55319" title="rhesus monkey" label="rhesus monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="55535" end="55539" title="fMRI" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55837" end="55870" title="simulation theory of mind reading" label="simulation theory of mind reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q177601" start="55961" end="55976" title="macaque" label="macaque monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758101" start="56324" end="56339" title="Andrew Meltzoff" label="Andrew Meltzoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q939813" start="56359" end="56370" title="Jean Decety" label="Jean Decety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490851" start="56536" end="56551" title="Shaun Gallagher" label="Shaun Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="56836" end="56853" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788847" start="56858" end="56881" title="high-functioning autism" label="high-functioning autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="57163" end="57167" title="Prefrontal cortex" label="mPFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18717" start="57726" end="57746" title="orbitofrontal cortex" label="orbitofrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="58162" end="58166" title="Prefrontal cortex" label="mPFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530686" start="58204" end="58224" title="extrastriate cortex" label="extrastriate regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822682" start="59575" end="59610" title="Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised" label="Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940216" start="59694" end="59718" title="temporoparietal junction" label="temporoparietal junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443721" start="60496" end="60510" title="mind-blindness" label="mind-blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064601" start="60661" end="60684" title="superior temporal gyrus" label="superior temporal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="60758" end="60762" title="Prefrontal cortex" label="mPFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="61572" end="61595" title="collective intelligence" label="collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753797" start="61737" end="61793" title="G factor (psychometrics)" label="&amp;quot;g&amp;quot; factor for general individual intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="61969" end="61986" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098451" start="62458" end="62474" title="Apparent death" label="tonic immobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="62845" end="62852" title="genetics" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="62867" end="62873" title="social psychology" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="63027" end="63042" title="ethology" label="animal behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="63060" end="63068" title="thought" label="thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701094" start="63129" end="63133" title="self (psychology)" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="63137" end="63151" title="self-awareness" label="self-awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="63153" end="63166" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="63172" end="63178" title="qualia" label="qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139321" start="64791" end="64797" title="plover" label="plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088125" start="65741" end="65760" title="Sue Savage-Rumbaugh" label="Sue Savage-Rumbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565461" start="65866" end="65871" title="Kanzi" label="Kanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="65920" end="65932" title="Common raven" label="Corvus corax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66282" end="66295" title="Keren Haroush" label="Keren Haroush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66300" end="66312" title="Ziv Williams" label="Ziv Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="66346" end="66352" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121931" start="66499" end="66524" title="anterior cingulate cortex" label="anterior cingulate cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q41693" start="66638" end="66661" title="prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121931" start="66893" end="66918" title="anterior cingulate cortex" label="anterior cingulate cortex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66993" end="67011" title="social interchange" label="social interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q849538" start="67030" end="67046" title="Attribution bias" label="Attribution bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629923" start="67049" end="67072" title="Cephalopod intelligence" label="Cephalopod intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q592525" start="67075" end="67096" title="Cetacean intelligence" label="Cetacean intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329497" start="67099" end="67122" title="Eliminative materialism" label="Eliminative materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="67125" end="67132" title="Empathy" label="Empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429140" start="67135" end="67150" title="Folk psychology" label="Folk psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116097" start="67153" end="67179" title="Grounding in communication" label="Grounding in communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044475" start="67182" end="67200" title="Intentional stance" label="Intentional stance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636076" start="67203" end="67218" title="Joint attention" label="Joint attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997805" start="67221" end="67232" title="Mental body" label="Mental body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920928" start="67235" end="67248" title="Mentalization" label="Mentalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q18295336" start="67251" end="67259" title="Mini-SEA" label="Mini-SEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="67262" end="67280" title="Origin of language" label="Origin of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387795" start="67283" end="67301" title="Perspective-taking" label="Perspective-taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984318" start="67305" end="67317" title="Quantum mind" label="Quantum mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q854502" start="67320" end="67343" title="Relational frame theory" label="Relational frame theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="67346" end="67360" title="Self-awareness" label="Self-awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111072" start="67364" end="67383" title="Social neuroscience" label="Social neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335050" start="67386" end="67404" title="Embodied cognition" label="Embodied cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572595" start="67407" end="67420" title="Space mapping" label="Space mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751533" start="67429" end="67447" title="The Mind of an Ape" label="The Mind of an Ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q189223" start="67456" end="67467" title="Turing test" label="Turing test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546801" start="67470" end="67486" title="Type physicalism" label="Type physicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102445405" start="67489" end="67511" title="Interpersonal accuracy" label="Interpersonal accuracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="67964" end="67999" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488084" wikidata="Q265083" url="?curid=488084" title="Domitian II">
<text>Domitian II () was a Roman soldier of the mid 3rd century who was acclaimed emperor, probably in northern Gaul in late 270 or early 271, and struck coins to advertise his elevation. It is now generally assumed that this man is to be equated with the Domitianus who is twice mentioned in the literary sources as a significant figure in the politics of the age, but on neither occasion as an outright contender for the Imperial throne.

Given that his reign lasted for, at best, only a few weeks after his acclamation and he does not seem to have secured significant military or political support, Domitianus is more properly categorized as a Roman usurper rather than an emperor. His attempted coup should also be understood in the context of the troubled later history of the Gallic Empire rather than that of the Empire as a whole.

==Numismatic evidence==
The only evidence for the existence and rule of an Imperial claimant named Domitianus derives from two coins. The first was part of a hoard discovered at Les Cléons, in the commune of Haute-Goulaine in the Loire-Atlantique department of France in 1900. The authenticity or significance of this coin was much debated and as late as 1992 Domitianus was widely considered &quot;at best a conjectural figure&quot;. The other coin was found fused in a pot with some 5,000 other coins of the period 250–275 (thus providing incontrovertible provenance) in the village of Chalgrove in Oxfordshire, England, in 2003. The hoard was acquired by the Ashmolean Museum in 2004.

In 2006, an alleged third specimen of the same usurper was found in the Vidin Province in north-western Bulgaria, by an amateur archaeologist with a metal detector. This coin&#x27;s identification should be disputed, as it is neither stylistically similar nor bearing of a similar inscription as the two genuine examples. It is much more likely a miscatalogued barbarous radiate. The Bulgarian coin also depicts Laetitia on the reverse, unlike the other two examples which depict Concordia. The coin is stored at the Sofia National Museum of History (in the complex &quot;Boyana&quot;), under &quot;Inv. No. 45197&quot;. It has not appeared in any academic publications besides those published in Bulgaria. 

The design of the two genuine coins is typical of those associated with the Gallic Empire. They are of the radiate type, depicting Domitianus as a bearded figure and wearing a radiate crown representing the rays of the sun, in reference to Sol Invictus (i.e. the sun perceived as a deity ). This depiction is very similar to that of the coins of the Gallic Emperors Victorinus (269–271) and Tetricus I (271–274).

Both coins bear the same legend, , an abbreviation for &quot;Imperator Caesar Domitianus Pius Felix Augustus&quot;. An unusual feature here is the absence of any reference to Domitianus&#x27;s nomen or praenomen. Gallic Empire coins usually bear the full &quot;tria nomina&quot; of the prince celebrated the better to carry out their propagandist function. On the reverse, the coins show Concordia, and have the legend , a propagandistic claim that the army was united behind Domitianus. Again this is a standard slogan for the Gallic Emperors.

Judging by their refined design, the coins were probably struck at the chief mint of the Gallic Empire – at Trier in the province of Gallia Belgica or Cologne in Germania Inferior – or, at least, from a die produced by artisans who were strongly influenced by those coins. It also suggests that the date of the coin was prior to 274 when the Emperor Aurelian suppressed the Gallic regime.

==Literary sources==
There are only two literary references for Domitianus&#x27;s existence, neither of which names him as an emperor:

* The 6th-century Byzantine historian Zosimus (1.49) records that a certain Domitianus was punished for a revolt during the reign of Aurelian (270–275). The text is vague as to the nature of his disloyalty and against whom it was directed. Because Zosimus places his coup in the reign of Aurelian and because he equates Domitianus with Septiminus (or Septimius) who was acclaimed Emperor by the Dalmatian garrison at about the same time it has usually been assumed that Domitianus was directly challenging Aurelian and that his revolt took place within the territory of the central Empire – those provinces not controlled by either the Gallic Emperors in the west or Zenobia&#x27;s Palmyrene Empire in the east. (Watson suggests that his command lay somewhere southwest of Lake Geneva, in the frontier region between the Gallic Empire and the central Empire);

* The notoriously unreliable &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; (12.14) mentions a Domitianus as a general involved in the suppression of the revolt of Macrianus Major in 261. This text asserts that in this operation Domitianus was an associate (possibly, a &quot;cliens&quot;, client or protégé) of Gallienus&#x27;s &quot;hipparchos&quot; (cavalry master general) Aureolus who is normally credited with the victory over Macrianus. However, the reference is made in terms that suggest that Domitianus was already a distinguished commander in his own right. There is nowhere in the text any suggestion that this Domitianus or any other man of that name was involved in any anti-regime activities during Aurelian&#x27;s reign.

:&quot;Historia Augusta&quot; also suggests that Domitianus was descendant of the Emperor Domitian, the son of Vespasian and his wife Domitilla the Elder. The intention here may be to suggest that Domitianus was of senatorial rank. It is possible that his motive in doing this was to deflect some of the glory accruing to the low-born Aureolus from his suppression of the Macrianic rebellion. The text&#x27;s author cannot bring himself to say anything that might appear to denigrate the achievement of Aureolus in this connection in comparison to the supine effeminacy of his &quot;bête noire&quot;, the unworthy Gallienus. However, he was probably happy to be able suggest that his associate, Domitianus, was &quot;one of us&quot;. One might remark that if Domitianus had been a senator he would probably have fallen foul of the decision taken by Gallienus early in his sole reign to strip all aristocratic army officers of their commissions. He would not, therefore, have been allowed to command the forces sent against the Macriani.

==Suggested interpretation==
The evidence is not sufficient to confirm that the associate or protégé of Aureolus mentioned in the HA, the obscure rebel of Aurelian&#x27;s reign mentioned by Zosimus and the Imperial claimant celebrated in the coins were one and the same man. However, academic opinion is inclined to the view that, more likely than not, they were one and the same.

It is quite possible that, as a client of Aureolus, Domitianus would later have become associated with the Gallic regime given what is suspected and known about his patron&#x27;s relations with Postumus. If &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;’s assertions as to his military reputation are correct it is not unlikely that he would have been welcomed into the entourage of the Gallic Emperor and his successors. However, the evidence is too vague and circumstantial.

The evidence of his coins suggests that the Domitianus was almost certainly a military figure associated with the rebel Gallic Empire who commanded troops close enough to one of the mint cities of Trier or Cologne to ensure that his Imperial pretensions were proclaimed in the traditional manner. It was very difficult for would-be Emperors in regions where there was no established mint to issue coins.

Given what is known of the chronology of the Gallic Empire his bid for Empire is most probably associated with the period of confusion following the officers’ coup against the Gallic Emperor Victorinus early in 271. The men who murdered Victorinus seem to have had no political agenda and it is not surprising that there should have been period of confusion after his death. In this circumstance it would not have been surprising that a faction may have been tempted to put forward a figure such as Domitianus who had an established military reputation – particularly if he was, indeed, the same man as the conqueror of the Macriani mentioned in &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;. On the other hand, the literary evidence does suggest that the forces favouring Tetricus I as the new Emperor were able to assert themselves so swiftly and decisively that Domitianus&#x27;s elevation was hardly remarked outside the provinces controlled by the Gallic Empire.

The most likely interpretation of the evidence of the coins is that Domitianus was involved in the officers&#x27; coup that overthrew Victorinus and managed to secure temporary control of one of the Gallic mints. It is thus more likely that he was suppressed by Tetricus I than by the central Roman Emperor Aurelian as the Zosimus reference would appear to suggest.

The use of the cognomen alone in the Imperial title is sufficiently unusual to raise questions about the circumstances in which the coins were produced. The circumstances in which the Chalgrove specimen was discovered leaves no doubt that it was, indeed, struck by somebody in the early 270s, but we have to consider that it might have been produced by a faction of the Rhine army officer cadre which hoped to use Domitianus as a figurehead, possibly without his knowledge or approval.

Domitianus&#x27;s fate is unknown. One possibility is that he was either executed by Tetricus or, more likely, that he was murdered by his own troops when the main Rhine army garrisons declared for Tetricus. A second possibility is that he was defeated by Placidianus, a general loyal to Aurelian who had been stationed to guard the lower Rhône valley during Victorinus&#x27; assault on Autun in 270. This would suggest that his rebellion took place in southern Gaul, near enough to the central empire&#x27;s provinces to be of concern to Aurelian. John F. White proposed possibly identifying him with a nephew mentioned by Eutropius as having been killed by Aurelian. Domitianus then being the son of a sister of Aurelian (full name Lucius Domitius Aurelianus) named Domitia.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Coin unearths new Roman emperor, BBC News, February 25, 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q265083" start="0" end="11" title="Domitian II" label="Domitian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="76" end="83" title="Roman emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="106" end="110" title="Roman Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11161560" start="641" end="654" title="Roman usurper" label="Roman usurper"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="776" end="789" title="Gallic Empire" label="Gallic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001970" start="1042" end="1056" title="Haute-Goulaine" label="Haute-Goulaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068" start="1064" end="1080" title="Loire-Atlantique" label="Loire-Atlantique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="1081" end="1091" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1095" end="1101" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275506" start="1422" end="1431" title="Chalgrove" label="Chalgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="1435" end="1446" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1448" end="1455" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q636400" start="1496" end="1512" title="Ashmolean Museum" label="Ashmolean Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012772" start="1595" end="1609" title="Vidin Province" label="Vidin Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="1627" end="1635" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020284" start="1884" end="1901" title="barbarous radiate" label="barbarous radiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246589" start="1935" end="1943" title="Laetitia (goddess)" label="Laetitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746321" start="2003" end="2012" title="Concordia (mythology)" label="Concordia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599170" start="2339" end="2346" title="Antoninianus" label="radiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077242" start="2408" end="2421" title="radiate crown" label="radiate crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="2472" end="2484" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="2582" end="2597" title="Gallic Emperor" label="Gallic Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="2598" end="2608" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312672" start="2623" end="2633" title="Tetricus I" label="Tetricus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760158" start="2839" end="2844" title="Nomen (Roman name)" label="nomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240901" start="2848" end="2857" title="praenomen" label="praenomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="3300" end="3305" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q206443" start="3325" end="3339" title="Gallia Belgica" label="Gallia Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="3343" end="3350" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="3354" end="3371" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="3542" end="3550" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="3756" end="3763" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="3851" end="3859" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q887042" start="4054" end="4064" title="Septimius (Roman emperor usurper)" label="Septiminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="4113" end="4121" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189705" start="4385" end="4392" title="Zenobia" label="Zenobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q877875" start="4400" end="4416" title="Palmyrene Empire" label="Palmyrene Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="4491" end="4502" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="4614" end="4630" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q378675" start="4725" end="4740" title="Macrianus Major" label="Macrianus Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="4837" end="4843" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="cliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q312910" start="4938" end="4946" title="Aureolus" label="Aureolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="5389" end="5397" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="5410" end="5419" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q241102" start="5433" end="5452" title="Domitilla the Elder" label="Domitilla the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="6884" end="6890" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q312603" start="6913" end="6921" title="Postumus" label="Postumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="7775" end="7785" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312672" start="8340" end="8350" title="Tetricus I" label="Tetricus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="8670" end="8680" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312672" start="8798" end="8808" title="Tetricus I" label="Tetricus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="8829" end="8842" title="Roman Emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="8843" end="8851" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="8918" end="8926" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231967" start="9646" end="9657" title="Placidianus" label="Placidianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="9678" end="9686" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="9729" end="9734" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q190827" start="9777" end="9782" title="Autun" label="Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="9852" end="9856" title="Roman Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q314694" start="10014" end="10023" title="Eutropius (historian)" label="Eutropius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488089" wikidata="Q492744" url="?curid=488089" title="Mijas">
<text>Mijas ( ; ) is a municipality in the Province of Málaga, in the autonomous community of Andalusia. Located on the southeastern coast of Spain, Mijas belongs to the region of Costa del Sol Occidental. Its center is a typical Andalusian white-washed village, Mijas Pueblo, located on a mountainside about 430 metres or 1,476 feet above sea level, in the heart of the Costa del Sol region.

The municipality has three nuclei, gathering the majority of its population:

* Mijas Pueblo (a hillside village, administrative center of the municipality)
* La Cala de Mijas (a coastal village and a seaside resort)
* Las Lagunas (a suburban and commercial area to the north and west of, and largely integrated with, Fuengirola).

Mijas Costa is used to denominate the coastal area of Mijas, especially the villages Calahonda, Riviera and La Cala de Mijas.

The economy of Mijas is primarily based on tourism, featuring local historical museums and many souvenir shops. The municipality has seven golf courses (four more are under construction), including the La Cala Resort, which is the biggest golf resort in Spain. Agricultural products include potatoes, cereals, and avocados.

==History==
Mijas was founded in prehistoric times by the Tartessians. The remains of the original fortification are still visible on parts of the exterior wall of the city. The area&#x27;s mineral wealth attracted ancient Greeks and Phoenicians to the village, as described in Ptolemy&#x27;s second-century &quot;Geography&quot;.

The Romans, who kept up a lively commerce with Mijas, knew it as &quot;Tamisa&quot;. Roman domination was later replaced with the Visigoths&#x27; rule after 714 AD. The Visigoths, in turn, were succeeded by the Moors. The Moors allowed the village inhabitants to preserve their property, religion, and customs in exchange for a third of their goods from agriculture, livestock, and farming. It was also the Moors who abbreviated the name of Tamisa to &quot;Mixa&quot;, which later became modern day &quot;Mijas&quot;.

During the time of the Emirate of Córdoba, the village was conquered by Umar ibn Hafsun. The village remained under the rule of Bobastro, who was defeated by Abd al-Rahman III in the late 9th century.

In 1487, Mijas resisted the attacks of the Catholic monarchs during the siege of Málaga. After Málaga fell, the inhabitants surrendered and most were sold as slaves. During the Revolt of the Comuneros a few decades later, Mijas remained loyal to the Spanish crown, which granted it the title of &quot;Muy Leal&quot; (&quot;Very Loyal&quot;). Soon after, Joanna of Castile promoted it to the status of villa (town) and it was exempt from royal taxes.

During this period and into the 19th century, Mijas suffered from intense pirate activity along the coast. It was this pirate activity that motivated the construction of the watchtowers that still stand today.

===Modern age===
In the 19th century, Mijas&#x27;s livelihood was mainly agriculture, fishing, and some farming and mineral extraction. Grape vines were the main source of wealth in Mijas until the Phylloxera plague destroyed all of the vineyards. Also important to Mijas&#x27;s economy was paper production. Some mills located in the area of &quot;Osunillas&quot; date back to 1744. The mid-1800s were a productive time for local industry, thanks to the arrival of Valencia’s paper-makers, carpenters from Alcoy (an Alicante’s Spanish town), and a mop, which created new functional links among manufacturers. Especially notable were the &quot;paper beds&quot;, which were very useful in Málaga because they were used as raisin wrappers.

An important historical event happened on December 2, 1831. General Torrijos landed at the beach &quot;El Charcón&quot; with 52 men. They crossed Mijas, climbed the hill to the top and took refuge at a house on &quot;Alqueria&quot; in &quot;Alhaurin de la Torre&quot;, on Molinas County property. They were surrounded by troops, sent by the governor Gonzales Moreno. Torrijos and his companions were shot on the San Andres beaches on December 11, 1831.

In 1873 a road opened between Mijas and Fuengirola, ending the segregation between the two towns which had been in effect since 1841. However, the village remained isolated until the arrival of the first newspaper, Second Republic. There was no phone service until 1953 and the town&#x27;s architecture consisted mostly of shacks. The population was scattered across the countryside, which consisted of small farms. During the post-war period, hunger and unemployment increased. The only work in the area was the collection of grass for the esparto, but the effects of droughts weakened even this industry. During this era, Mijas also was the scene of anti-Franco army operations because of the support and respect of the army in this area.

In the 1950s, an asbestos factory was built to reduce unemployment and the first small hotel was built because of the growing fame of the Costa del Sol. With the advent of tourism, the towns of La Cala and Las Lagunas began construction of urban residential areas, resulting in the birth of Chollocasa, Cala, and many more cities. Las Lagunas appeared out of nowhere from the interior of a farming community and La Cala was a rural village with just 19 farming families.

==Climate==
The climate of Mijas, due to its proximity to the sea, enjoys semi-tropical temperatures with winter days being mostly warm/hot and agreeable, and days of hot/very hot weather from May until October. The months of July and August are very hot with temperatures at the end of July and early August hovering around 30C. Winter nights can be occasionally chilly but with only an occasional light frost. The rainfall is below 600 millimetres (24 inches) per year and occurs mainly between October and April. The town boasts some 2,920 hours of sunshine per year.

The climate changes gradually with increasing elevation in the mountains. Temperatures can drop to . In the peaks, over high, some ice may form in winter, while precipitation increases to almost 800 mm (32 in).

==Education==
The areas of Mijas and Fuengírola have a good state education system as does all the Costa del Sol. There are also plenty of private fee-paying International colleges for all ages, within easy reach. The local International, private fee-paying college is St Anthony´s College Mijas.
==See also==
* List of municipalities in Málaga

==References==
==External links==

*Official website
*Tourism Official website
*Malaga Metropolitan Transport Consortium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492744" start="0" end="5" title="Mijas" label="Mijas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074737" start="17" end="29" title="Municipalities of Spain" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q95028" start="37" end="55" title="Province of Málaga" label="Province of Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="64" end="84" title="autonomous community" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="88" end="97" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="136" end="141" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997038" start="174" end="198" title="Costa del Sol Occidental" label="Costa del Sol Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845457" start="257" end="269" title="Mijas Pueblo" label="Mijas Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="328" end="343" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q215254" start="365" end="378" title="Costa del Sol" label="Costa del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845457" start="468" end="480" title="Mijas Pueblo" label="Mijas Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q592566" start="547" end="563" title="La Cala de Mijas" label="La Cala de Mijas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="607" end="618" title="Las Lagunas, Mijas" label="Las Lagunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q492735" start="706" end="716" title="Fuengirola" label="Fuengirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894940" start="720" end="731" title="Mijas Costa" label="Mijas Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="986" end="990" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461442" start="1049" end="1063" title="La Cala Resort" label="La Cala Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1148" end="1155" title="cereals" label="cereals"/>
<link wikidata="Q320416" start="1230" end="1241" title="Tartessians" label="Tartessians"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="1450" end="1457" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="1480" end="1501" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="&amp;quot;Geography&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1508" end="1514" title="ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="1634" end="1642" title="Visigoth" label="Visigoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="1715" end="1720" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="2046" end="2064" title="Emirate of Córdoba" label="Emirate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498612" start="2095" end="2110" title="Umar ibn Hafsun" label="Umar ibn Hafsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q888390" start="2151" end="2159" title="Bobastro" label="Bobastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q190418" start="2181" end="2198" title="Abd al-Rahman III" label="Abd al-Rahman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="2268" end="2285" title="Catholic monarchs" label="Catholic monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103591" start="2297" end="2312" title="Siege of Málaga (1487)" label="siege of Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q151663" start="2402" end="2425" title="Revolt of the Comuneros" label="Revolt of the Comuneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q171136" start="2579" end="2596" title="Joanna of Castile" label="Joanna of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950" start="2626" end="2631" title="villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q367315" start="3085" end="3095" title="Phylloxera" label="Phylloxera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="3353" end="3361" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3531" end="3541" title="paper beds" label="paper beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="3575" end="3581" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q928533" start="4621" end="4628" title="esparto" label="esparto"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="4839" end="4847" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q215254" start="4960" end="4973" title="Costa del Sol" label="Costa del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5016" end="5023" title="La Cala" label="La Cala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5028" end="5039" title="Las Lagunas, Mijas" label="Las Lagunas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5113" end="5123" title="Chollocasa" label="Chollocasa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5153" end="5164" title="Las Lagunas, Mijas" label="Las Lagunas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5234" end="5241" title="La Cala" label="La Cala"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040948" start="6347" end="6373" title="St Anthony´s College Mijas" label="St Anthony´s College Mijas"/>
<link wikidata="Q93238" start="6390" end="6422" title="List of municipalities in Málaga" label="List of municipalities in Málaga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488095" wikidata="Q869733" url="?curid=488095" title="Twix">
<text>Twix is a caramel shortbread biscuit bar made by Mars Inc., consisting of a biscuit applied with other confectionery toppings and coatings (most frequently caramel and milk chocolate). Twix are packaged with one (mini and snack sizes), two (standard size), or four bars (king size) in a wrapper.

==History==

Twix was first produced in the United Kingdom in 1967, and it was introduced in the United States in 1976, and again in 1979. The name is a portmanteau of &quot;twin sticks&quot;. Twix was called &quot;Raider&quot; in mainland Europe for many years before its name was changed in 1991, 2000 in Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Turkey, to match the international brand name. The Raider brand was resurrected for retro editions sold in Germany in 2009, in the Netherlands, Belgium, Finland and Sweden in 2015, and Switzerland in late 2023.

==Production==
Twix bars for the North American market are made in Cleveland, Tennessee, along with M&amp;M&#x27;s. For global markets like Europe and Africa they are produced in Veghel, the Netherlands alongside Mars bars and other Mars, Incorporated chocolates.

==Advertising==

From 1990 to 2001, actor and martial arts master Chuck Norris appeared in commercials for Twix as the candy&#x27;s spokesman. He appeared in selected events and was featured in the Twix advertising campaign. In 2012, Twix launched a campaign called &quot;Pick a Side.&quot; The campaign created a rivalry between the two &quot;sides&quot; of the Twix bar, which are made in different factories. Each bar was given its own packaging, labeled as either a &quot;Right Twix&quot; or a &quot;Left Twix,&quot; even though both sides are identical and made on the same packaging line.

==Twix products==
===Bars===
The following flavours are available in the United States.

* The Twix candy bar was introduced in 1976 and reintroduced in 1979. It consists of chocolate, caramel, and a cookie crunch.
* Twix Peanut Butter was introduced in 1983. It is a candy bar consisting of a chocolate cookie filled with peanut butter instead of caramel.
* Twix Salted Caramel is a variation of the original Twix bar. It has a chocolate cookie, but instead of the usual caramel center, it has a salted caramel center.
* Twix Cookies &amp; Creme was introduced in 1991. It is a candy bar consisting of a chocolate bar with cookie bits and a white creme taking the place of caramel.
* Twix Ice Cream Bar is a frozen confection created by Mars Incorporated. It consists of vanilla ice cream coated in caramel, then enrobed in milk chocolate.
* Twix 100 Calories is a candy bar that consists of a caramel-covered cookie with a chocolate coating. It has 100 calories per serving.
* Twix Cookie Dough is a variation on the classic Twix candy bar. It has a cookie dough center instead of the traditional caramel, and is covered in milk chocolate.

===Discontinued products===
*Twix Chocolate Fudge is a candy bar introduced by Mars, Inc. in 1990. It is a variation of the original Twix bar, but with a chocolate fudge center instead of caramel. The candy bar also has a chocolate cookie bottom and is coated in milk chocolate.

===Shrinkflation===
Like many confectionery items, Twix has been accused of &quot;shrinkflation,&quot; where Mars, Incorporated has decreased the size of the bar. This accusation is based on the fact that the size of a Twix bar has decreased over time, while the price has remained the same.

== In popular culture ==
In an episode of &quot;Seinfeld&quot; entitled &quot;The Dealership&quot;, a major plotline in the episode focuses on George Costanza&#x27;s failed attempts to extract a Twix bar from a vending machine. Also, a recurring joke in the episode is that people confuse a Twix bar with a 5th Avenue Bar. However, George insists that &quot;Twix is the only candy bar with the cookie crunch.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q869733" start="0" end="4" title="Twix" label="Twix"/>
<link wikidata="Q617216" start="10" end="28" title="caramel shortbread" label="caramel shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="29" end="36" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="49" end="58" title="Mars, Incorporated" label="Mars Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="76" end="83" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q183440" start="156" end="163" title="caramel candy" label="caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164820" start="168" end="182" title="milk chocolate" label="milk chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="450" end="461" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q962118" start="920" end="940" title="Cleveland, Tennessee" label="Cleveland, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q739550" start="953" end="967" title="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s" label="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557060" start="1032" end="1038" title="Veghel" label="Veghel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1040" end="1055" title="the Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31305" start="1066" end="1075" title="Mars bars" label="Mars bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="1086" end="1104" title="Mars, Incorporated" label="Mars, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673" start="1184" end="1196" title="Chuck Norris" label="Chuck Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="3246" end="3264" title="Mars Inc." label="Mars, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="3478" end="3486" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729385" start="3508" end="3522" title="The Dealership" label="The Dealership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777013" start="3573" end="3588" title="George Costanza" label="George Costanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="3641" end="3656" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11849588" start="3737" end="3751" title="5th Avenue (candy)" label="5th Avenue Bar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488099" wikidata="Q357493" url="?curid=488099" title="Dwain Chambers">
<text>Dwain Anthony Chambers (born 5 April 1978) is a British track sprinter. He has won international medals at World and European levels and is one of the fastest European sprinters in the history of athletics. His primary event is the 100 metres, with a best of 9.97 seconds, which ranks him equal 9th on the British all-time list. He is the former European record holder for the 60 metres and 4×100 metres relay events with 6.42 seconds and 37.73 s respectively.

Chambers ran a 100 m world junior record of 10.06 s in 1997 and became the youngest ever world medallist in the event at the 1999 World Championships, taking the bronze. On his Olympic début at the 2000 Sydney Olympics he was the best European performer in fourth place. He broke the 10-second barrier twice at the 2001 World Championships. In 2003 he received a two-year athletics ban after testing positive for THG, a banned performance-enhancing drug and was stripped of the 100 m European title and record he achieved in 2002.

Chambers returned to competition in June 2006 and won gold with his teammates in the 4×100 m at the 2006 European Championships. He tried other sports, including a spell with the Hamburg Sea Devils of the NFL Europa league and a rugby league trial with Castleford. Sprinting success came over 60 m when he won silver at the 2008 World Indoor Championships, gold at the 2009 European Indoors, and became world champion at the 2010 World Indoor Championships.

Due to his doping ban, he was barred from the Olympics, Commonwealth Games, and much of the European racing circuit, from 2006 to 2012. The Court of Arbitration for Sport overturned his lifetime Olympic ban, deeming it non-compliant with the World Anti-Doping Code, and he competed in the 2012 London Olympics. He produced a ghost-written autobiography with writer Ken Scott, &quot;Race Against Me&quot;, in 2009. 

Still competing at the age of 45, he set a new indoor M45 60m world record and reached the semi-finals in the UK Athletics Indoor Championships. Outside of Athletics, he is an athletics coach and public speaker. 

He is of Afro-Caribbean- Jamaican descent and has two sons with his partner Leonie Daley.

== Biography ==
=== Early life and career ===
Chambers was born in Islington, and raised in Finsbury Park, London. Running was a part of his family life: his older sister Christine won the senior 100 metres Finals at the English Schools Championships in 1986 and 1987 and competed in the European Athletics Junior Championships. As a schoolboy he was coached by Selwyn Philbert who devoted himself to the young sprinter. Chambers first athletic success came at the 1994 English Schools&#x27; Athletic Association Championships, where he won the boys&#x27; intermediate 100 m race with a time of 10.64 seconds. International medals followed at the 1995 European Junior Championships, at which he won the 100 m and the 4×100 metres relay. He defended these titles at the 1997 European Junior Championships, and set a then world junior record in the 100 m with a time of 10.06 s.

Chambers transitioned into the senior ranks soon after, taking the 100 m silver medal behind his British teammate Darren Campbell at the 1998 European Championships. He achieved a new personal best in September at the 1998 IAAF World Cup with a run of 10.03 s for third place and won a relay gold medal. At the 1998 Commonwealth Games he was a 100 m semi finalist and set a games record as part of the 4×100 m relay team. His ability attracted the attention of former sprinter and Commonwealth Games gold medallist Mike McFarlane, who became his coach. He came first in the 100 m in the 1999 European Cup, then at a meet in Nuremberg he became only the second European sprinter (after Linford Christie) to break the ten second barrier with a time of 9.99 s. Fellow British sprinter Jason Gardener scored a time of 9.98 s in Lausanne soon after, becoming the third Briton to break the barrier. In spite of this, Chambers remained some distance behind his North American counterparts.

=== Seville World Championships to Sydney Olympics ===
In his first major outing on the world stage, Chambers attained a new personal best at the 1999 World Championships in Seville, registering a time of 9.97 s for third place in the 100 m final. This made the 21-year-old the youngest ever World Championships 100 m medallist. North Americans dominated the event as Maurice Greene and Bruny Surin took first and second place respectively, with record runs of 9.80 s and 9.84 s, respectively. The British sprint team Chambers, Gardener, Campbell and Marlon Devonish performed well in the 4×100 metres relay event as runners-up in a time of 37.73 s behind the US team led by Greene. World record holder Maurice Greene was hitting his peak, winning three gold medals in Seville. However, at 21 years old, Chambers had achieved more than Greene had at that age: Greene&#x27;s best was 10.08 s in 1996 and he had never reached a major final.

With the 2000 Sydney Olympics approaching, Chambers studied the technique of other sprinters. In an interview with BBC journalist Tom Fordyce, Chambers commented on the stamina Greene and Surin had gained from running in the 200 metres event and Jason Gardener&#x27;s improved acceleration through running the 60 metres event. He experimented with distances at the beginning of 2000, sprinting over 50, 60 and 200 m in various competitions. He set a personal best of 6.55 s in the 60 m event in Ghent in February. A hamstring injury caused him to miss six-weeks of training and when he returned his 100 m performances were lacklustre. He finished ninth at the Golden Gala in Rome with a slow time of 10.41 s and was seventh in a tame 10.30 s at the London Grand Prix, results that led him to consider quitting the season altogether. A late rejuvenation at the British Olympic trials guaranteed his selection as he snatched first place with 10.11 s (just one hundredth of a second ahead of Darren Campbell). Victory against in-form world record holder Maurice Greene in Gateshead raised Chambers&#x27; confidence and he stated his aim to take home a medal from the Games.

The 2000 Sydney Olympics saw Chambers come close to the podium. He easily qualified through the heat stages and achieved a season&#x27;s best of 10.08 s in the 100 m final finishing fourth behind Greene, Ato Boldon and Obadele Thompson. Chambers was the best European 100 m performer, but after disqualification in the relay he left the games without a medal.

=== Edmonton World championships ===
He made his fastest opening to a season in 2001 by winning the 100 m for his club Belgrave Harriers at the European Clubs Cup with a meet record time of 10.12 s. At the Amateur Athletics Association (AAA) trials in Birmingham his run of 10.01 s was the fastest ever wind-legal time recorded in Britain by a British sprinter. Chambers ran with consistency in the summer of 2001: he won at the Seville Grand Prix in 10.01 s and finished third in ten seconds flat at the Athletissima meet. In the run up to the 2001 IAAF Edmonton World Championships Chambers compared his own performances to the British record holder: &quot;I am very consistent in the 10.00s this year, and that bodes well for the Worlds. If you are running as fast as Linford Christie in his prime, it gives you a lot of confidence.&quot;

Chambers also competed over 200 m and a personal best run of 20.31 s earned him selection in both sprints for the World Championships. In an interview with Tom Fordyce, Chambers stated that Maurice Greene&#x27;s strong presence and mind games undermined the competition both physically and mentally. &quot;You have to get out in front of him and hold on for dear life&quot; he said of the world record holder.

Chambers broke the ten second barrier twice in the 2001 World Championships with a personal best of 9.97 s in the quarter-finals and a run of 9.99 s in the final. This was not enough for a medal in a strong race which featured five sprinters running under ten seconds and saw Greene defend his title. Chambers was later upgraded to fourth place after silver medallist Tim Montgomery tested positive for banned substances. A hamstring injury in the final ruled him out of the 200 m event. Chambers ended his season at the 2001 Goodwill Games in Brisbane, and finished in first place in the absence of an injured Greene, who commentated on his European rival&#x27;s victory.

=== 2002 European champion ===
Chambers&#x27; coach Mike McFarlane struggled with the workload of full-time training. Frustrated by the distance between himself and the top sprinters, Chambers decided to relocate to California to work with Ukrainian coach Remi Korchemny and nutritionist Victor Conte. After parting ways with American sprinter Tim Montgomery, Conte looked to Chambers to fill the athlete&#x27;s berth. In the run up to the year&#x27;s major events, Chambers was in fine form and recorded a 200 m personal best of 20.27 s in Athens on 10 June 2002. Montgomery, impressed by Chambers&#x27; training regime, tipped the Briton to win the gold at the forthcoming 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, England.

He won the 100 m at the Commonwealth Games trials in a season&#x27;s best of 10.03 s, then equalled Linford Christie&#x27;s record of 10.04 s at European Cup, where he led the British team to victory as team captain. Victories over Maurice Greene followed at Oslo&#x27;s IAAF Golden League meeting and in Sheffield with a wind-assisted 9.95 s. He was the favourite for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, but Chambers faced stiff competition from British newcomer Mark Lewis-Francis who was finishing fractions of a second behind him. Chambers won all his preliminary races and reached the final, along with Lewis-Francis and Jason Gardener, but he suffered a cramp mid-race and ended up in last place. The English sprinters had the three slowest times in the final, with Lewis-Francis also beset by injury.

After Commonwealth disappointment on home turf, Chambers won gold medals in the 100 m and 4×100 m relay at the 2002 European Championships in Munich, setting a championship record of 9.96 s. Chambers recorded a time of 9.94 s at the Weltklasse Zürich meeting, again beating world record holder Greene. He finished the season by equalling Linford Christie&#x27;s European record at the 2002 IAAF Grand Prix Final. His run of 9.87 s with a maximum allowable wind of +2.0 m/s left him second to Tim Montgomery, who set a world record of 9.78 s. Chambers received the 2002 European Athlete of the Year trophy for his achievements on the track that year.

=== 2003 World championships ===
Chambers began the 2003 season with a grandiose statement – namely that he would lower the 100 m record to 9.65 s. After recovering from a minor injury he suffered in January, Despite claims he could also beat the 60 m indoor record, his form was poor and he failed to pass the heats at the 2003 British Grand Prix, finishing fourth in a time of 6.68 s. He was beaten by Mark Lewis-Francis by a hundredth of a second at the trials for the IAAF World Indoor Championships, narrowly missing out on selection with a time of 6.59 s.

Chambers announced that he was to part with trainer Mike McFarlane in favour of a permanent relationship with Ukrainian coach Remi Korchemny. The sprinter started the 100 m season modestly, finishing third and fourth in Modesto and Eugene, respectively. Chambers beat Montgomery in Glasgow in June, running a stadium record of 10.15 s into a headwind, and qualified for the World Championships by winning the AAA trials.

His season&#x27;s best came under unusual circumstances at the British Grand Prix – due to a system malfunction he was initially timed by hand at dead on ten seconds, which was amended to 9.96 s after video evidence was consulted. He could not match that form at the World 100 m final: Kim Collins, Darrel Brown, Darren Campbell, and Chambers all finished within a split second of each other and Chambers was adjudged to have finished fourth. Chambers squandered his anchoring lead in the 4×100 m relay, allowing Joshua J. Johnson of the United States team to beat him to the finish line. In spite of his close fourth and a relay silver medal, there was a sense of disappointment in the press that Chambers&#x27; record breaking claims and gold medals had not materialised.

=== Doping ban ===
A sample for an out-of-competition drugs test that Chambers had provided in Germany on 1 August 2003 was re-examined in October and subsequently tested positive for banned substances. The United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) were investigating the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative (BALCO); the workplace of both Chambers&#x27; coach Remi Korchemny, and nutritionist Victor Conte. Both men faced charges of distributing illegal drugs to athletes in the United States. The BALCO Scandal uncovered drug use in a wide range of sportsmen and women, including sprinters Marion Jones and Tim Montgomery.

Chambers claimed that his new coach had introduced him to Conte as a way of providing him with specialised &#x27;nutritional supplements&#x27; – which he took by putting a few drops of liquid under his tongue. Conte had helped develop a type of anabolic steroid called THG, or tetrahydrogestrinone, at BALCO. After Chambers discovered that he had tested positive for drugs he sent his lawyer to meet Conte and make inquires about the supplement he had been ingesting. Conte assured him that all the substances were IAAF compliant.

After further investigation, it was revealed on 22 October 2003 that Chambers had tested positive for the banned steroid THG. Analysis of his backup sample also tested positive and the outcome was confirmed on 7 November 2003, making Chambers the first person to test positive for the new drug. Chambers was suspended the same day with an independent UK Athletics tribunal pending. The disciplinary hearing on 24 February 2004 resulted in a two-year ban from athletics, backdated to begin on 7 November 2003. He was also banned for life from the Olympics, and stripped of the medals he had won since mid-2002, after admitting that he had taken THG from that date. Chambers&#x27; 2002 relay gold medal performance was erased, costing teammates Darren Campbell, Marlon Devonish and Christian Malcolm their medals in the process. Chambers was also ordered by the IAAF to pay back his earnings from the period of his athletics career that was affected by his drug abuse.

Conte claimed that rival coach Trevor Graham had revealed the drug to US testers, acting &quot;purely out of competitive jealousy&quot; as Chambers was challenging Graham&#x27;s trainees; Montgomery and Greene. Chambers denied that he had any knowledge that the substance he was taking was banned and claimed he was deceived by Conte over its true use. However, he contradicted his statement in a later interview, saying that he had major suspicions that he was using banned substances but was too naïve and lacking in self-respect to act otherwise. By Chambers&#x27; own admission in 2008, in a letter by his supplier Conte to British anti-doping chief John Scott, THG was not the only substance he had used during his career. In his confession he admitted to the use of epitestosterone cream, EPO, HGH, insulin lispro, modafinil and liothyronine.

Banned from competition, Chambers sought alternative commercial outlets for his athletic prowess. He had an unsuccessful American football try-out with the San Francisco 49ers, hoping to emulate Renaldo Nehemiah. He drifted on to the celebrity circuit, appearing on British reality television series &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot; in May 2004. However, Chambers had little interest in the show and soon chose to leave. He appeared in neither sporting events nor television programmes for 18 months.

=== Return to athletics ===
Chambers began training in Jamaica in late 2005 in preparation for the athletics season. He faced new challengers in the 100 m as Maurice Greene was no longer a dominant force and Jamaican Asafa Powell was the new world record holder. Chambers began working with Glen Mills, coach of Caribbean sprinters Kim Collins and Usain Bolt. The drug suspension had expired in November but he needed to pass four mandatory drugs tests in order to gain clearance to compete with the IAAF. His comeback was further delayed as he gave an interview with the BBC revealing he began using drugs at the beginning of 2002, not since August 2003, as he had claimed to the IAAF. After further disclosure (that took away his European 100 m gold medal and invalidated his European record of 9.87 s), Chambers was cleared to compete on 10 June 2006, although his return was dependent on an agreement to repay prize money he won while using banned substances. He returned to competition on 11 June 2006 at the British Grand Prix and took third in 10.07 s, behind Asafa Powell who equalled his own world record. Chambers stated that his training regime with Bolt had helped him make a strong opening performance despite a long absence from competition. The result placed Chambers at the top of the British rankings and was the second fastest time by a European sprinter in 2006.

Chambers lamented the effects of his drug use and noted the irony that the drugs did not do much to improve the consistency of his performances. On his return to international competition his times were significantly worse than he achieved prior to drug use: in the 100 m final at the 2006 European Championships, Chambers ran a sub-par 10.24 s and finished in fifth place. He was part of the gold medal-winning British 4×100 m team, but Darren Campbell, who was angry about losing his 2002 and 2003 relay medals due to Chambers&#x27; ban, refused to join the team in a celebratory lap. After the competition, Chambers again expressed an interest in switching to American football, and completed a week-long NFL Europa training camp in Cologne that November.

=== American Football ===
Chambers signed for BAFA National Leagues side Farnham Knights in 2005, After attending a series of NFL Europe training camps, he gained a contract with German NFL Europa side Hamburg Sea Devils in March 2007. Following news that Chambers was receiving new, legal nutritional supplements from Victor Conte, the Hamburg Sea Devils confirmed that Chambers would undergo a vigorous drug testing regime.

Chambers reflected on drug use in athletics in an interview with Olympic gold medallist Sir Matthew Pinsent for the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Inside Sport&quot; programme. Chambers claimed there would always be athletes using performance-enhancing drugs because drug testers did not keep pace with advances in science and that athletes who took drugs had an immense advantage over those who remained clean. Chambers was roundly condemned for his comments in the interview by both the press and his former colleagues in the athletics world, including Sir Steve Redgrave, Mo Farah, and Sebastian Coe.

Chambers&#x27; American football career was brought to a standstill when a stress fracture injury on his right foot ruled him out for the season. The situation worsened further when the NFL closed the European league on 29 June 2007 leaving Chambers jobless. He returned as a TV personality on reality television show &quot;Cirque de Celebrité&quot; in October but was unpopular with the public and subsequently voted off.

=== Athletics again and rugby league===
Following the collapse of the NFL Europa franchise, Chambers made a second return to athletics in early 2008. Competing in the 60 m indoor final at the Birmingham Games in February 2008, he finished with a time of 6.60 s, setting a new meeting record. UK Athletics chief executive Niels de Vos initially banned Chambers from competing in the trials for the 2008 IAAF World Indoor Championships but, after the IAAF overruled the decision, Chambers won the event and selection. UK Athletics stated that committee was &quot;unanimous in its desire not to select Dwain&quot; but were forced to by the selection criteria, saying they would have preferred to send younger athletes eligible for the Olympics.

At the World Indoor Championships 60 metres final, Chambers won a silver medal and recorded a new personal best of 6.54 s to take second behind Olusoji Fasuba. The performance did not sway opinion: Chambers continued to encounter extensive criticism within athletics. Promoters did not invite him to key athletics events, Eddie Kulukundis – who had supported Chambers earlier in his career – refused to sponsor the sprinter, and the British Olympic Association (BOA), prevented him from competing in the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. To return to the track Chambers had to rely on the money he received from his partner, Leonie Daley, a civil servant whom he met at the Miss Jamaica UK competition. The couple now had a child, a boy named Skye who was born in September 2005. He amassed a selection of cuttings about his fall from grace and the BALCO Scandal in order to show his son the risks of drug abuse.

Chambers tried to fashion himself as a living example of the dangers of drugs, sporting a T-shirt in Valencia with an anti-drugs slogan of &quot;Just Say No!&quot;. He also expressed regret about previous comments suggesting that drug use was necessary to reach the upper echelons of athletics and set about presenting himself as a changed, clean athlete – devoid of the bravado that had marked his earlier career. Chambers&#x27; reinvention was met with a mixed reaction and the acceptance of a proven drug user on the track was not palatable to some. Dame Kelly Holmes, and parts of the British press called for Chambers to retire from the Great Britain athletics team.

Chambers&#x27; return to athletics took an unusual turn when he confirmed in March 2008 that he had joined English rugby league team Castleford Tigers on trial; a move which surprised and angered in equal measure given the fact he had never played the sport before. The Rugby Football League did not object to the move, in spite of his drug-damaged reputation, but stated much improvement was needed prior to any appearance for Castleford in the Super League competition. At a rugby press conference, Chambers expressed a desire to compete in the Beijing Olympics, casting doubt on his dedication to his new career. Chambers officially registered as a player with the Rugby Football League, and Martin Offiah declared that he was prepared to mentor Chambers. He completed training with the Castleford Tigers first-team squad and made his début in a reserve game against York City Knights, but Castleford announced that they would not be offering him a contract.

=== High Court challenge ===

In May 2008 Chambers announced that he was challenging his Olympic ban at the High Court of Justice. Chambers returned to sprinting in June and, in his first 100 m race since August 2006, he won the Papaflessia meet with a time of 10.26 s. He achieved the &quot;A&quot; Standard for the 2008 Beijing Olympics in June and won the British Olympic trials in ten seconds flat in July. Public opinion on an Olympic appearance remained split.

His performance at the Olympic trials was in vain as Mr. Justice Mackay upheld the BOA ban in the High Court of Justice and stated that a right to work was not sufficient reason to remove it. The BOA chairman, Lord Moynihan, was satisfied with the outcome, stating that those abusing drugs did not deserve to represent Great Britain at the Olympics. However, he lamented that a sprinter of Chambers&#x27; calibre had in effect excluded himself from the competition.

The effort of the High Court challenge and the Olympic ban took its toll on Chambers, but he had no intention to retire and set an appearance in the 2012 London Olympics as his main goal, aiming to prove he could perform without the use of drugs. Lord Moynihan objected to this, saying it would sully the reputation of both the Great Britain athletics team and the London Olympics. In late 2008 Chambers signed a book deal, covering his athletics career and drug usage, and stated his desire to become a sprint coach when his track career was finished. He had his second child, a boy named Rocco, that November.

Charles van Commenee&#x27;s appointment as head coach of UK Athletics brought a change of approach towards Chambers as both the new coach and Niels De Vos welcomed him back to compete internationally. The pair judged that he had served his sentence – van Commenee was especially complimentary, stating: &quot;He is a likeable guy and a damned fine athlete&quot;. That month Chambers appeared at a &quot;Tackling Doping in Sport&quot; conference and told of the damage drugs had caused to his career, health, and finances. The Olympic ban remained in place, however, and London 2012 chairman Sebastian Coe said: &quot;I am clear cut on the Chambers case – I don&#x27;t think there is room for drugs cheats in sport&quot;.

=== &quot;Race Against Me&quot; ===
Chambers ceased legal action to overturn his Olympic ban and instead aimed to finish his career on a high. He intensively studied the technique of Usain Bolt to improve his own times, seeing Bolt as the new generation&#x27;s Maurice Greene. Though he was still banned from Euromeetings-organised events, he set a new personal best of 6.52 s in the 60 m at the Birmingham Indoor Grand Prix, then became the UK Indoor Champion, equalling Mike Rodgers&#x27; world leading time of 6.51 s. At the 2009 European Indoor Championships he broke Ronald Pognon&#x27;s European 60 m record with a 6.42 s run in the semi-finals, then won the gold medal with a time of 6.46 s in the final. British head coach van Commenee stated that Chambers had undergone vigorous testing and that his performance sent &quot;a message that you can win and break European records in the proper way.&quot;

The record-breaking performance brought him an invite from the Berlin IAAF Golden League meet, although organising group Euromeetings condemned the move. Revelations in Chambers&#x27; autobiography &quot;Race Against Me&quot; brought further controversy as the book had in-depth accounts of his past drug abuse and claimed drug use remained rife in athletics, estimating that half the American Olympic athletes in Beijing had used illegal substances. Chambers signed a statement with UK Sport, verifying that he believed the information to be true, which brought a close to the organisation&#x27;s inquiries into his drug use. An IAAF investigation concluded that the book demanded no further action on their part. Olympic gold medallist and anti-drugs campaigner Ed Moses gave his support, saying that Chambers admissions provided a useful insight, but that athletes and administrators remained in denial about the high levels of doping in athletics.

Invites to Golden League meets never materialised, but he continued to run at smaller events. He ran a European leading time of 10.06 seconds at Papaflessia in Greece, and won the 100 m and 200 m races at the 2009 European Team Championships. He was the fastest entrant at the national championships but 2008 runner-up Simeon Williamson won the final by some distance. The result took Chambers by surprise and he said that limited opportunities to race had made him complacent. He later withdrew from the 200 m race citing exhaustion.

At the World Championships Chambers finished sixth in 100 m final with a season&#x27;s best of 10.00 seconds. He was the only sprinter from outside the Americas in the final and was some distance behind Bolt who ran a world record of 9.58 seconds. However, he was very pleased with his performance and said he was happy just to be involved in the fastest 100 m race ever. He pulled out of the 200 m with a calf injury and called an end to his season.

=== World indoor champion ===

The following year, he began by focusing on the 2010 IAAF World Indoor Championships, and he won the 60 m at the UK trials in 6.50 seconds (a time only he had bettered in the previous two seasons). His closest competitor, Ivory Williams, received a ban for marijuana usage, leaving Chambers as a strong favourite. He was the fastest in all rounds of World 60 m competition, and surged ahead of Mike Rodgers in the final to win his first world title with a time of 6.48 seconds. Banned from the 2010 Commonwealth Games, he set his sights on making the team for the 2010 European Athletics Championships.

At the start of the outdoor season he had wins in Maringá in Brazil and at the Cezmi Or Memorial. He beat Christophe Lemaitre to win the 100 m at the 2010 European Team Championships, helping Great Britain to second place in the tournament and recording 9.99 seconds – the first sub-10 time by a European athlete in almost four years. Lemaitre and Chambers were seen as the only gold medal contenders for the 100 m final at the European Athletics Championships, but the event defied expectations in terms of times and placings. The Frenchman won in 10.11 seconds into a headwind while a tight finish between the four following athletes (all 10.18) saw Chambers finish fifth.

=== 2011–2012: World and Olympic semi-finalist ===
The start of his 2011 season saw him take a fourth consecutive national title over 60 m with a European-leading time. At the 2011 European Athletics Indoor Championships the following month he was beaten to the line by Obikwelu, although he was pleased with the silver medal as he had changed his training to focus towards the 100 m for that season. Four straight wins on the Brazilian Athletics Tour came at the beginning of his outdoor season in May, including a season&#x27;s best of 10.01 seconds, and he took his fifth national title at the British trials. At the 2011 World Championships he reached the 100 m semi-finals but fell foul of the IAAF&#x27;s new false start rule: he twitched in his blocks and was immediately disqualified.

He won his fifth national title in the 60 m in 2012 with a season&#x27;s best of 6.58 m. A third consecutive podium finish came at the 2012 IAAF World Indoor Championships, where he pipped Trell Kimmons to the bronze medal. Chambers was given the chance to return to the Olympic stage after the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) decided in favour of the World Anti-Doping Agency over the validity of British Olympic Association&#x27;s (BOA) Olympic ban by-law. CAS agreed that the law was non-compliant with the World Anti-Doping Code, to which the BOA was signatory due to its connection with the International Olympic Committee. Chambers ran a 150 m-straight best of 15.27 seconds at the Great City Games in May then won the 100 m Olympic trial race, holding off emerging teenager Adam Gemili. His absence from the major track circuit came to an end with a run at the Diamond League London Grand Prix, although he did not achieve the Olympic &quot;A&quot; standard time there.

Chambers was named in the British squad for the 2012 London Olympics after the selectors took into account his trials win and his times from the previous year. Given the abrupt turnaround in his fortunes, he said: &quot;For me representing my country in an Olympics is a privilege that should never be taken for granted. To be given the opportunity to do so in my home town has been a dream that at times has seemed very distant and is now a reality.&quot; He returned to the British relay team at the 2012 European Athletics Championships after a six-year absence but a botched baton change saw the team disqualified. At the Olympics he won his 100 metres heat in a season&#x27;s best of 10.02 seconds, with a legal 2.0 m/s following wind, in his first Olympic race in twelve years. He was drawn in the same semi-final as Usain Bolt but Chambers&#x27; run of 10.05 seconds for fourth meant he did not make the final. His Olympics came to an end in the 4×100 metres relay heats as the British team made an illegal baton exchange.

=== 2013–2014 ===
Chambers began his 2013 season with a 60 m win in Glasgow with a run of 6.58 seconds. A back injury affected his preparations for the 2013 European Indoor Championships, where he was eliminated in the heats. Outdoors, he won his fourth consecutive British Championship title, running 10.04. A month later at the World Championships in Moscow, he ran 10.14 in his heat to reach the semi-finals, where he was eliminated running 10.15.

Chambers began 2014 by finishing second in the 60 m at the British Indoor Championships, before going on to finish sixth in the 60 m final at the World Indoor Championships in a time of 6.52s. This was the fastest time he had run the 60m in since 2010. In his first three 100 m races of the outdoor season he failed to break 10.20, before hitting form during the British Championships. Going into the event, he was only ranked 10th in the UK, but he won the 100 m final, defeating Chijindu Ujah, who had broken 10 seconds three weeks earlier. Chambers&#x27; victory guaranteed him selection for the European Championships as his winning time was 10.12 secs, inside the European qualifying mark of 10.20. This was his fifth consecutive win at the British Championships. Chambers won his final medal in international competition at the 2014 IAAF World Relays in May. At the 2014 European Championships in August, Chambers missed out on a final individual medal by 0.02 seconds, finishing 4th in the 100m final in 10.24. This would be his last appearance at a major championships.

=== Later career ===
Chambers attended just two meets in 2015. He had a more active 2016, winning his heat and semi-final in the 60m at the British Indoor Championships but only managed seventh in the final. At the outdoor national championships in June, he made the final of the 100m in which he ran a heavily wind assisted (+3.0 m/s) 10.11, which once again saw him finish seventh. In 2017, Chambers came third at the national indoor championships in 6.62 but was not selected for the 2017 European Indoor Championships. He could only reach the national semi-finals outdoors in July in the 100m, and announced his retirement the following month.

In December 2018, 40-year-old Chambers returned at a low-key meet in London. He then entered the national indoor championships in February 2019. He progressed from his heat, but was disqualified after a false start in the semi-final. In February 2020, Chambers once again returned to the British Indoor Championships. He finished last in his semi-final after coming through the heats.

Chambers entered the 100m at the British Championships in 2021 and 2022 but failed to progress from the heats on both occasions.

In January 2024, at an open meet in Lee Valley, he set a new world record for the M45 Indoor 60m with a time of 6.81s. He went on to compete at the UK Indoor Championships in February 2024, reaching the semi-finals. 

=== Outside Athletics ===
As well as competitive athletics, Chambers founded Chambers for Sport in 2009, offering group and 1-2-1 sprint coaching at the Lee Valley Athletics Centre in London. He founded the Dwain Chambers Performance Academy, which aims to provide all round coaching for the next generation of sporting stars and is open for young athletes between 9 and 21. 

He is also a public speaker and gave his first TedX in October 2023. 

== Statistics ==

Chambers&#x27; performances at tournaments in the 100 metres event make him one of the fastest European sprinters in the history of recorded athletics. His personal best of 9.97 s set at the 1999 Seville World Championships places him as the seventh fastest European in the 100 m and the sixth fastest Briton behind Linford Christie (9.87 s), James Dasaolu (9.91 s), Zharnel Hughes (9.91 s), Chijindu Ujah (9.96 s) and Joel Fearon (9.96 s). Chambers&#x27; annulled 9.87 s finish at the Paris Grand Prix in 2002 would have made him the joint fastest British 100 m sprinter with Christie and the joint second fastest European in the event.

Amongst his British contemporaries Chambers ranks top with two 9.97 s finishes; the first in 1999 in Seville, Spain and the second in 2001 in Edmonton, Canada. Compatriot Mark Lewis-Francis also scored a personal best of 9.97 s at the Edmonton World Championships. Great Britain teammate Jason Gardener&#x27;s personal best of 9.98 s falls just short of Chambers&#x27;. None of his British contemporaries have broken the ten second barrier on more than one occasion; Chambers has done so five times.

Chambers is the only athlete ever to run sub-10s 100m in three consecutive decades (1990s, 2000s and 2010s) and is the eighth-fastest Briton of all time over 100m. 

=== Personal bests ===

=== International competition record ===
* 

== See also ==
* James Dasaolu
* List of doping cases in athletics

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
*Chambers&#x27; annulled performances and revised standings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357493" start="0" end="22" title="Dwain Chambers" label="Dwain Anthony Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="56" end="61" title="track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q624482" start="62" end="70" title="Sprint (running)" label="sprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="196" end="205" title="athletics (sport)" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="242" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445200" start="339" end="361" title="European records in athletics" label="former European record"/>
<link wikidata="Q246681" start="377" end="386" title="60 metres" label="60 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q230061" start="391" end="409" title="4×100 metres relay" label="4×100 metres relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q592883" start="483" end="502" title="List of world junior records in athletics" label="world junior record"/>
<link wikidata="Q132444" start="587" end="611" title="1999 World Championships in Athletics" label="1999 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="639" end="646" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="660" end="680" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Sydney Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163866" start="746" end="763" title="10-second barrier" label="10-second barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q503240" start="777" end="801" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics" label="2001 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q416940" start="875" end="878" title="Tetrahydrogestrinone" label="THG"/>
<link wikidata="Q210707" start="1094" end="1121" title="European Championships in Athletics" label="2006 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q523608" start="1173" end="1191" title="Hamburg Sea Devils (NFL Europe)" label="Hamburg Sea Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="1199" end="1209" title="NFL Europa" label="NFL Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="1223" end="1235" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941467" start="1247" end="1257" title="Castleford Tigers" label="Castleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q836635" start="1318" end="1349" title="2008 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2008 World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q968915" start="1363" end="1384" title="2009 European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="2009 European Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q831707" start="1419" end="1450" title="2010 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2010 World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="1593" end="1623" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q749394" start="1695" end="1717" title="World Anti-Doping Code" label="World Anti-Doping Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="1742" end="1762" title="2012 London Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986879" start="2092" end="2106" title="British African-Caribbean community" label="Afro-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="2108" end="2116" title="Jamaicans" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="2241" end="2250" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q122566" start="2266" end="2279" title="Finsbury Park (area)" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2281" end="2287" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="2370" end="2380" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q428792" start="2462" end="2501" title="European Athletics Junior Championships" label="European Athletics Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378369" start="2644" end="2686" title="English Schools&amp;#x27; Athletic Association" label="English Schools&amp;#x27; Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954754" start="2821" end="2855" title="1995 European Athletics Junior Championships" label="1995 European Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q230061" start="2891" end="2909" title="4×100 metres relay" label="4×100 metres relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954755" start="2943" end="2977" title="1997 European Athletics Junior Championships" label="1997 European Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q592883" start="2994" end="3013" title="List of world junior records in athletics" label="world junior record"/>
<link wikidata="Q847956" start="3125" end="3137" title="silver medal" label="silver medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q549013" start="3166" end="3181" title="Darren Campbell" label="Darren Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q623385" start="3189" end="3216" title="1998 European Championships in Athletics" label="1998 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170920" start="3270" end="3289" title="1998 IAAF World Cup" label="1998 IAAF World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869171" start="3363" end="3386" title="Athletics at the 1998 Commonwealth Games" label="1998 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9305965" start="3426" end="3438" title="Commonwealth Games records in athletics" label="games record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933355" start="3567" end="3581" title="Mike McFarlane" label="Mike McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681685" start="3644" end="3656" title="European Cup (athletics)" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="3676" end="3685" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q310019" start="3737" end="3753" title="Linford Christie" label="Linford Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q163866" start="3768" end="3786" title="ten second barrier" label="ten second barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q178460" start="3834" end="3848" title="Jason Gardener" label="Jason Gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="3876" end="3884" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q132444" start="4182" end="4206" title="1999 World Championships in Athletics" label="1999 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4210" end="4217" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="4328" end="4347" title="IAAF World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q296309" start="4404" end="4418" title="Maurice Greene (athlete)" label="Maurice Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q441217" start="4423" end="4434" title="Bruny Surin" label="Bruny Surin"/>
<link wikidata="Q528894" start="4587" end="4602" title="Marlon Devonish" label="Marlon Devonish"/>
<link wikidata="Q230061" start="4625" end="4637" title="4 x 100m relay" label="4×100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4805" end="4812" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="4985" end="5005" title="2000 Sydney Olympics" label="2000 Sydney Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5091" end="5094" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815836" start="5106" end="5117" title="Tom Fordyce" label="Tom Fordyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="5201" end="5211" title="200 metres" label="200 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q178460" start="5222" end="5236" title="Jason Gardener" label="Jason Gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q246681" start="5286" end="5295" title="60 metres" label="60 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="5471" end="5476" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q196002" start="5492" end="5501" title="hamstring" label="hamstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q225463" start="5636" end="5647" title="Golden Gala" label="Golden Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5651" end="5655" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q791183" start="5725" end="5742" title="London Grand Prix" label="London Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="6045" end="6054" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426702" start="6308" end="6319" title="Athletics at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="100 m final"/>
<link wikidata="Q311366" start="6352" end="6362" title="Ato Boldon" label="Ato Boldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q366517" start="6367" end="6383" title="Obadele Thompson" label="Obadele Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882683" start="6628" end="6645" title="Belgrave Harriers" label="Belgrave Harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q557830" start="6653" end="6671" title="European Champion Clubs Cup (athletics)" label="European Clubs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867501" start="6715" end="6744" title="Amateur Athletics Association" label="Amateur Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="6761" end="6771" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q665517" start="7014" end="7026" title="Athletissima" label="Athletissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q503240" start="7064" end="7092" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics" label="Edmonton World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q310019" start="7280" end="7296" title="Linford Christie" label="Linford Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599250" start="7919" end="7924" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q316170" start="8131" end="8145" title="Tim Montgomery" label="Tim Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599248" start="8238" end="8249" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics – Men&amp;#x27;s 200 metres" label="200 m event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537615" start="8284" end="8303" title="Athletics at the 2001 Goodwill Games" label="2001 Goodwill Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="8307" end="8315" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933355" start="8489" end="8503" title="Mike McFarlane" label="Mike McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="8653" end="8663" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q289885" start="8693" end="8707" title="Remi Korchemny" label="Remi Korchemny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576499" start="8712" end="8724" title="nutritionist" label="nutritionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q979655" start="8725" end="8737" title="Victor Conte" label="Victor Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="8978" end="8984" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="9112" end="9135" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="2002 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="9139" end="9149" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681685" start="9306" end="9318" title="European Cup (athletics)" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="9420" end="9424" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q727164" start="9432" end="9450" title="IAAF Golden League" label="IAAF Golden League"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="9466" end="9475" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q375939" start="9618" end="9636" title="Mark Lewis-Francis" label="Mark Lewis-Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006818" start="9814" end="9819" title="cramp" label="cramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q623388" start="10074" end="10101" title="2002 European Championships in Athletics" label="2002 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="10105" end="10111" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q661729" start="10196" end="10213" title="Weltklasse Zürich" label="Weltklasse Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599609" start="10348" end="10374" title="2002 IAAF Grand Prix Final" label="2002 IAAF Grand Prix Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337699" start="10532" end="10560" title="European Athlete of the Year" label="European Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="11086" end="11117" title="IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="IAAF World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="11287" end="11296" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204561" start="11397" end="11404" title="Modesto, California" label="Modesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="11409" end="11415" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="11459" end="11466" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q263403" start="11551" end="11570" title="2003 World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806703" start="11866" end="11883" title="2003 World Championships in Athletics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="World 100 m final"/>
<link wikidata="Q311298" start="11885" end="11896" title="Kim Collins" label="Kim Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166577" start="11898" end="11910" title="Darrel Brown" label="Darrel Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372425" start="12112" end="12129" title="Joshua J. Johnson" label="Joshua J. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468312" start="12581" end="12613" title="United States Anti-Doping Agency" label="United States Anti-Doping Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q795416" start="12645" end="12677" title="Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative" label="Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q289885" start="12730" end="12744" title="Remi Korchemny" label="Remi Korchemny"/>
<link wikidata="Q979655" start="12763" end="12775" title="Victor Conte" label="Victor Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834572" start="12868" end="12881" title="BALCO Scandal" label="BALCO Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209396" start="12961" end="12973" title="Marion Jones" label="Marion Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q316170" start="12978" end="12992" title="Tim Montgomery" label="Tim Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q309438" start="13240" end="13256" title="anabolic steroid" label="anabolic steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416940" start="13264" end="13267" title="tetrahydrogestrinone" label="THG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="13510" end="13514" title="International Association of Athletics Federations" label="IAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647513" start="13878" end="13890" title="UK Athletics" label="UK Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="14073" end="14081" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q549013" start="14270" end="14285" title="Darren Campbell" label="Darren Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q528894" start="14287" end="14302" title="Marlon Devonish" label="Marlon Devonish"/>
<link wikidata="Q561374" start="14307" end="14324" title="Christian Malcolm" label="Christian Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394546" start="14526" end="14539" title="Trevor Graham" label="Trevor Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q416852" start="15267" end="15282" title="epitestosterone" label="epitestosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="15290" end="15293" title="Erythropoietin" label="EPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="15295" end="15298" title="HGH" label="HGH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492616" start="15300" end="15314" title="insulin lispro" label="insulin lispro"/>
<link wikidata="Q410441" start="15316" end="15325" title="modafinil" label="modafinil"/>
<link wikidata="Q930170" start="15330" end="15342" title="liothyronine" label="liothyronine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="15466" end="15483" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="15501" end="15520" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q954108" start="15540" end="15556" title="Renaldo Nehemiah" label="Renaldo Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784600" start="15651" end="15670" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen (British TV series)" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182747" start="16063" end="16075" title="Asafa Powell" label="Asafa Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108684" start="16137" end="16147" title="Glen Mills" label="Glen Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="16158" end="16167" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q311298" start="16178" end="16189" title="Kim Collins" label="Kim Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189" start="16194" end="16204" title="Usain Bolt" label="Usain Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606107" start="17495" end="17506" title="2006 European Athletics Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="100 m final"/>
<link wikidata="Q623563" start="17514" end="17541" title="2006 European Championships in Athletics" label="2006 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q549013" start="17667" end="17682" title="Darren Campbell" label="Darren Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="17892" end="17909" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="17937" end="17947" title="NFL Europa" label="NFL Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="17965" end="17972" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834539" start="18035" end="18056" title="BAFA National Leagues" label="BAFA National Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463272" start="18062" end="18077" title="Farnham Knights" label="Farnham Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="18115" end="18125" title="NFL Europe" label="NFL Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q523608" start="18191" end="18209" title="Hamburg Sea Devils (NFL Europe)" label="Hamburg Sea Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q52680" start="18504" end="18523" title="Matthew Pinsent" label="Sir Matthew Pinsent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18532" end="18535" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q52679" start="18957" end="18975" title="Steve Redgrave" label="Sir Steve Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671" start="18977" end="18985" title="Mo Farah" label="Mo Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188502" start="18991" end="19004" title="Sebastian Coe" label="Sebastian Coe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41392" start="19082" end="19097" title="stress fracture" label="stress fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="19193" end="19196" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="19301" end="19319" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121972" start="19331" end="19350" title="Cirque de Celebrité" label="Cirque de Celebrité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647513" start="19723" end="19735" title="UK Athletics" label="UK Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031593" start="19752" end="19764" title="Niels de Vos" label="Niels de Vos"/>
<link wikidata="Q836635" start="19828" end="19864" title="2008 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2008 IAAF World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="19880" end="19884" title="IAAF" label="IAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611199" start="20208" end="20223" title="2008 IAAF World Indoor Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s 60 metres" label="60 metres final"/>
<link wikidata="Q113551" start="20318" end="20332" title="Olusoji Fasuba" label="Olusoji Fasuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336207" start="20496" end="20512" title="Eddie Kulukundis" label="Eddie Kulukundis"/>
<link wikidata="Q849756" start="20607" end="20634" title="British Olympic Association" label="British Olympic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="20678" end="20698" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="20702" end="20709" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="20814" end="20827" title="civil servant" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834572" start="21022" end="21035" title="BALCO Scandal" label="BALCO Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230758" start="21640" end="21657" title="Kelly Holmes" label="Dame Kelly Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="21875" end="21887" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941467" start="21893" end="21910" title="Castleford Tigers" label="Castleford Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="22030" end="22051" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142995" start="22206" end="22218" title="Super League" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295578" start="22455" end="22468" title="Martin Offiah" label="Martin Offiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572603" start="22630" end="22647" title="York City Knights" label="York City Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="22831" end="22852" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132375" start="22952" end="22963" title="Papaflessia" label="Papaflessia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="23040" end="23061" title="2008 Beijing Olympics" label="2008 Beijing Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q514404" start="23329" end="23342" title="right to work" label="right to work"/>
<link wikidata="Q129679" start="23401" end="23414" title="Colin Moynihan, 4th Baron Moynihan" label="Lord Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q749109" start="23510" end="23539" title="Great Britain at the Olympics" label="Great Britain at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="23807" end="23827" title="2012 London Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375415" start="24271" end="24291" title="Charles van Commenee" label="Charles van Commenee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25302" end="25314" title="Euromeetings" label="Euromeetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874427" start="25389" end="25417" title="Birmingham Indoor Grand Prix" label="Birmingham Indoor Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q920951" start="25465" end="25477" title="Mike Rodgers (athlete)" label="Mike Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q968915" start="25521" end="25555" title="2009 European Indoor Championships" label="2009 European Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q947242" start="25565" end="25578" title="Ronald Pognon" label="Ronald Pognon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445200" start="25586" end="25606" title="List of European records in athletics" label="European 60 m record"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613712" start="25698" end="25703" title="2009 European Athletics Indoor Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s 60 metres" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q727164" start="25975" end="25993" title="IAAF Golden League" label="IAAF Golden League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26109" end="26124" title="Race Against Me" label="Race Against Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q140185" start="26290" end="26326" title="United States at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="American Olympic athletes in Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864952" start="26389" end="26397" title="UK Sport" label="UK Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q52620" start="26669" end="26677" title="Edwin Moses" label="Ed Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132375" start="27003" end="27014" title="Papaflessia" label="Papaflessia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638660" start="27067" end="27099" title="2009 European Team Championships" label="2009 European Team Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q182966" start="27177" end="27194" title="Simeon Williamson" label="Simeon Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152772" start="27401" end="27420" title="2009 World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313355" start="27741" end="27764" title="2009 World Championships in Athletics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="fastest 100 m race ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q831707" start="27925" end="27961" title="2010 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2010 IAAF World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156353" start="28099" end="28113" title="Ivory Williams" label="Ivory Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754365" start="28227" end="28249" title="2010 IAAF World Indoor Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s 60 metres" label="World 60 m competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q695233" start="28371" end="28394" title="2010 Commonwealth Games" label="2010 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q210666" start="28441" end="28478" title="2010 European Athletics Championships" label="2010 European Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q208669" start="28531" end="28538" title="Maringá" label="Maringá"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065848" start="28560" end="28577" title="Cezmi Or Memorial" label="Cezmi Or Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q274636" start="28587" end="28606" title="Christophe Lemaitre" label="Christophe Lemaitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625464" start="28631" end="28663" title="2010 European Team Championships" label="2010 European Team Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q959833" start="28890" end="28901" title="2010 European Athletics Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="100 m final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137378" start="29333" end="29377" title="2011 European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="2011 European Athletics Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29584" end="29608" title="Brazilian Athletics Tour" label="Brazilian Athletics Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q208675" start="29777" end="29801" title="2011 World Championships in Athletics" label="2011 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334948" start="29817" end="29834" title="2011 World Championships in Athletics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="100 m semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q162991" start="29872" end="29883" title="false start" label="false start"/>
<link wikidata="Q746504" start="30086" end="30122" title="2012 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2012 IAAF World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q966445" start="30140" end="30153" title="Trell Kimmons" label="Trell Kimmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="30246" end="30276" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q749394" start="30308" end="30332" title="World Anti-Doping Agency" label="World Anti-Doping Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="30552" end="30583" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544307" start="30644" end="30660" title="Great City Games" label="Great City Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701223" start="30737" end="30748" title="Adam Gemili" label="Adam Gemili"/>
<link wikidata="Q301839" start="30824" end="30838" title="Diamond League" label="Diamond League"/>
<link wikidata="Q791183" start="30839" end="30856" title="London Grand Prix" label="London Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q185262" start="30982" end="31002" title="Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217258" start="31436" end="31473" title="2012 European Athletics Championships" label="2012 European Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q734020" start="31580" end="31595" title="Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="100 metres heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144200" start="31887" end="31911" title="Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 4 × 100 metres relay" label="4×100 metres relay heats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814387" start="32117" end="32151" title="2013 European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="2013 European Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q842232" start="32295" end="32314" title="2013 World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814406" start="32563" end="32589" title="2014 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689998" start="32898" end="32911" title="Chijindu Ujah" label="Chijindu Ujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15102308" start="33251" end="33273" title="2014 IAAF World Relays" label="2014 IAAF World Relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q688179" start="33289" end="33316" title="2014 European Athletics Championships" label="2014 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417727" start="33983" end="34017" title="2017 European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="2017 European Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="35395" end="35405" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q132444" start="35541" end="35568" title="1999 World Championships in Athletics" label="Seville World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q310019" start="35661" end="35677" title="Linford Christie" label="Linford Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371095" start="35688" end="35701" title="James Dasaolu" label="James Dasaolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070630" start="35712" end="35726" title="Zharnel Hughes" label="Zharnel Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689998" start="35737" end="35750" title="Chijindu Ujah" label="Chijindu Ujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209356" start="35764" end="35775" title="Joel Fearon" label="Joel Fearon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585186" start="35831" end="35847" title="IAAF Grand Prix Final" label="Paris Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="36085" end="36092" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="36126" end="36134" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q375939" start="36155" end="36173" title="Mark Lewis-Francis" label="Mark Lewis-Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503240" start="36219" end="36247" title="2001 World Championships in Athletics" label="Edmonton World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q178460" start="36272" end="36286" title="Jason Gardener" label="Jason Gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371095" start="36737" end="36750" title="James Dasaolu" label="James Dasaolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617180" start="36753" end="36786" title="List of doping cases in athletics" label="List of doping cases in athletics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488100" wikidata="Q11284942" url="?curid=488100" title="Henry Blofeld">
<text>Henry Calthorpe Blofeld (born 23 September 1939), nicknamed Blowers by Brian Johnston, is an English retired sports journalist, broadcaster and amateur ornithologist best known as a cricket commentator for &quot;Test Match Special&quot; on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra. He has established a reputation as a commentator with an accent, vocabulary and syntax that is quintessentially Old Etonian both in style and substance. He also writes on cricket and has authored eight books to date.

==Early life==
Blofeld&#x27;s family were landowners at Hoveton in Norfolk and he was the youngest of three siblings. His elder brother, Sir John Blofeld, became a High Court judge. Henry&#x27;s father (Thomas Robert Calthorpe Blofeld, 1903–1986) was at Eton with Ian Fleming and his name is believed to have been the inspiration for the name of James Bond supervillain, Ernst Stavro Blofeld.

Blofeld is a distant relative of the Honourable Freddie Calthorpe, a former England Test captain, but, contrary to common belief, he is not Calthorpe&#x27;s nephew.

==Education==
Blofeld was educated at Sunningdale School and at Eton College, followed by King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, but failed both his final exams.

===School cricket===
Blofeld played cricket at both Sunningdale and Eton. He was wicket-keeper for the Eton College First XI and had an exceptional career as a schoolboy cricketer. In 1956, Blofeld scored 104 not out for a Public Schools team against the Combined Services, and he was given the Cricket Society&#x27;s award for the most promising young player of the season. Appointed Eton captain in his final year at school, Blofeld suffered a very serious accident, when he was hit by a bus while riding a bicycle, remaining unconscious for 28 days.

===First-class cricket at Cambridge===
Although his injuries curtailed his subsequent cricketing career, Blofeld did go on to play 16 first-class matches for Cambridge University during 1958 and 1959. The 1958 side was skippered by future England captain Ted Dexter and his first victim behind the stumps, on his debut for Cambridge against Kent, was also another future England captain, Colin Cowdrey, whom he caught off Dexter&#x27;s bowling. He was unable to obtain a regular place in the side as a wicket keeper and only played in that position when first choice Chris Howland was unavailable. Of the 16 games that Blofeld played for Cambridge (five in 1958 and 11 in 1959), he kept wicket in only four of them.

In 1959, Blofeld played in half of the university fixtures, including the Varsity Match against Oxford, where he won his Blue &quot;as an opening batsman of sorts... the worst Blue awarded since the war&quot; according to Blofeld himself. Fittingly, he made his only first-class century against the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) at Lord&#x27;s in July 1959, in his penultimate game for Cambridge. He attended King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, but left after two years without receiving a degree.

In his only match for Free Foresters, against Cambridge University in 1960, Blofeld kept wicket. His last first-class victim was Howland, captaining Cambridge that year. He played one Gillette Cup match for a minor county, Norfolk against Hampshire in 1965 under the captaincy of Bill Edrich, who was 49 years old at the time. Playing as an opening batsman, Blofeld top scored for his side with 60.

==Life and career==
===Sports journalism===
Blofeld took a job at the merchant bank Robert Benson Lonsdale for three years, but it was not to his taste and he drifted into sports journalism. He reported on the England tour to India in 1963–4 for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, and was close to being picked as an emergency batsman to replace the ill Micky Stewart for the 2nd Test in Bombay. When he was told by David Clark, the tour manager, that he might have to play, Blofeld replied &quot;I would certainly play if needed, but if I scored 50 or upwards in either innings I was damned if I would stand down for the Calcutta Test&quot;. On the day of the Test Stewart discharged himself from hospital and played despite his illness. After tea on the first day, Stewart was rushed back to hospital and played no further part in the tour. Blofeld continued as a print journalist until 1972 when he joined the &quot;Test Match Special&quot; team. He had also previously commentated for ITV in the 1960s.

===&quot;Test Match Special&quot;===
Blofeld was a regular commentator for &quot;TMS&quot; from 1972 to 2017, except for a period at BSkyB from 1991 to 1994. Blofeld&#x27;s cricket commentary was characterised by his plummy voice and his idiosyncratic mention of superfluous details regarding the scene, including things such as construction cranes or numbers of pink shirts in the crowd; as well as pigeons, buses, aeroplanes and helicopters that happened to be passing by. After the tea and lunch breaks he was also known to talk for extended periods of time about the food on offer, in particular cakes, with occasional interruptions to describe the situation on the field. He also used the phrase &quot;my dear old thing&quot;.

In 1995, Blofeld was censured for an allegedly antisemitic comment made live on-air on &quot;Test Match Special&quot;, when broadcasting from Headingley. He referred to onlookers watching a match from the balcony of a tall building outside the ground at Headingley as being at &quot;the Jewish end&quot;. Blofeld and the BBC apologised for a comment that was &quot;not spawned by malice&quot;.

From 2006 he commentated less frequently, missing the 2007 World Cup, despite having covered the opening ceremonies of the two preceding World Cups in 2003 and 1999 for &quot;TMS&quot;. Speaking to Michael Parkinson about this on BBC Radio 2 on 26 August 2007, he responded to the question of why he was commentating less these days, by remarking that &quot;they obviously want to bring in new faces&quot; adding that during the Ashes series during 2006–7 &quot;I felt in a funny way that I wasn&#x27;t part of it any more&quot;. During the summer 2008 season, he resumed a full commentating quota on Tests and ODIs.

Blofeld missed the 2009 home test series against South Africa but returned for the 2010 home series against Pakistan. He did not cover the Ashes series in Australia during 2010–11 but returned for the Indian tour of England in Summer 2011. In January 2012, he rejoined the &quot;TMS&quot; team covering England&#x27;s tour of the United Arab Emirates against Pakistan and also the autumn 2012 England tour of India.

On 23 June 2017, Blofeld announced his retirement as a BBC &quot;Test Match Special&quot; commentator. His last test commentary was when England played West Indies at Lord&#x27;s on 9 September 2017. He was given a standing ovation on a lap of the ground following the match.

===Outside sport===
Blofeld was awarded an OBE for services to broadcasting in 2003. The following year, he appeared alongside Fred Trueman in the &quot;Tertiary Phase&quot; of the &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; radio series playing himself. Blofeld has written a partly autobiographical book entitled &quot;My Dear Old Thing: Talking Cricket&quot;. He undertakes an &quot;Evening With Blowers&quot; theatrical show which has toured all over the UK, as well as many other public speaking engagements. Together with TMS producer Peter Baxter he tours with the theatrical show &quot;Memories of Test Match Special&quot; from 2013 on. His fourth book was entitled &quot;Squeezing the Orange&quot;.

In November 2003, Blofeld was the castaway on &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; with his favourite selection being the classic Brian Johnston and Jonathan Agnew &quot;TMS&quot; exchange &quot;Getting your leg over&quot;.

Outside cricket, Blofeld&#x27;s favourite hobby is &quot;drinking wine&quot;, followed by &quot;eating food&quot; and &quot;going out.&quot; He has his own Côtes du Rhône label which he markets as &quot;Blowers&#x27; Rhône&quot; and unashamedly promotes this during his one-man theatrical chat shows &quot;An Evening With Blowers&quot;, that he mainly performs during the cricket close season. The show has been recorded on DVD and CD. He often wears vividly coloured outfits, which he ascribes to partial colour blindness.

Blofeld celebrated his 70th birthday by hosting an evening show in front of 2000 paying &quot;guests&quot; at the Royal Albert Hall, with appearances on stage by friends such as &quot;TMS&quot; commentator Jonathan Agnew, who narrated the event live, West Indian commentator Tony Cozier, TV personality Stephen Fry, cricket journalist John Woodcock, TV celebrity Christine Hamilton and his elder brother, former High Court Judge Sir John Blofeld.

In January 2015 Blofeld was a guest, and the winner, on the BBC One&#x27;s comedy series &quot;Room 101&quot;. In December 2017 he was a guest on the BBC One comedy panel show &quot;Would I Lie to You?&quot; He was one of the travellers in series 4 of the Twofour production &quot;The Real Marigold Hotel&quot;.

==Personal life==
Blofeld has been married three times and divorced twice. He has a daughter, Suki (born 1964), with his first wife. He separated from his Swedish second wife, Bitten, in 2007. He had a double heart bypass operation in 1999 after being diagnosed with angina and was given the last rites after he nearly died in intensive care following the operation. Blofeld lived in Chelsea for many years, but moved to Menorca in 2018.

In a Boxing Day 2013 interview on the Radio New Zealand &quot;Summer Noelle&quot; programme, Blofeld said he had recently married an Italian woman, Valeria. his main occupation was on stage at the theatre.

Blofeld published an autobiography, &quot;Squeezing the Orange&quot;, in 2013. The book recounts his personal and professional life, including encounters with various celebrities and politicians, and a 46-day road trip from London to Bombay in a vintage Rolls-Royce. In 2017 he published &quot;Over and Out&quot;, a recollection of his years spent with the &quot;Test Match Special&quot; team.

==References==
==Published books==
*&quot;Cricket in Three Moods: Eighteen Months of Test Cricket and the Ways of Life Behind it&quot;, The Sportsmans Book Club, 1971 
*&quot;The Packer Affair&quot;, Collins, 1978 ()
*&quot;One Test After Another: Life in International Cricket&quot;, Stanly Paul, 1985 ()
*&quot;My Dear Old Thing: Talking Cricket&quot;, Stanley Paul, 1988 ()
*&quot;A Thirst for Life&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2001 ()
*&quot;Cricket and All That&quot;, Coronet, 2001 ()
*&quot;Cricket&#x27;s Great Entertainers&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2003 ()
*&quot;Squeezing the Orange&quot;, Harper Collins, 2013 ()
*&quot;Cricket on Three Continents&quot;, Wymer, 2015 ()
*&quot;The Man who Coloured Cricket&quot;, Wymer, 2015
*&quot;Blowers, Bubbles &amp; Balls&quot;, Wymer, 2016 ()
*&quot;Over and Out: My Innings of a Lifetime with Test Match Special&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2017 ()
*&quot;My A-Z of Cricket: A Personal Celebration of Our Glorious Game&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2019
*&quot;Ten to Win . . . And the Last Man In: My Pick of Test Match Cliffhangers&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2022 ()
*&quot;Sharing My Love of Cricket: Playing the Game and Spreading the Word&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2024 ()

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11284942" start="0" end="23" title="Henry Blofeld" label="Henry Calthorpe Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q11284942" start="60" end="67" title="Henry Blofeld" label="Blowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964233" start="71" end="85" title="Brian Johnston" label="Brian Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="116" end="126" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="128" end="139" title="Sports presenter" label="broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="152" end="165" title="ornithologist" label="ornithologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="182" end="189" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377229" start="212" end="230" title="Test Match Special" label="Test Match Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="240" end="251" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q795596" start="256" end="285" title="BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra" label="BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="399" end="410" title="Eton College" label="Old Etonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548710" start="561" end="568" title="Hoveton" label="Hoveton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222240" start="646" end="658" title="John Blofeld (judge)" label="John Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755201" start="669" end="685" title="High Court judge (England and Wales)" label="High Court judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="769" end="780" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="851" end="861" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498903" start="862" end="874" title="supervillain" label="supervillain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104987" start="876" end="896" title="Ernst Stavro Blofeld" label="Ernst Stavro Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496702" start="947" end="964" title="Freddie Calthorpe" label="Freddie Calthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640598" start="1103" end="1121" title="Sunningdale School" label="Sunningdale School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="1129" end="1141" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="1155" end="1185" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q692525" start="1302" end="1315" title="wicket-keeper" label="wicket-keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776019" start="1381" end="1398" title="History of English amateur cricket" label="schoolboy cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="1444" end="1458" title="Public school (United Kingdom)" label="Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150893" start="1476" end="1493" title="Combined Services" label="Combined Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728054" start="1516" end="1531" title="Cricket Society" label="Cricket Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q949035" start="1933" end="1953" title="Cambridge University Cricket Club" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12983106" start="2030" end="2040" title="Ted Dexter" label="Ted Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982596" start="2163" end="2176" title="Colin Cowdrey" label="Colin Cowdrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999865" start="2342" end="2355" title="Christopher Howland" label="Chris Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916170" start="2566" end="2579" title="Varsity Match" label="Varsity Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928811" start="2613" end="2617" title="Cambridge Blue" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="2791" end="2814" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="2901" end="2931" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499843" start="3009" end="3023" title="Free Foresters" label="Free Foresters"/>
<link wikidata="Q626625" start="3171" end="3183" title="Gillette Cup (England)" label="Gillette Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869173" start="3196" end="3208" title="Minor Counties" label="minor county"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051020" start="3210" end="3217" title="Norfolk County Cricket Club" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528662" start="3267" end="3278" title="Bill Edrich" label="Bill Edrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921438" start="3457" end="3470" title="merchant bank" label="merchant bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q48699118" start="3471" end="3493" title="Robert Benson Lonsdale" label="Robert Benson Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378489" start="3597" end="3628" title="English cricket team in India in 1963–64" label="England tour to India in 1963–4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3639" end="3651" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838931" start="3732" end="3745" title="Micky Stewart" label="Micky Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="3766" end="3772" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232393" start="3794" end="3805" title="David Clark (cricketer)" label="David Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="4367" end="4370" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377229" start="4467" end="4470" title="Test Match Special" label="TMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="4519" end="4524" title="British Sky Broadcasting" label="BSkyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="5166" end="5177" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061609" start="5261" end="5271" title="Headingley Cricket Ground" label="Headingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127675" start="5568" end="5582" title="2007 Cricket World Cup" label="2007 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="5662" end="5669" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139952" start="5674" end="5678" title="1999 Cricket World Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035890" start="5712" end="5729" title="Michael Parkinson" label="Michael Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="6462" end="6482" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="6491" end="6499" title="Pakistani cricket team" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6869" end="6872" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535440" start="6953" end="6965" title="Fred Trueman" label="Fred Trueman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6979" end="6993" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Tertiary to Quintessential Phases#The Tertiary Phase" label="Tertiary Phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q25169" start="7013" end="7050" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172718" start="7373" end="7385" title="Peter Baxter (radio producer)" label="Peter Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="7593" end="7612" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964233" start="7666" end="7680" title="Brian Johnston" label="Brian Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q966788" start="7685" end="7699" title="Jonathan Agnew" label="Jonathan Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151005" start="7917" end="7931" title="Côtes du Rhône AOC" label="Côtes du Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="8400" end="8417" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822129" start="8561" end="8572" title="Tony Cozier" label="Tony Cozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="8589" end="8600" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264800" start="8621" end="8634" title="John Woodcock (cricket writer)" label="John Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111038" start="8649" end="8667" title="Christine Hamilton" label="Christine Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222240" start="8719" end="8731" title="John Blofeld (judge)" label="John Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="8794" end="8801" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071022" start="8829" end="8837" title="Room 101 (British TV series)" label="Room 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q655817" start="8916" end="8935" title="Would I Lie to You? (British game show)" label="Would I Lie to You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859468" start="8990" end="8997" title="Twofour" label="Twofour"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698789" start="9015" end="9038" title="The Real Marigold Hotel" label="The Real Marigold Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="9249" end="9278" title="double heart bypass operation" label="double heart bypass operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="9314" end="9320" title="angina" label="angina"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="9339" end="9349" title="last rites" label="last rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="9431" end="9438" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="9468" end="9475" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="9491" end="9501" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626518" start="9524" end="9541" title="Radio New Zealand" label="Radio New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="9714" end="9727" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9917" end="9923" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="9927" end="9933" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996556" start="9947" end="9958" title="List of Rolls-Royce motor cars" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488105" wikidata="Q5465729" url="?curid=488105" title="Foot guards">
<text>Foot guards are senior infantry regiments within the British Army and the Canadian Army whose primary role includes military and combat operations, while its secondary role include public duties responsibilities which reflect their senior status. Foot guards regiments were historically infantry soldiers who fought on foot who also performed public duties like mounting a guard.

The British foot guards were established in the 17th century, and served as an infantry unit and royal guards for the monarchy. In the 19th century, the Canadian foot guard were formed, modelled after their British counterparts as a reflection of Canada’s relationship with the monarchy and to undertake ceremonial duties in Ottawa. Historically, other countries have also maintained units called &quot;foot guards,&quot; though not all of these were the senior infantry regiments of their forces or were units that were tasked with both military combat responsibilities with ceremonial public duties.

, the British Army maintains five regiments of foot guards, while the Canadian Army Reserve maintains two regiments of foot guards. While most foot guard units continue to serve in light infantry or infantry roles, two of the five British foot guards regiments have transitioned to mechanised infantry roles.

==United Kingdom==

The British Army maintains five regiments of foot guards. The Grenadier Guards, Coldstream Guards, and Irish Guards specialise in infantry and light infantry roles, while the Scots Guards and Welsh Guards specialise in mechanised and light mechanised infantry roles. The five foot guard regiments form the infantry component of the Household Division.

===History===
The oldest foot guards regiment dates back to 1642. Foot guards units have historically been front-line troops, with their ceremonial public duties always being a secondary function. As royal guards to the British monarchy, the foot guards have accumulated unique privileges and traditions over its existence. The reigning British monarch traditionally serves as the colonel-in-chief of the regiments within the Household Division.

The three oldest regiments—the Grenadier Guards, Coldstream Guards, and Scots Guards—were formed during the English Civil War, while the Irish Guards and Welsh Guards were established in the 20th century. The Irish Guards were created in 1900 after Queen Victoria was impressed by the actions of Irish units during the Second Boer War. The Welsh Guards were formed in 1915 by King George V, after it was pointed out that the Household Division lacked representation from Wales. A sixth regiment of foot guards briefly existed after the First World War, the Guards Machine Gun Regiment.

===Public duties===

The regiments of the foot guards are responsible for performing public duties, most notably mounting the King&#x27;s Guard at St. James&#x27;s Palace and Buckingham Palace, as well as mounting the Windsor Castle Guard, and the Tower of London Guard, all key locations of significance to the monarchy. Although the regiments of foot guards perform the majority of these public duties, they occasionally are supported by other units in the British Armed Forces and the Commonwealth of Nations.

Historically, the foot guards also manned ten other sentry posts around London, including Horse Guards, Savoy Prison, and Montagu House.

==Canada==

The Canadian Army Reserve includes two regiments of foot guards, the Governor General&#x27;s Foot Guards and the Canadian Grenadier Guards, both formed in the 19th century. The two regiments of foot guards are the senior reserve infantry regiments in Canada and train in an infantry role to support Canadian Armed Forces domestic operations and support the Regular Force in international operations. The two units form part of Canada&#x27;s household troops and serve as a symbol of the armed forces&#x27; relationship with the Canadian monarchy and also perform public duties in Ottawa as a result. 

The Royal Regiment of Canada is another Army Reserve unit that is uniformed as a regiment of foot guards, although they are formally a line infantry regiment. The regiment adopted the uniform of its predecessor, the Royal Grenadiers, which was uniformed after the British Grenadier Guards.

The Canadian Army Regular Force also established a foot guard regiment in 1953, known as the Canadian Guards. However, the unit was reduced to nil strength in 1970 and reassigned to the army&#x27;s Supplementary Order of Battle. 

===Public duties===
Along with their infantry role, the two regiments of foot guards are also tasked with ceremonial public duties at Rideau Hall and Parliament Hill in Ottawa as the country&#x27;s household troops. While both units perform public duties in the capital, only the Governor General&#x27;s Foot Guards are based in Ottawa, with the Canadian Grenadier Guards based in Montreal. 

In addition to supporting ceremonial duties at Rideau Hall and other events for the Governor General of Canada, the Governor General&#x27;s Foot Guards&#x27; Public Duties Company also oversees the Ceremonial Guard. The Ceremonial Guard is a subunit of the Governor General&#x27;s Foot Guards that operates during the summer and is open to members of the Canadian Armed Forces who want to participate in ceremonial public duties. Service members in the Ceremonial Guard wear the uniforms of the two Canadian foot guard regiments, regardless of their actual regimental or unit affiliation, as they perform public duties traditionally carried out by the foot guard regiments.

==Other historical uses==
===Germany===

The Prussian Army of the Kingdom of Prussia and the Imperial German Army of the German Empire operated several &quot;Garde-Regiment zu Fuß&quot; () units, including the 1st Foot Guards, 3rd Foot Guards, 4th Foot Guards, and 5th Foot Guards. All Prussian princes received their military commission through the 1st Foot Guards.

===Japan===
The &quot;hatamoto&quot; were high-ranking samurai who served as personally served the daimyo in feudal Japan during the Tokugawa shogunate that included a subgroup called the &quot;kachi&quot; or &quot;Foot Guards&quot;, and the &quot;umamawari-shū&quot; or &quot;Horse Guards&quot;. However, only the &quot;umamawari-shū&quot; were tasked as bodyguards for the daimyo, while the &quot;kachi&quot; were not assigned ceremonial duties and engaged in combat as part of their training for higher positions.

==See also==
*Guard of honour
*Imperial guard
*Life guard (military)
*Protective security unit

==Footnotes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5465729" start="0" end="11" title="Foot guards" label="Foot guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="23" end="31" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="53" end="65" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="74" end="87" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257729" start="181" end="194" title="public duties" label="public duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q357983" start="362" end="378" title="guard mounting" label="mounting a guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q971045" start="478" end="490" title="royal guards" label="royal guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="628" end="667" title="monarchy of Canada" label="Canada’s relationship with the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402243" start="1054" end="1075" title="Canadian Army Reserve" label="Canadian Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="1165" end="1179" title="light infantry" label="light infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="1266" end="1285" title="mechanised infantry" label="mechanised infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1318" end="1330" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="1376" end="1392" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="1394" end="1411" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q252564" start="1417" end="1429" title="Irish Guards" label="Irish Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="1444" end="1452" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="1457" end="1471" title="light infantry" label="light infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="1489" end="1501" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806308" start="1506" end="1518" title="Welsh Guards" label="Welsh Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="1554" end="1573" title="mechanised infantry" label="mechanised infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q450132" start="1646" end="1664" title="Household Division" label="Household Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q971045" start="1867" end="1879" title="royal guards" label="royal guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1887" end="1903" title="British monarchy" label="British monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="2222" end="2239" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2363" end="2377" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="2433" end="2448" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="2495" end="2503" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2585" end="2590" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2650" end="2665" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614136" start="2671" end="2698" title="Guards Machine Gun Regiment" label="Guards Machine Gun Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="2827" end="2844" title="King&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="King&amp;#x27;s Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="2848" end="2871" title="St. James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St. James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="2876" end="2893" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q357983" start="2906" end="2914" title="guard mounting" label="mounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="2919" end="2933" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="2949" end="2964" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="3160" end="3180" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3189" end="3212" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3287" end="3293" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q492350" start="3305" end="3317" title="Horse Guards (building)" label="Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428442" start="3319" end="3331" title="Savoy Place" label="Savoy Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530462" start="3337" end="3350" title="Montagu House, Bloomsbury" label="Montagu House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402243" start="3369" end="3390" title="Canadian Army Reserve" label="Canadian Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972414" start="3434" end="3469" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Foot Guards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520190" start="3478" end="3503" title="Canadian Grenadier Guards" label="Canadian Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="3664" end="3685" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076915" start="3722" end="3735" title="Regular Force" label="Regular Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="3893" end="3910" title="Canadian monarchy" label="Canadian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="3945" end="3951" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522562" start="3971" end="3995" title="Royal Regiment of Canada" label="Royal Regiment of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q595732" start="4102" end="4115" title="line infantry" label="line infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950344" start="4183" end="4199" title="Royal Grenadiers" label="Royal Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721140" start="4351" end="4366" title="Canadian Guards" label="Canadian Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644454" start="4456" end="4485" title="Supplementary Order of Battle" label="Supplementary Order of Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151874" start="4623" end="4634" title="Rideau Hall" label="Rideau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="4639" end="4654" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4870" end="4878" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="4966" end="4992" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="5080" end="5096" title="Ceremonial Guard" label="Ceremonial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="5237" end="5258" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="5602" end="5615" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="5623" end="5641" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="5650" end="5670" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="5678" end="5691" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q162549" start="5767" end="5782" title="1st Foot Guards (German Empire)" label="1st Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223201" start="5784" end="5799" title="3rd Foot Guards (German Empire)" label="3rd Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q230300" start="5801" end="5816" title="4th Foot Guards (German Empire)" label="4th Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q239008" start="5822" end="5837" title="5th Foot Guards (German Empire)" label="5th Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q60918" start="5884" end="5894" title="Commission (document)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q572662" start="5947" end="5955" title="hatamoto" label="hatamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="5980" end="5987" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="6024" end="6030" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="6058" end="6076" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="6281" end="6290" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="6457" end="6472" title="Guard of honour" label="Guard of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010841" start="6474" end="6488" title="Imperial guard" label="Imperial guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544830" start="6490" end="6511" title="Life guard (military)" label="Life guard (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251378" start="6513" end="6537" title="Protective security unit" label="Protective security unit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488106" wikidata="Q7577410" url="?curid=488106" title="Spin probe">
<text>A spin probe is a molecule with stable free radical character that carries a functional group. This group can be used to couple the probe to another molecule, e.g. a biomolecule.

Electron spin resonance can be employed to quantify the probe&#x27;s concentration.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7577410" start="2" end="12" title="Spin probe" label="spin probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="18" end="26" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="39" end="51" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="77" end="93" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q206229" start="166" end="177" title="biomolecule" label="biomolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="180" end="203" title="Electron spin resonance" label="Electron spin resonance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488109" wikidata="Q450132" url="?curid=488109" title="Household Division">
<text>The Household Division forms a part of the British Army&#x27;s London District and is made up of five regiments of foot guards and two Household Cavalry regiments. The division is responsible for performing public duties and state ceremonies in London and Windsor. Such functions include the State Opening of Parliament, Trooping the Colour, and mounting the King&#x27;s Guard.

==Composition==

In the United Kingdom, the Household Division consists of seven regiments, giving rise to the division&#x27;s motto of &quot;Septem juncta in uno&quot; (Latin for &#x27;seven joined in one&#x27;). The Household Division is made up of the Household Cavalry, which includes the Life Guards and the Blues and Royals, as well as five regiments of foot guards – the Grenadier Guards, Coldstream Guards, Scots Guards, Irish Guards and Welsh Guards.

The Household Division also includes the following incremental companies: Nijmegen Company – Grenadier Guards, No 7 Company – Coldstream Guards, F Company – Scots Guards, Numbers 9 and 12 Company – Irish Guards. The Household Division is commanded by the Major-General commanding the Household Division who is also General Officer Commanding London District.

==History==
The Household Division was once responsible for mounting the guard to several institutions in London. In 1819, the Household Division maintained ten separate guard mountings for 89 sentry posts. These include the Armoury Guard, the British Museum Guard, the Kensington Palace Guard, the King&#x27;s Guard, the Magazine Guard, the Military Asylum Guard, the Savoy Prison Guard, the Tylt Guards, and the York Hospital Guard. In addition, the Household Division also provided night guards for the Bank of England, Covent Garden Opera House, and Drury Lane. However, the Household Division&#x27;s commitment to most of these postings, besides the King&#x27;s Guard, ceased at the end of the 19th century. 

Some historical accounts have documented instances of members of the Household Division engaging in same-sex relationships and prostitution, with reports of such activities dating back to the 19th and 20th centuries.

From 1950 to 1968, the Household Division was known as the Household Brigade.

==Similar units in other countries==

Several Canadian units are known as &quot;household regiments&quot; or &quot;household troops&quot;, given their relationship with the Canadian monarchy. This includes the Governor General&#x27;s Horse Guards, Governor General&#x27;s Foot Guards, and the Canadian Grenadier Guards. The term &quot;household guard&quot; is used by the Canadian Armed Forces to describe a type of quarter guard that is mounted for dignitaries including the Canadian royal family, the governor general of Canada and other heads of state. 

The phrase &quot;household division&quot; or &quot;household regiment&quot; is not used in other Commonwealth countries, although some maintain units that perform similar ceremonial functions, like Australia&#x27;s Federation Guard and Malaysia&#x27;s Royal Malay Regiment.

==References==
==External links==
* Household Cavalry website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q450132" start="4" end="22" title="Household Division" label="Household Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="43" end="55" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258950" start="63" end="78" title="London District (British Army)" label="London District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115" end="126" title="foot guards#United Kingdom" label="foot guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="135" end="152" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257729" start="207" end="220" title="public duties" label="public duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="245" end="251" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="256" end="263" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="292" end="319" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="State Opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142196" start="321" end="340" title="Trooping the Colour" label="Trooping the Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q357983" start="346" end="354" title="guard mounting" label="mounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="359" end="376" title="King&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="King&amp;#x27;s Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="403" end="417" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="549" end="554" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="634" end="651" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777894" start="672" end="683" title="Life Guards (United Kingdom)" label="Life Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q886048" start="692" end="708" title="Blues and Royals" label="Blues and Royals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="739" end="750" title="Foot guards#United Kingdom" label="foot guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="757" end="773" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="775" end="792" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="794" end="806" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q252564" start="808" end="820" title="Irish Guards" label="Irish Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806308" start="825" end="837" title="Welsh Guards" label="Welsh Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614135" start="891" end="912" title="British Army incremental infantry companies" label="incremental companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737999" start="1095" end="1142" title="Major-General commanding the Household Division" label="Major-General commanding the Household Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258950" start="1182" end="1197" title="London District (British Army)" label="London District"/>
<link wikidata="Q357983" start="1370" end="1384" title="guard mounting" label="guard mounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="1444" end="1458" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="1470" end="1487" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="1499" end="1516" title="King&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="King&amp;#x27;s Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886295" start="1569" end="1581" title="Savoy Palace" label="Savoy Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="1706" end="1721" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="1723" end="1748" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Garden Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="1754" end="1764" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="2385" end="2402" title="Canadian monarchy" label="Canadian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737412" start="2422" end="2458" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Horse Guards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972414" start="2460" end="2495" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Foot Guards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520190" start="2505" end="2530" title="Canadian Grenadier Guards" label="Canadian Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="2584" end="2605" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269262" start="2628" end="2641" title="quarter guard" label="quarter guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="2688" end="2709" title="Canadian royal family" label="Canadian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="2715" end="2741" title="governor general of Canada" label="governor general of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589532" start="2968" end="3001" title="Australia&amp;#x27;s Federation Guard" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s Federation Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374432" start="3022" end="3042" title="Royal Malay Regiment" label="Royal Malay Regiment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488117" wikidata="Q158170" url="?curid=488117" title="944 Hidalgo">
<text>944 Hidalgo is a centaur and unusual object on an eccentric, cometary-like orbit between the asteroid belt and the outer Solar System, approximately in diameter. Discovered by German astronomer Walter Baade in 1920, it is the first member of the dynamical class of centaurs ever to be discovered. The dark D-type object has a rotation period of 10.1 hours and likely an elongated shape. It was named after Mexican revolutionary Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla.

== Discovery and naming ==

Hidalgo was discovered by German astronomer Walter Baade on 31 October 1920 at Bergedorf Observatory in Hamburg, Germany. It is named for Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla (1753–1811), who was responsible for declaring Mexico&#x27;s independence in 1810 and the ensuing Mexican War of Independence. German astronomers who were in Mexico to observe a total eclipse on 10 September 1923 had an audience with President Álvaro Obregón. During this meeting, they asked his permission to name the asteroid after Hidalgo ().

== Orbit and classification ==
Hidalgo orbits the Sun at a distance of 1.9–9.5 AU once every 13 years and 9 months (5,024 days; semi-major axis of 5.74 AU). Its orbit has a high eccentricity of 0.66 and an inclination of 43° with respect to the ecliptic. The body&#x27;s observation arc begins with its official discovery observation on 31 October 1920.

With a semi-major axis between that of Jupiter (5.2 AU) and Neptune (30.1 AU), Hidalgo is a member of the dynamically unstable population of centaurs, located between the classical asteroids and the trans-Neptunian objects. The Minor Planet Center classifies it both as main-belt asteroid and unusual object due to an orbital eccentricity higher than 0.5. Hidalgo has traditionally been considered an asteroid because centaurs were not recognized as a distinct class until the discovery of 2060 Chiron in 1977. Alternatively, cis-Neptunian object and distant object are more generic terms that also includes objects further out the Solar System.

Hidalgo orbit takes it to the inner edge of the asteroid belt and as far out as to the orbit of Saturn (9.0–10.1 AU), a characteristic normally associated with Saturn&#x27;s family of comets. Some astronomers therefore suspect that it was once a comet. It is a Jupiter- and Saturn-crosser. Strictly speaking, Hidalgo is a Saturn-grazer rather than a crosser as its aphelion does not clear Saturn&#x27;s. The object&#x27;s severe orbital inclination is suspected to be the result of a close encounter with Jupiter. Even as recently as 1922, Hidalgo passed within 0.89 AU of Jupiter. Its orbit has a Jupiter minimum orbit intersection distance of only .

It is unlikely there are any large satellites orbiting Hidalgo larger than about 15 kilometers across. Observations from the Very Large Telescope in 2003 ruled out any secondary objects brighter than V=19.5 further than 200 kilometers from the asteroid. However, smaller moons have not been ruled out.

== Physical characteristics ==

In the Tholen and Bus–DeMeo classification, Hidalgo is a dark, carbonaceous D-type asteroid.

According to the surveys carried out by the Japanese Akari satellite and the NEOWISE mission of NASA&#x27;s Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer, Hidalgo measures 52.45 and 61.4 kilometers in diameter and its surface has a low albedo of 0.042 and 0.028, respectively. The prominent JPL Small-Body Database currently gives a diameter of 38 kilometers taken from the publication &quot;Hazards due to Comets and Asteroids&quot; (Tom Gehrels, 1994). The &quot;Collaborative Asteroid Lightcurve Link&quot; assumes a standard albedo for a carbonaceous asteroid of 0.057 and derives a diameter of 44.6 km based on an absolute magnitude of 10.48, while Johnston&#x27;s archive adopts Akari&#x27;s diameter of 52 km with an albedo of 0.042.

In the late 1990s, a network of astronomers worldwide gathered lightcurve data that was ultimately used to derive the spin states and shape models of 10 new asteroids, including Hidalgo. The authors describe the shape model as having &#x27;very large flat areas and a &quot;rectangular&quot; pole-on silhouette, which are strong indications of a highly nonconvex shape&#x27;. Some of the light curves show sharp minima, which indicates the object shape may have two lobes. Lightcurve data has also been recorded by observers at the Antelope Hills Observatory in Colorado, United States. When Pluto was discovered Hidalgo was the furthest known minor planet from the Sun.

== Notes ==

== References ==

== External links ==
* Lightcurve plot of (944) Hidalgo, Antelope Hills Observatory
* Asteroid Lightcurve Database (LCDB), query form (info )
* Dictionary of Minor Planet Names, Google books
* Discovery Circumstances: Numbered Minor Planets (1)–(5000) – Minor Planet Center
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158170" start="0" end="11" title="944 Hidalgo" label="944 Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="17" end="24" title="centaur (minor planet)" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753578" start="29" end="43" title="Unusual minor planet" label="unusual object"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="61" end="66" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="93" end="106" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="115" end="133" title="outer Solar System" label="outer Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="194" end="206" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="265" end="272" title="centaur (minor planet)" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814074" start="306" end="319" title="D-type asteroid" label="D-type object"/>
<link wikidata="Q185981" start="326" end="341" title="rotation period" label="rotation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="428" end="453" title="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla" label="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772819" start="496" end="506" title="discovery (observation)" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="528" end="540" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q681942" start="563" end="584" title="Bergedorf Observatory" label="Bergedorf Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="622" end="647" title="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla" label="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="746" end="773" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="806" end="812" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="832" end="839" title="solar eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556644" start="843" end="860" title="Solar eclipse of September 10, 1923" label="10 September 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="882" end="891" title="president of Mexico" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="892" end="906" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="1074" end="1076" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="1123" end="1138" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="1201" end="1212" title="orbital inclination" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="1218" end="1219" title="Degree (angle)" label="°"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="1240" end="1248" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16333724" start="1266" end="1281" title="observation arc" label="observation arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="1389" end="1396" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="1410" end="1417" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="1491" end="1498" title="Centaur (minor planet)" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="1531" end="1539" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="1549" end="1571" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="1578" end="1597" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="1620" end="1638" title="main-belt asteroid" label="main-belt asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753578" start="1643" end="1657" title="unusual minor planet" label="unusual object"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="1668" end="1688" title="orbital eccentricity" label="orbital eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1840" end="1851" title="2060 Chiron" label="2060 Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282923" start="1901" end="1915" title="Distant minor planet" label="distant object"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="2093" end="2099" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="2181" end="2186" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="2243" end="2248" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517483" start="2258" end="2266" title="Jupiter-crosser" label="Jupiter-"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660985" start="2271" end="2285" title="Saturn-crosser" label="Saturn-crosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858447" start="2603" end="2638" title="minimum orbit intersection distance" label="minimum orbit intersection distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="2775" end="2795" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750705" start="2992" end="2998" title="Tholen classification" label="Tholen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750705" start="3003" end="3027" title="Bus–DeMeo classification" label="Bus–DeMeo classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814074" start="3061" end="3076" title="D-type asteroid" label="D-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q298047" start="3132" end="3147" title="Akari (satellite)" label="Akari satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="3156" end="3163" title="NEOWISE" label="NEOWISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="3187" end="3222" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="3305" end="3311" title="astronomical albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026990" start="3360" end="3383" title="JPL Small-Body Database" label="JPL Small-Body Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q312255" start="3504" end="3515" title="Tom Gehrels" label="Tom Gehrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q729623" start="3611" end="3632" title="C-type asteroid" label="carbonaceous asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="3688" end="3706" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="3874" end="3884" title="lightcurve" label="lightcurve"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="4403" end="4408" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488129" wikidata="Q6927086" url="?curid=488129" title="Moving Pictures (band)">
<text>Moving Pictures are an Australian rock band formed in 1980. Their debut album, &quot;Days of Innocence&quot;, was issued in October 1981 and eventually peaked at No. 1 on the Kent Music Report Albums Chart in February the following year. In January 1982, they released their single, &quot;What About Me&quot;, which reached No. 1 on the Kent Singles Chart. Later that year, Elektra Records issued &quot;Days of Innocence&quot; and &quot;What About Me&quot; in North America. The single reached No. 29 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and appeared on the associated year-end Hot 100 list for 1983. A proposed series of United States performances supporting REO Speedwagon, Tom Petty, and Hall &amp; Oates fell through when Elektra was substantially reorganised.

In November 1982, another single, &quot;Winners&quot;, peaked at No. 12 in Australia. In October 1983, their second album, &quot;Matinee&quot;, was released. It reached No. 16 and, of its four singles, only the lead single, &quot;Back to the Streets&quot;, reached the Top 40. Their non-album single &quot;Never&quot; was used for two film soundtracks, &quot;Footloose&quot; (1984) and &quot;Hot Rod&quot; (2007). By the end of 1987, the group had disbanded. The band reformed in 2011 with annual tours.

==History==
===1980–1987===
Moving Pictures were formed in Sydney in 1980 with Charlie Cole on keyboards and trumpet; Paul Freeland on drums; Garry Frost on guitar, keyboards, and vocals; Ian Lees on bass guitar (ex-This Side Up); Alex Smith on vocals and guitar (Bilgola Bop Band, This Side Up); and Andrew Thompson on saxophone (Bilgola Bop Band). Initially they performed as a &quot;hard working, R&amp;B-inspired pub-rock outfit&quot;, playing up to 250 shows a year, with their early influences being Bruce Springsteen, Graham Parker and Van Morrison. In early 1981 Moving Pictures were signed to the Wheatley management team – run by former Masters Apprentices&#x27; bass guitarist Glenn Wheatley – and the allied Wheatley Records label. Their debut single, &quot;Bustin&#x27; Loose&quot;, broke into the Top 50 on the Kent Singles Chart in October.

Their debut album, &quot;Days of Innocence&quot;, also appeared in October 1981 and initially failed to reach the Top 40 on the Kent Albums Chart. It was produced by Charles Fisher (Radio Birdman, The Radiators, Air Supply). The band&#x27;s live show was all about their rock leanings but the album featured strong ballads that belied that live rock act. In January 1982 they issued another single, &quot;What About Me&quot;, which remained at No. 1 for six weeks early that year. Renewed interest in the album saw it reach No. 1 in February on the Kent Albums Chart. The album became the fourth-highest-selling album of the year. &quot;What About Me&quot; won the &#x27;Best Single&#x27; category at the 1982 Countdown Awards. It was the second-highest-selling single in Australia for 1982, behind Survivor&#x27;s &quot;Eye of the Tiger&quot;.

The album&#x27;s third single, &quot;Sweet Cherie&quot;, from &quot;Days of Innocence&quot; peaked at 51, while the fourth and final single, &quot;Winners&quot;, reached No. 12 in November. By that time Freeland had been replaced on drums by Mark Meyer (ex-Stylus, Richard Clapton Band, Mark Gillespie Band). Moving Pictures had signed to the Elektra distribution label in the United States, which issued &quot;Days of Innocence&quot; and &quot;What About Me&quot; in North America. The single reached No. 29 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop singles chart, spending 26 weeks inside the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. It made &quot;Billboard&quot;″s year-end Hot 100 list for 1983, at No. 88 – a rare feat for a single with such a low peak position. The song made an unusual comeback in 1989, peaking at No. 46. On the eve of their planned US tour to capitalise on their success there, Elektra was substantially reorganised and their relationship collapsed. The tour was to include support slots with REO Speedwagon, Tom Petty and Hall &amp; Oates as well as their own headlining shows. In hindsight this was Moving Pictures&#x27; best opportunity to enter the US market, but it was ruined.

In October 1983 their second album, &quot;Matinee&quot;, also produced by Fisher, was released. It reached No. 16 in Australia and, of its four singles, only &quot;Back to the Streets&quot;, reached the Top 40. The album captured more of the band&#x27;s live show feel and rock leanings. Late in 1983 the band toured Japan. Due to band problems Frost left the group in 1984, saying &quot;the group had lost direction&quot;. He was temporarily replaced on guitar by Joey Amenta (ex-Taste, Redhouse, Russell Morris Band, Wendy and the Rockets) until Kevin Bennett (Allied Harp, Wild Colonial Boys) joined the line-up in 1985. The group continued to tour domestically and had gained a strong, loyal following. In May 1987 they undertook the Live Picture Show Tour and disbanded afterwards. In December that year the next album, &quot;The Last Picture Show&quot;, based on the tour was issued.

===1987–present: Post Moving Pictures===
Ex-Moving Pictures members have undertaken various musical careers:
* Charlie Cole initially worked in Los Angeles, in 1990 he joined Frost&#x27;s band, 1927. He has recorded work in America with members of the Blues Brothers Band, with James Blundell (in Nashville) and did session work for various individuals and bands including Ed Kuepper. In 1999 Cole returned to Australia and joined The Shuffle Kings in which, as from 2003, he played trumpet, recorder, keyboards and the piano accordion.
* Garry Frost left Moving Pictures in 1984 feeling the group had lost direction. He concentrated on his song-writing and piano playing – so much so that he developed tendonitis in his wrists. In 1987 he formed a pop-rock group, 1927, with Eric Weideman, whom he had seen performing on &quot;Hey Hey It&#x27;s Saturday&quot;″s &quot;Red Faces&quot; talent segment. Whilst with 1927, Frost also worked with Gyan co-writing her 1989 hit &quot;Wait&quot;. &quot;Wait&quot; was the first single from her self-titled debut album, which won an ARIA award and was certified platinum. In 1990 Frost left 1927, and became co-partner in a Sydney post production studio, he continued writing, performing and producing. Some of Frost&#x27;s work in the early 2000s was with Sydney singer-songwriter, Djamel and vocalist Carlie Fairburn.
* Ian Lees formed the blues band, Chasin&#x27; the Train, with fellow former Moving Pictures member Kevin Bennett. Lees then became a session bass guitarist, he played with Mal Eastick and Lee Kernaghan. Over his career he has played for The Wild Colonial Boys, Tommy Emmanuel, Tania Kernaghan, Mondo Rock, Phil Emmanuel, Gina Jeffreys, Matt Taylor, and Kevin Borich.
* Alex Smith formed Alex Smith and the Volunteers aka Alex Smith and DBM, in 1989. The line up included Ben Little (ex-Pink Slips) on guitar, Lee Borkman (Scribble) on keyboards, Dave Carter on bass guitar and Mark O&#x27;Shea on drums. In 1991 Smith fronted The Blues Liners, which released a single, &quot;This Time Tomorrow&quot;, recorded at Alberts Studios.
* Andy Thompson became a session musician, he contributed a saxophone solo on Elton John&#x27;s track, &quot;Li&#x27;l &#x27;Frigerator&quot;, from his 1984 album, &quot;Breaking Hearts&quot;. While a member of Moving Pictures Thompson had worked for Mark Gillespie in 1982 and then with Australian Crawl in 1983 for their album, &quot;Semantics&quot;. He contributed to Jenny Morris&#x27; 1987 album, &quot;Body And Soul&quot;. He toured with Cold Chisel and played with Dire Straits on their Brothers in Arms tour.
* Kevin Bennett, after forming Chasin&#x27; the Train with Lees, went on to blues, roots band, The Flood.
* Mark Meyer joined Chasin&#x27; the Train alongside Lees and Bennett. He has performed in Wendy Matthews touring band and together with Lees have both been long term rhythm section for James Blundell. Meyer and Lees have also worked with Australian guitarist-singer Lawrie Minson and Lee Kernaghan.
* Original drummer Paul Freeland left the music business to focus on a career in wood-sculpting. Having received formal training as a metallurgist before joining the band, he would also go on to teach manual arts at The School of Performing Arts in Newtown. He died of complications from Alzheimer&#x27;s in April 2020.

===2005: Reunion===
In 2005 Moving Pictures reformed as an acoustic trio, with Smith and Cole joined by Dave Carter (ex Alex Smith and DBM), for 26 performances throughout New South Wales and Queensland. In July 2011, to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the initial release of &quot;Days of Innocence&quot;, Moving Pictures reformed with the line-up of Cole, Frost, Lees, Meyer, Smith and Thompson. They performed in Melbourne and Sydney, including an appearance on breakfast TV show, &quot;Sunrise&quot;, performing their signature song. Smith described the reformation &quot;this line-up and this band hasn&#x27;t been in the same room together since 1984 ... I&#x27;m just going to play it by ear – same as I used to do every day in the past [...] It will be like, &#x27;What are we here for? We&#x27;re here to play and have a great time&#x27;&quot;.

==Legacy==
In February 2004 Moving Pictures&#x27; hit single, &quot;What About Me&quot;, was covered by &quot;Australian Idol&quot; (2003) runner-up Shannon Noll, which peaked at No. 1 on the ARIA Singles Chart – for four weeks. Noll liked the original, &quot;it&#x27;s just a great song about average people, and there are a lot of us out there ... I didn&#x27;t mess around with it heaps, I just sang it as honest as possible&quot;. &quot;What About Me&quot; is the first Australian single to achieve No. 1 on two separate occasions by two different artists.

Their song, &quot;Never&quot;, was used as part of the soundtrack for two films, 1984&#x27;s &quot;Footloose&quot; and 2007&#x27;s &quot;Hot Rod&quot;. In both cases the song accompanied the film&#x27;s star doing a punchdance routine. The punchdance routine was also parodied in the &quot;Family Guy&quot; season 12 episode &quot;Baby Got Black&quot;. The band have indicated that due to the bankruptcy of their U.S. record company, and unfortunate timing of the release of &quot;Never&quot;, they had not received any royalties whatsoever for the track.

In 2000, BMG Australia released an album, &quot;Days of Innocence – The Ultimate Collection&quot;, which has remastered tracks from their debut album (reproducing its original cover art), with bonus tracks from &quot;Matinee&quot; and a couple non-album single sides, such as &quot;Never&quot;.

==Members==
;Current members
*Charlie Cole – keyboards, trumpet 
*Alex Smith – vocals, guitar 
*Garry Frost – guitar, keyboards 
*Ian Lees – bass 
*Mark Meyer – drums 
*Scott Simpkins – saxophone 

;Former members
*Paul Freeland – drums 
*Andy Thompson – saxophone 
*Joey Amenta – guitar 
*Kevin Bennett – guitar, keyboards 
*Andy Bickers – saxophone 

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Live albums===
===Compilation albums===
===Singles===
==Awards and nominations==
===Countdown Australian Music Awards===
&quot;Countdown&quot; was an Australian pop music TV series on national broadcaster ABC-TV from 1974 to 1987, it presented music awards from 1979 to 1987, initially in conjunction with magazine &quot;TV Week&quot;. The TV Week / Countdown Awards were a combination of popular-voted and peer-voted awards.
|-
|1981
| themselves
| Best New Talent
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | 1982
| &quot;What About Me?&quot;
| Best Single 
|-
| themselves
| Most Popular Group 
|-
| 1983
| Charles Fisher for work with Moving Pictures
| Best Record Producer of the Year
|-
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Alex Smith from Moving Pictures&quot;, interview with James O&#x27;Loghlin on ABC New South Wales radio&#x27;s &quot;The Backyard&quot;, broadcast on 11 August 2005. Archived from the original on 7 September 2010.
* &quot;They Wrote the Songs, Part 2&quot; interview of Garry Frost by Debbie Kruger for Australasian Performing Right Association&#x27;s magazine, &quot;APRAP&quot;, July–August 2002.
* 2005 reunion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6927086" start="0" end="15" title="Moving Pictures (band)" label="Moving Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="34" end="38" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243379" start="85" end="102" title="Days of Innocence" label="Days of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669424" start="175" end="192" title="Kent Music Report" label="Kent Music Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990944" start="289" end="302" title="What About Me (Moving Pictures song)" label="What About Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="374" end="389" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="508" end="537" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="660" end="674" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="676" end="685" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="691" end="707" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q24902742" start="1072" end="1077" title="Never (Moving Pictures song)" label="Never"/>
<link wikidata="Q611368" start="1125" end="1134" title="Footloose (1984 soundtrack)" label="Footloose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630741" start="1158" end="1165" title="Hot Rod (2007 film)" label="Hot Rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="1777" end="1794" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377134" start="1796" end="1809" title="Graham Parker" label="Graham Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="1814" end="1826" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750624" start="1918" end="1937" title="Masters Apprentices" label="Masters Apprentices"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569175" start="1959" end="1973" title="Glenn Wheatley" label="Glenn Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243379" start="2153" end="2170" title="Days of Innocence" label="Days of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077677" start="2294" end="2308" title="Charles Fisher (producer)" label="Charles Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126038" start="2310" end="2323" title="Radio Birdman" label="Radio Birdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759214" start="2325" end="2338" title="The Radiators (Australian band)" label="The Radiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q407814" start="2340" end="2350" title="Air Supply" label="Air Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990944" start="2533" end="2546" title="What About Me (Moving Pictures song)" label="What About Me"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2572" end="2591" title="List of number-one singles in Australia during the 1980s#1982 .28Kent Music Report.29" label="No. 1 for six weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415045" start="2598" end="2607" title="1982 in music" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825080" start="2838" end="2854" title="Australian pop music awards" label="Countdown Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135315" start="2927" end="2935" title="Survivor (band)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165305" start="2949" end="2965" title="Eye of the Tiger" label="Eye of the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629734" start="3231" end="3237" title="Stylus (band)" label="Stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324754" start="3239" end="3259" title="Richard Clapton" label="Richard Clapton Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="3317" end="3324" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3490" end="3511" title="Billboard magazine" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="3560" end="3589" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="3974" end="3988" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="3990" end="3999" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="4004" end="4020" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381695" start="4663" end="4682" title="Russell Morris" label="Russell Morris Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982798" start="4684" end="4705" title="Wendy Stapleton" label="Wendy and the Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4996" end="5017" title="The Last Picture Show (Moving Pictures album)" label="The Last Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5200" end="5211" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562027" start="5250" end="5254" title="1927 (band)" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129902" start="5334" end="5348" title="James Blundell (singer)" label="James Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="5353" end="5362" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593862" start="5429" end="5439" title="Ed Kuepper" label="Ed Kuepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="5759" end="5769" title="tendonitis" label="tendonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562027" start="5821" end="5825" title="1927 (band)" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749290" start="5884" end="5910" title="Hey Hey It&amp;#x27;s Saturday" label="Hey Hey It&amp;#x27;s Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623968" start="5998" end="6002" title="Gyan Evans" label="Gyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623961" start="6092" end="6103" title="Gyan (album)" label="self-titled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="6130" end="6140" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA award"/>
<link wikidata="Q952835" start="6606" end="6619" title="Lee Kernaghan" label="Lee Kernaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310298" start="6679" end="6693" title="Tommy Emmanuel" label="Tommy Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683244" start="6695" end="6710" title="Tania Kernaghan" label="Tania Kernaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898776" start="6712" end="6722" title="Mondo Rock" label="Mondo Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199661" start="6739" end="6752" title="Gina Jeffreys" label="Gina Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395860" start="6771" end="6783" title="Kevin Borich" label="Kevin Borich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="7226" end="7236" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754372" start="7318" end="7333" title="Breaking Hearts" label="Breaking Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872160" start="7436" end="7452" title="Australian Crawl" label="Australian Crawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449105" start="7484" end="7493" title="Semantics (album)" label="Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179410" start="7519" end="7531" title="Jenny Morris (musician)" label="Jenny Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936884" start="7556" end="7569" title="Body and Soul (Jenny Morris album)" label="Body And Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524937" start="7862" end="7876" title="Wendy Matthews" label="Wendy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129902" start="7957" end="7971" title="James Blundell (singer)" label="James Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="8205" end="8217" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653504" start="8272" end="8283" title="industrial arts" label="manual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851145" start="8320" end="8327" title="Newtown, New South Wales" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="8359" end="8375" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641047" start="8891" end="8898" title="Sunrise (Australian TV program)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000381" start="9279" end="9283" title="2004 in music" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="9349" end="9356" title="cover version" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="9366" end="9381" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488920" start="9405" end="9417" title="Shannon Noll" label="Shannon Noll"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="9448" end="9466" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q24902742" start="9836" end="9841" title="Never (Moving Pictures song)" label="Never"/>
<link wikidata="Q611368" start="9917" end="9926" title="Footloose (1984 soundtrack)" label="Footloose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630741" start="9955" end="9962" title="Hot Rod (2007 film)" label="Hot Rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345663" start="10034" end="10044" title="punchdance" label="punchdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="10108" end="10118" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746229" start="10149" end="10163" title="Baby Got Black" label="Baby Got Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="10384" end="10387" title="BMG Records" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243380" start="10423" end="10466" title="Days of Innocence – The Ultimate Collection" label="Days of Innocence – The Ultimate Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176829" start="11190" end="11199" title="Countdown (Australian TV series)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="11268" end="11274" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="11384" end="11391" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247946" start="12067" end="12080" title="Debbie Kruger" label="Debbie Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q64399020" start="12085" end="12126" title="Australasian Performing Right Association" label="Australasian Performing Right Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488132" wikidata="Q4765450" url="?curid=488132" title="Anisothermal plasma">
<text>An Anisothermal plasma is a plasma which thermal state can be approximated by more than one temperature for the different degrees of freedom of the plasma. 
The degrees of freedom refer to translation (kinetic energy), rotation, vibration of each particle type. 

Examples of anisothermal plasmas can be found among low-pressure plasmas that are excited by high frequency electric fields, see frequency classification of plasmas. They generally exhibit hot electrons that are powered by the alternating electric field, and a neutral and ion component, which is significantly colder due to the low efficiency of the energy transfer between light electrons and heavy neutrals and ions.

The term nonthermal plasma includes anisothermal plasmas and means that the different degrees of freedom of the plasma are &quot;not&quot; in thermal equilibrium.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="28" end="34" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q274502" start="122" end="140" title="degrees of freedom (physics and chemistry)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="202" end="216" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="372" end="386" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="393" end="428" title="frequency classification of plasmas" label="frequency classification of plasmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="457" end="465" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="537" end="540" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513560" start="694" end="711" title="nonthermal plasma" label="nonthermal plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175122" start="827" end="846" title="thermal equilibrium" label="thermal equilibrium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488139" wikidata="Q1506896" url="?curid=488139" title="George Augustus Robinson">
<text>George Augustus Robinson (22 March 1791 – 18 October 1866) was an English born builder and self-trained preacher who was employed by the British colonial authorities to conciliate the Indigenous Australians of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land and the Port Phillip District to the process of British colonialisation.

In 1830, Robinson, with the guidance of Aboriginal Tasmanians such as Truganini and Woureddy, led what became known as &quot;the friendly mission&quot; around Van Diemen’s Land, which was organised to establish contact with the surviving Indigenous clans during the Black War. The mission later evolved into a series of further expeditions to round-up these survivors and place them into enforced exile at the Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment on Flinders Island. From 1835 to 1839, Robinson became the superintendent of this facility, where his mismanagement resulted in the deaths of many of those exiled. 

He was appointed Chief Protector of Aborigines by the Aboriginal Protection Board in Port Phillip District, New South Wales in 1839, a position he held until 1849. His documentation of his many travels around what is now the state of Victoria are still a uniquely significant source of historical and cultural information about the Indigenous people of this region and their destruction by British colonists.

Robinson is remembered as a complex and controversial individual who played an important role in both preserving a record of Aboriginal society and also profiteering from enacting genocidal policies against these same people. He is also remembered today for his enthusiastic role in the supply of Aboriginal skeletal remains to English &#x27;collectors&#x27;.

== Early life ==
Robinson was born on 22 March 1791 in London, England, to William Robinson, a construction worker, and Susannah Robinson (&quot;née&quot; Perry). He followed his father into the building trade, married Maria Amelia Evans on 28 February 1814, and had five children over the next ten years. He worked as a bricklayer at the Chatham Dockyard and had some involvement with the construction of martello towers along England&#x27;s coast. Robinson then became a builder in London manufacturing bricks and tiles.

In 1823, Robinson was involved in a financial scandal with a religious institution which resulted in him fleeing England. He made for Scotland, leaving his wife and family under the care of his brother. He sought to leave Britain altogether, initially purchasing a ticket to the Mosquito Coast as part of Gregor MacGregor&#x27;s fraudulent Poyais scheme. But after hearing that it was a swindle, he instead purchased a steerage berth on a ship to Australia. Robinson failed to convince his wife to come with him and sailed in September 1823 alone.

== Van Diemen&#x27;s Land ==

Robinson arrived in Hobart in January 1824. He established himself as a builder and was soon employing several men. He was secretary of the Bethel Union and was a committee member of the Auxiliary Bible Society, also helping to found the Van Diemen&#x27;s Land Mechanics&#x27; Institution. He was allocated a block of land in the township upon which he built a house and was joined by his wife and children in April 1826.

===The &quot;friendly mission&quot;===
Bloody conflict between the colonists and the Aboriginal Tasmanians had vastly increased during the 1820s, which evolved into what is known as the Black War. In 1829, Governor George Arthur ordered the establishment of ration station on Bruny Island as a token gesture of goodwill toward the local Nuenonne people who had remained at peace with the British. Robinson had expressed a strong interest in preaching Christianity to the Aborigines and Arthur appointed him as manager of this station where he quickly became familiar with the Nuenonne people, language and customs. However, by the end of the year, almost all of these Aboriginal people had died from introduced disease and violence.

Despite this catastrophe, Robinson conveyed to Governor Arthur the idea his travelling to the uncolonised regions of western Van Diemen&#x27;s Land where he would conciliate the local Aboriginal clans to be at peace with the British invaders. Arthur accepted this idea and in 1830 Robinson led what became known as the &quot;friendly mission&quot;. Robinson had befriended Truganini and Woureddy, two of the few surviving Nuenonne people, and with several other Aboriginal people, they acted as guides for Robinson on the trek through the rugged west coast.
Truganini, Woureddy and the others aided Robinson to make contact with the Ninene people around Bathurst Harbour of whom Towterer was a leading figure. They then made their way up the west coast past Macquarie Harbour to Cape Grim, where Robinson was informed of the Cape Grim massacre of Aboriginal people perpetrated by employees of the Van Diemen&#x27;s Land Company. 

Robinson was also informed of Governor Arthur&#x27;s decree that a £5 bounty was to be awarded for every native captured. His mission subsequently took on a new priority where personal financial gain became a priority. Robinson used a Pairelehoinner youth named Tunnerminnerwait to gather some of the local people, who he shipped to Launceston to claim the bounty.

At Launceston, the settlers were preparing for the climax of the Black War. Called the Black Line, it was a 2,200 man strong chain of armed colonists and soldiers to sweep the settled areas looking to kill or trap any Aboriginal people they found. Robinson was allowed to continue his mission to the north-east, away from the direction of the Black Line.

Robinson&#x27;s group arrived at Cape Portland in October 1830 having rescued several Indigenous women from the slavery of the local sealers, and been joined by the respected warrior Mannalargenna and his small remnant clan. They were informed of the failure of the Black Line to capture or kill many Aboriginal people and it was decided by the government to use the nearby Bass Strait Islands as a place of enforced exile for those Indigenous Tasmanians collected by Robinson.

Robinson&#x27;s first choice of island to confine the approximately 20 Aboriginal Tasmanians in his charge was Swan Island. Exposed to powerful gales, the small island had poor access to water supply and was infested with tiger snakes. Robinson soon left for Hobart where he had a meeting with Governor Arthur in early 1831. For his &quot;friendly mission&quot; work, Robinson was rewarded with land grants and hundreds of pounds worth of pay increases.

===Further expeditions to capture the remaining Aboriginal Tasmanians===
While in Hobart, Robinson successfully negotiated a contract with the colonial authorities for him to lead further expeditions to capture all the remaining Aboriginal Tasmanians and transfer them to confinement in Bass Strait. Robinson firstly took Truganini, the other guides and around 25 Aboriginal people held in various hospitals and jails in Hobart and Launceston, and transported them to Swan Island where the others were still being held. The combined captive population swelled to over 50 and Robinson decided to move the place of exile to a former sealer&#x27;s camp on Gun Carriage Island.

====Expedition of 1831====
Gun Carriage Island proved little better than Swan Island and many of the exiled Aborigines started to sicken, with several dying in the first few weeks. Robinson took Truganini, Woureddy, Kikatapula, Pagerly, Mannalargenna, Woretemoeteryenner, Tunnerminnerwait and Maulboyheenner as guides to capture the remaining Aboriginal Tasmanians in the settled districts. They started off in July 1831 with the initial aim of finding the respected Tyerrernotepanner leader Eumarrah and his small clan, whom they captured in late August near the locality of Pipers Brook. They then continued on, looking to take captive the remaining members of the Oyster Bay and Big River tribes who had condensed into a single group taking refuge in the Central Highlands. Truganini and the other Indigenous guides frustrated Robinson by seeming to alert this group of their approach and it wasn&#x27;t until December that they were seized. This group which included the once-feared warriors Tongerlongeter and Montpelliatta, were paraded in Hobart before being transported to Gun Carriage Island.

====Expeditions of 1832 and 1833====
Robinson then conducted expeditions to capture the remaining Indigenous people of the west coast of Tasmania. Several guides including Eumarrah and Kikatapula died early in the expedition, but Robinson still managed to apprehend through deceitful means most of the remaining tribespeople from the Cape Grim region. In September 1832, Truganini saved Robinson by swimming him across the Arthur River away from a group of Tarkiner people who intended to kill him.

In April 1833, Robinson returned to lead another expedition to seize the west coast clans, with Truganini, Woureddy and others again chosen as guides. Robinson captured the remaining Ninine by taking captive the child of Towterer which forced the clan to surrender. By July they had captured almost all of the remaining west coast people including the Tarkiner tribe led by a man named Wyne who had attempted to kill Robinson the previous year. 

Robinson deposited his prisoners at the Macquarie Harbour Penal Station to await transportation to Flinders Island where the Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment had been formed to replace the internment camp at Gun Carriage Island. The approximately 35 captives were held in terrible conditions at Macquarie Harbour, with around half dying from bacterial pneumonia and suicide within a couple of weeks. This included previously healthy young men, pregnant women and infants. Over 80% of the captured Tarkiner people perished. After shipping off the survivors to Wybalenna, Robinson returned with his guides to Hobart.

====Expedition of 1834====
Some Aboriginal people were still reported to be residing in the wilderness around Sandy Cape and the Vale of Belvoir, so in early 1834 Robinson set out again with Truganini and the other guides to find them. Before heading west, they firstly attempted to obtain two Aboriginal slaves that were in possession of John Batman at his Kingston estate along the Ben Lomond Rivulet. However, Batman, who at this stage had tertiary syphilis, refused to give them up saying they were his property.

From February to April, Robinson&#x27;s group located and captured twenty Tarkiner people on the west coast. This was despite Truganini and Woureddy temporarily refusing to act as guides for Robinson. However, crossing the Arthur River on the return journey, Truganini again saved Robinson&#x27;s life by swimming out to his raft and towing it to the bank after it was carried away by the swift current.

After sending these Tarkiner off to exile at Wybalenna, Robinson left the expedition, placing his sons in charge to find the remnant Tommigener clan located near the Vale of Belvoir. For months, Truganini and the others trudged through heavy winter snow and spring rains but finally located the last eight people of this tribe in December near the Western Bluff. In February 1835, these Tommigener were shipped off to Wybalenna from Launceston, leaving Robinson to claim his rewards for removing almost in entirety the remaining Aboriginal population from mainland Tasmania.

==Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment==

In September 1835, with the completion of the removal of Aborigines from mainland Tasmania, Robinson was appointed as their superintendent at the internment facility known as the Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment on Flinders Island.

Robinson began a program of Christianising the inmates. He changed their names, made them wear European clothes and attempted to prohibit their practising of Aboriginal culture and language, which was completely opposite to what he had promised the Indigenous people when he deceived them into leaving their homelands. The encampment was also badly mismanaged under Robinson and rates of illness and mortality were extremely high.

== Chief Protector of Aborigines in Port Phillip District ==

Robinson was keen to remove himself of responsibility at Wybalenna and in 1839 accepted the position of Protector of Aborigines in the newly colonised Port Phillip District in present-day Victoria. Robinson took his family and seventeen Aboriginal Tasmanians from Wybalenna with him as servants. Robinson was assigned with four Assistant Protectors, William Thomas, James Dredge, Edward Stone Parker and Charles Sievwright.

Robinson established himself and his family in Melbourne, buying a prime parcel of land in South Yarra. He took a census of Aboriginal people living at the fringes of the settlement and noted the high rates introduced disease and morbidity amongst them. However, he was mostly unable or unwilling to alleviate their plight. He did, though, take an active role in advocating for better legal rights for the Aborigines especially after the Lettsom raid, where the colonial government used the military and police to force the expulsion of Indigenous people from Melbourne.

During his decade of service as Chief Protector he made more than 20 expeditions into the four districts of the Aboriginal Protectorate located in what is now Victoria.

In 1841 and 1842, Robinson traveled to western Victoria with Tunnerminnerwait where he investigated and reported on the Convincing Ground massacre that had occurred in 1833 or 1834. In 1841 he investigated a gunshot incident, and whilst travelling came across the aboriginal aquaculture site of Lake Condah, recording its dimensions.

His journals are regarded as amongst the most important documents on the early years of European settlement in Victoria. They offer significant observations on Koorie culture, early Melbourne personalities, the landscape and settler society.

== Later life ==
The Port Phillip Protectorate was abolished on 31 December 1849, with Robinson receiving a pension. He returned to England in 1852 and the following year married Rose Pyne, with whom he had another five children. The couple spent five years living in Europe, mostly in Paris and Rome. In 1859 they settled in Bath, England, where Robinson died on 18 October 1866 at the age of 75.

==Robinson in contemporary culture==

Semi-fictional accounts of Robinson&#x27;s travels are included in Matthew Kneale&#x27;s book &quot;English Passengers&quot; and in T. C. Boyle&#x27;s short story &quot;The Extinction Tales&quot;, and Robinson is a major character in Richard Flanagan&#x27;s 2008 novel &quot;Wanting&quot;.
There is a reference to Robinson in the book &quot;The Lost Diamonds of Killiecrankie&quot; by Gary Crew and Peter Gouldthorpe, and in &quot;Following the Equator&quot;, by Mark Twain. Robert Drewes&#x27; &#x27;Savage Crows&#x27; also incorporates the work of Robinson into the plot. See also Mudrooroo&#x27;s critical portrayal of Robinson in &quot;Doctor Wooreddy&#x27;s Prescription for Enduring the Ending of the World&quot;, &quot;Master of the Ghost Dreaming&quot; and his Vampire Trilogy: &quot;The Undying&quot;, &quot;Underground&quot; and &quot;The Promised Land&quot;. Additionally, Cassandra Pybus&#x27; 2020 biography of Truganini, entitled &quot;Truganini: Journey Through the Apocalypse&quot; provides a detailed account of Robinson&#x27;s personal relationship with Truganini and the traumatic psychological and cultural shifts experienced by Aboriginal Tasmanians.

Tasmanian artist Julie Gough referenced Robinson and his work in her 2019 exhibition &quot;Tense Past&quot; at Tasmania Museum &amp; Art Gallery.

==Robinson and museum collections==
During Robinson&#x27;s time in Tasmania and Victoria, he collected a large number of objects and artworks from the Aboriginal communities there. He also collected human skulls and other Aboriginal remains. After his death, his widow Rose sold the items to many museums. The British Museum has 138 items relating to Robinson&#x27;s time in Australia, including Aboriginal artefacts, prints and drawings. Joseph Barnard Davis acquired many from Robinson&#x27;s widow in the 1860s, and it may be through his activities that objects subsequently found their way into other collections, for example at the British Museum. Leeds Discovery Centre has two spears he collected. The Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford holds nineteen objects relating to Robinson&#x27;s time abroad. The collection at Pitt Rivers includes several paintings and prints describing individual people from Aboriginal communities, including: Truggernana, Jenny, and Fanny, amongst others.

==Notes==
==References==
* Rae-Ellis, Vivienne (1988). &quot;Black Robinson Protector of Aborigines&quot;, Melbourne University Press, 
* Ryan, Lyndall (2012). &quot;Tasmanian Aborigines: a history since 1803&quot;, Allen &amp; Unwin, (esp. pp. 151–239)

==External links==
* George Augustus Robinson – State Library of NSW
* George Augustus Robinson – State Records of NSW
* the journals and papers of George Augustus Robinson (1791-1866) – NSW State Library Protector of Aborigines Heritage Collection
* Black Robinson: Protector of Aborigines. A controversial study of by Vivienne Rae-Ellis Melbourne University Press
* Calder, James E.(1875). &quot;&quot; esp. p. 20</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1506896" start="0" end="24" title="George Augustus Robinson" label="George Augustus Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="184" end="206" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="210" end="232" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230856" start="241" end="262" title="Port Phillip District" label="Port Phillip District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775114" start="281" end="304" title="History of Australia (1788–1850)" label="British colonialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="347" end="368" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians" label="Aboriginal Tasmanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q242064" start="377" end="386" title="Truganini" label="Truganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452675" start="391" end="399" title="Woureddy" label="Woureddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="466" end="483" title="Van Diemen’s Land" label="Van Diemen’s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q880629" start="573" end="582" title="Black War" label="Black War"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325713" start="717" end="751" title="Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment" label="Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q938581" start="755" end="770" title="Flinders Island" label="Flinders Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113491" start="935" end="964" title="Protector of Aborigines" label="Chief Protector of Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q322950" start="972" end="999" title="Aboriginal Protection Board" label="Aboriginal Protection Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230856" start="1003" end="1024" title="Port Phillip District" label="Port Phillip District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="1026" end="1041" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="1152" end="1160" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1744" end="1750" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q811122" start="1784" end="1803" title="construction worker" label="construction worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q327321" start="2010" end="2020" title="bricklayer" label="bricklayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068204" start="2028" end="2044" title="Chatham Dockyard" label="Chatham Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q91285" start="2095" end="2110" title="martello towers" label="martello towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2347" end="2355" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165546" start="2492" end="2506" title="Mosquito Coast" label="Mosquito Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q330882" start="2518" end="2534" title="Gregor MacGregor" label="Gregor MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2553" end="2566" title="Gregor MacGregor#Poyais scheme" label="Poyais scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q244914" start="2632" end="2640" title="steerage" label="steerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2660" end="2669" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="2812" end="2818" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897952" start="2932" end="2944" title="Bethel Union" label="Bethel Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q920404" start="2979" end="3002" title="British and Foreign Bible Society" label="Auxiliary Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="3300" end="3321" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians" label="Aboriginal Tasmanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q880629" start="3401" end="3410" title="Black War" label="Black War"/>
<link wikidata="Q826766" start="3430" end="3443" title="George Arthur" label="George Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25605" start="3491" end="3503" title="Bruny Island" label="Bruny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068421" start="3552" end="3560" title="Nuenonne" label="Nuenonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q242064" start="4322" end="4331" title="Truganini" label="Truganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452675" start="4336" end="4344" title="Woureddy" label="Woureddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824007" start="4582" end="4595" title="Toogee people" label="Ninene people"/>
<link wikidata="Q203879" start="4603" end="4619" title="Bathurst Harbour, Tasmania" label="Bathurst Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424854" start="4628" end="4636" title="Towterer" label="Towterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882990" start="4707" end="4724" title="Macquarie Harbour" label="Macquarie Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304477" start="4728" end="4737" title="Cape Grim" label="Cape Grim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034229" start="4774" end="4792" title="Cape Grim massacre" label="Cape Grim massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271820" start="4846" end="4876" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land Company" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372150" start="4950" end="4956" title="bounty (reward)" label="bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880104" start="5142" end="5158" title="Tunnerminnerwait" label="Tunnerminnerwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="5213" end="5223" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q880629" start="5311" end="5320" title="Black War" label="Black War"/>
<link wikidata="Q880629" start="5333" end="5343" title="Black Line" label="Black Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027944" start="5635" end="5648" title="Cape Portland" label="Cape Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890603" start="5785" end="5798" title="Mannalargenna" label="Mannalargenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653454" start="6192" end="6203" title="Swan Island (Tasmania)" label="Swan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520949" start="6303" end="6314" title="tiger snake" label="tiger snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915186" start="7189" end="7208" title="Gun Carriage Island" label="Gun Carriage Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q124393689" start="7427" end="7437" title="Kikatapula" label="Kikatapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890603" start="7448" end="7461" title="Mannalargenna" label="Mannalargenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q100323966" start="7463" end="7481" title="Woretemoeteryenner" label="Woretemoeteryenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880104" start="7483" end="7499" title="Tunnerminnerwait" label="Tunnerminnerwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474236" start="7504" end="7518" title="Maulboyheenner" label="Maulboyheenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859815" start="7678" end="7695" title="Tyerrernotepanner language" label="Tyerrernotepanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066191" start="7703" end="7711" title="Eumarrah" label="Eumarrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q55772107" start="7787" end="7799" title="Pipers Brook, Tasmania" label="Pipers Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114397" start="7969" end="7986" title="Central Highlands (Tasmania)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250682" start="8207" end="8221" title="Tongerlongeter" label="Tongerlongeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124288703" start="8226" end="8239" title="Montpelliatta" label="Montpelliatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304477" start="8648" end="8657" title="Cape Grim" label="Cape Grim"/>
<link wikidata="Q711143" start="8737" end="8749" title="Arthur River (Tasmania)" label="Arthur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424854" start="9035" end="9043" title="Towterer" label="Towterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756121" start="9301" end="9332" title="Macquarie Harbour Penal Station" label="Macquarie Harbour Penal Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q938581" start="9360" end="9375" title="Flinders Island" label="Flinders Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325713" start="9386" end="9420" title="Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment" label="Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776920" start="9605" end="9624" title="bacterial pneumonia" label="bacterial pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800805" start="9989" end="9999" title="Arthur-Pieman Conservation Area" label="Sandy Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q55442417" start="10008" end="10023" title="Middlesex, Tasmania" label="Vale of Belvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q734353" start="10218" end="10229" title="John Batman" label="John Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056887" start="10237" end="10245" title="Deddington, Tasmania" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="10322" end="10339" title="tertiary syphilis" label="tertiary syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55448953" start="11150" end="11163" title="Mersey Forest, Tasmania" label="Western Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113491" start="12251" end="12274" title="Protector of Aborigines" label="Protector of Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230856" start="12298" end="12319" title="Port Phillip District" label="Port Phillip District"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="12335" end="12343" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758903" start="12497" end="12511" title="William Thomas (Australian settler)" label="William Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132833" start="12513" end="12525" title="James Dredge (minister)" label="James Dredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293786" start="12527" end="12546" title="Edward Stone Parker" label="Edward Stone Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066070" start="12551" end="12569" title="Charles Sievwright" label="Charles Sievwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="12619" end="12628" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304617" start="12663" end="12674" title="South Yarra" label="South Yarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783799" start="13010" end="13022" title="Lettsom raid" label="Lettsom raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880104" start="13375" end="13391" title="Tunnerminnerwait" label="Tunnerminnerwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q777916" start="13434" end="13460" title="Convincing Ground massacre" label="Convincing Ground massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800900" start="13609" end="13620" title="Lake Condah" label="Lake Condah"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="13760" end="13768" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542768" start="13809" end="13815" title="Koorie" label="Koorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="13831" end="13840" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="14218" end="14231" title="Bath, England" label="Bath, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671" start="14396" end="14410" title="Matthew Kneale" label="Matthew Kneale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672" start="14429" end="14447" title="English Passengers" label="English Passengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q786526" start="14461" end="14472" title="T. Coraghessan Boyle" label="T. C. Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351191" start="14563" end="14579" title="Richard Flanagan" label="Richard Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968176" start="14598" end="14617" title="Wanting (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Wanting&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524914" start="14714" end="14723" title="Gary Crew" label="Gary Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174312" start="14728" end="14745" title="Peter Gouldthorpe" label="Peter Gouldthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954434" start="14760" end="14781" title="Following the Equator" label="Following the Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="14792" end="14802" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303498" start="14804" end="14816" title="Robert Drewe" label="Robert Drewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q923682" start="14912" end="14921" title="Mudrooroo" label="Mudrooroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233886" start="14969" end="15041" title="Doctor Wooreddy&amp;#x27;s Prescription for Enduring the Ending of the World" label="Doctor Wooreddy&amp;#x27;s Prescription for Enduring the Ending of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907662" start="15213" end="15228" title="Cassandra Pybus" label="Cassandra Pybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242064" start="15253" end="15262" title="Truganini" label="Truganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q242064" start="15401" end="15410" title="Truganini" label="Truganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="15478" end="15499" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians" label="Aboriginal Tasmanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q50345598" start="15519" end="15530" title="Julie Gough" label="Julie Gough"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="15716" end="15724" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="15959" end="15973" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281348" start="16088" end="16108" title="Joseph Barnard Davis" label="Joseph Barnard Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q69789812" start="16302" end="16324" title="Leeds Discovery Centre" label="Leeds Discovery Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456119" start="16358" end="16376" title="Pitt Rivers Museum" label="Pitt Rivers Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="16380" end="16386" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937894" start="16663" end="16682" title="Vivienne Rae-Ellis" label="Rae-Ellis, Vivienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493494" start="16774" end="16787" title="Lyndall Ryan" label="Ryan, Lyndall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488140" wikidata="Q865807" url="?curid=488140" title="Charge carrier">
<text>In solid state physics, a charge carrier is a particle or quasiparticle that is free to move, carrying an electric charge, especially the particles that carry electric charges in electrical conductors. Examples are electrons, ions and holes. In a conducting medium, an electric field can exert force on these free particles, causing a net motion of the particles through the medium; this is what constitutes an electric current. 
The electron and the proton are the elementary charge carriers, each carrying one elementary charge (&quot;e&quot;), of the same magnitude and opposite sign.

==In conductors==
In conducting mediums, particles serve to carry charge. In many metals, the charge carriers are electrons. One or two of the valence electrons from each atom are able to move about freely within the crystal structure of the metal. The free electrons are referred to as conduction electrons, and the cloud of free electrons is called a Fermi gas. Many metals have electron and hole bands. In some, the majority carriers are holes.

In electrolytes, such as salt water, the charge carriers are ions, which are atoms or molecules that have gained or lost electrons so they are electrically charged. Atoms that have gained electrons so they are negatively charged are called anions, atoms that have lost electrons so they are positively charged are called cations. Cations and anions of the dissociated liquid also serve as charge carriers in melted ionic solids (see e.g. the Hall–Héroult process for an example of electrolysis of a melted ionic solid). Proton conductors are electrolytic conductors employing positive hydrogen ions as carriers.

In a plasma, an electrically charged gas which is found in electric arcs through air, neon signs, and the sun and stars, the electrons and cations of ionized gas act as charge carriers.

In a vacuum, free electrons can act as charge carriers. In the electronic component known as the vacuum tube (also called &quot;valve&quot;), the mobile electron cloud is generated by a heated metal cathode, by a process called thermionic emission. When an electric field is applied strongly enough to draw the electrons into a beam, this may be referred to as a cathode ray, and is the basis of the cathode-ray tube display widely used in televisions and computer monitors until the 2000s.

In semiconductors, which are the materials used to make electronic components like transistors and integrated circuits, two types of charge carrier are possible. In p-type semiconductors, &quot;effective particles&quot; known as electron holes with positive charge move through the crystal lattice, producing an electric current. The &quot;holes&quot; are, in effect, electron vacancies in the valence-band electron population of the semiconductor and are treated as charge carriers because they are mobile, moving from atom site to atom site. In n-type semiconductors, electrons in the conduction band move through the crystal, resulting in an electric current.

In some conductors, such as ionic solutions and plasmas, positive and negative charge carriers coexist, so in these cases an electric current consists of the two types of carrier moving in opposite directions. In other conductors, such as metals, there are only charge carriers of one polarity, so an electric current in them simply consists of charge carriers moving in one direction.

==In semiconductors==
There are two recognized types of charge carriers in semiconductors. One is electrons, which carry a negative electric charge. In addition, it is convenient to treat the traveling vacancies in the valence band electron population (holes) as a second type of charge carrier, which carry a positive charge equal in magnitude to that of an electron.

===Carrier generation and recombination===

When an electron meets with a hole, they recombine and these free carriers effectively vanish. The energy released can be either thermal, heating up the semiconductor (&quot;thermal recombination&quot;, one of the sources of waste heat in semiconductors), or released as photons (&quot;optical recombination&quot;, used in LEDs and semiconductor lasers). The recombination means an electron which has been excited from the valence band to the conduction band falls back to the empty state in the valence band, known as the holes. The holes are the empty states created in the valence band when an electron gets excited after getting some energy to pass the energy gap.

=== Majority and minority carriers ===
The more abundant charge carriers are called majority carriers, which are primarily responsible for current transport in a piece of semiconductor. In n-type semiconductors they are electrons, while in p-type semiconductors they are holes. The less abundant charge carriers are called minority carriers; in n-type semiconductors they are holes, while in p-type semiconductors they are electrons.

In an intrinsic semiconductor, which does not contain any impurity, the concentrations of both types of carriers are ideally equal. If an intrinsic semiconductor is doped with a donor impurity then the majority carriers are electrons. If the semiconductor is doped with an acceptor impurity then the majority carriers are holes.

Minority carriers play an important role in bipolar transistors and solar cells. Their role in field-effect transistors (FETs) is a bit more complex: for example, a MOSFET has p-type and n-type regions. The transistor action involves the majority carriers of the source and drain regions, but these carriers traverse the body of the opposite type, where they are minority carriers. However, the traversing carriers hugely outnumber their opposite type in the transfer region (in fact, the opposite type carriers are removed by an applied electric field that creates an inversion layer), so conventionally the source and drain designation for the carriers is adopted, and FETs are called &quot;majority carrier&quot; devices.

===Free carrier concentration===

&quot;Free carrier concentration&quot; is the concentration of free carriers in a doped semiconductor. It is similar to the carrier concentration in a metal and for the purposes of calculating currents or drift velocities can be used in the same way. Free carriers are electrons (holes) that have been introduced into the conduction band (valence band) by doping. Therefore, they will not act as double carriers by leaving behind holes (electrons) in the other band. In other words, charge carriers are particles that are free to move, carrying the charge. The free carrier concentration of doped semiconductors shows a characteristic temperature dependence.

== In superconductors ==
Superconductors have zero electrical resistance and are therefore able to carry current indefinitely. This type of conduction is possible by the formation of Cooper pairs. At present, superconductors can only be achieved at very low temperatures, for instance by using cryogenic chilling. As yet, achieving superconductivity at room temperature remains challenging; it is still a field of ongoing research and experimentation. Creating a superconductor that functions at ambient temperature would constitute an important technological break-through, which could potentially contribute to much higher energy efficiency in grid distribution of electricity.

== In quantum situations ==
Under exceptional circumstances, positrons, muons, anti-muons, taus and anti-taus may potentially also carry electric charge. This is theoretically possible, yet the very short life-time of these charged particles would render such a current very challenging to maintain at the current state of technology. It might be possible to artificially create this type of current, or it might occur in nature during very short lapses of time.

== In plasmas ==
Plasmas consist of ionized gas. Electric charge can cause the formation of electromagnetic fields in plasmas, which can lead to the formation of currents or even multiple currents. This phenomenon is used in nuclear fusion reactors. It also occurs naturally in the cosmos, in the form of jets, nebula winds or cosmic filaments that carry charged particles. This cosmic phenomenon is called Birkeland current. Considered in general, the electric conductivity of plasmas is a subject of plasma physics.

==See also==
*Carrier lifetime
*Free charge
*Molecular diffusion

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="3" end="22" title="solid state physics" label="solid state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q865807" start="26" end="40" title="Charge carrier" label="charge carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="46" end="54" title="particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="58" end="71" title="quasiparticle" label="quasiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="106" end="121" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="179" end="199" title="electrical conductor" label="electrical conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="215" end="223" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="226" end="229" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q651050" start="235" end="240" title="electron hole" label="holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="269" end="283" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="411" end="427" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="434" end="442" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="451" end="457" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q865807" start="466" end="492" title="Charge carrier" label="elementary charge carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="512" end="529" title="elementary charge" label="elementary charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="582" end="586" title="sign (mathematics)" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="671" end="676" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="703" end="711" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="732" end="748" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="806" end="823" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="876" end="895" title="conduction band" label="conduction electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072904" start="942" end="951" title="Fermi gas" label="Fermi gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="1041" end="1053" title="electrolytes" label="electrolytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="1063" end="1073" title="Saline water" label="salt water"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1099" end="1102" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1278" end="1283" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1359" end="1365" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="1453" end="1464" title="ionic compound" label="ionic solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898555" start="1480" end="1500" title="Hall–Héroult process" label="Hall–Héroult process"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686486" start="1558" end="1574" title="Proton conductor" label="Proton conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="1656" end="1662" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="1710" end="1722" title="electric arc" label="electric arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006" start="1737" end="1746" title="neon sign" label="neon sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="1843" end="1849" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="1935" end="1946" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="2037" end="2044" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q215259" start="2066" end="2085" title="thermionic emission" label="thermionic emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="2201" end="2212" title="cathode ray" label="cathode ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="2238" end="2254" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="2333" end="2346" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="2413" end="2423" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="2429" end="2447" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="2524" end="2543" title="Quasiparticle" label="effective particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q651050" start="2559" end="2573" title="Electron hole" label="electron holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="2724" end="2745" title="valence band" label="valence-band electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="3456" end="3469" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="3479" end="3487" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="3513" end="3528" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="3600" end="3612" title="valence band" label="valence band"/>
<link wikidata="Q651050" start="3634" end="3639" title="electron hole" label="holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q351558" start="3836" end="3845" title="carrier generation and recombination" label="recombine"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="4020" end="4030" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="4066" end="4072" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="4118" end="4122" title="light-emitting diode" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="4127" end="4146" title="laser diode" label="semiconductor laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="4604" end="4611" title="current (electricity)" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064248" start="4654" end="4674" title="n-type semiconductor" label="n-type semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064248" start="4705" end="4725" title="p-type semiconductor" label="p-type semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197777" start="4906" end="4929" title="intrinsic semiconductor" label="intrinsic semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="5065" end="5070" title="doping (semiconductor)" label="doped"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="5274" end="5293" title="Bipolar junction transistor" label="bipolar transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="5298" end="5308" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="5325" end="5348" title="field-effect transistor" label="field-effect transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="5395" end="5401" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="5493" end="5499" title="field-effect transistor" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="5504" end="5509" title="Field-effect transistor" label="drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="5551" end="5555" title="field-effect transistor" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q288224" start="5799" end="5814" title="Inversion layer (semiconductors)" label="inversion layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="6036" end="6049" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="6072" end="6091" title="doping (semiconductor)" label="doped semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q651050" start="6270" end="6275" title="electron hole" label="holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="6312" end="6327" title="conduction band" label="conduction band"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="6329" end="6341" title="valence band" label="valence band"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="6675" end="6690" title="Superconductors" label="Superconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q620057" start="6833" end="6845" title="Cooper pair" label="Cooper pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="7392" end="7401" title="Positron" label="positrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151" start="7403" end="7408" title="Muon" label="muons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188392" start="7422" end="7426" title="Tau (particle)" label="taus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="8020" end="8034" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q803957" start="8202" end="8219" title="Birkeland current" label="Birkeland current"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="8297" end="8311" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046374" start="8328" end="8344" title="Carrier lifetime" label="Carrier lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050425" start="8346" end="8357" title="Free charge" label="Free charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104113" start="8359" end="8378" title="Molecular diffusion" label="Molecular diffusion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488144" wikidata="Q6908884" url="?curid=488144" title="Mor lam sing">
<text>Mor lam sing (Thai/Isan หมอลำซิ่ง) is a fast-paced, racy and modernized version of the traditional Lao/Isan song form &quot;mor lam (for ex:in 1986) &quot;. &quot;Sing&quot; comes from the English word &quot;racing&quot; (a reference to the music&#x27;s speed and its origins among Isan&#x27;s biker fraternity). In this style, the lead singer is accompanied by the &quot;khaen&quot;, Western drums, electric guitar, electric keyboards and bass guitar. The style was invented in Chaiyaphum province around 1985 and was popularised over the next few years after it was taken up by Ratdri Sivilai in Khon Kaen. It is based on the Khon Kaen style of &quot;lam tang san &quot;but incorporates string instrumentation and luk thung singing styles and extensive use of the Central Thai language rather than Isan.

The songs are often about disappointment in love and hardships during life away from Northeast Thailand. The songs are full of sexual innuendo, and feature &quot;hang khreuang&quot; - young female dancers in fanciful dress.

Among the most popular &quot;mor lam sing&quot; artists are the groups Rock Salaeng and Rock Sadert.

==See also==
*Mor lam

==External links==
*khaen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6908884" start="0" end="12" title="Mor lam sing" label="Mor lam sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="14" end="18" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="19" end="23" title="Isan language" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="99" end="102" title="Laos" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="103" end="107" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="124" end="131" title="mor lam" label="mor lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="189" end="196" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="294" end="299" title="motorcycle" label="biker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740479" start="372" end="377" title="khaen" label="khaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="393" end="397" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="400" end="415" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="426" end="434" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="440" end="451" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q275377" start="479" end="498" title="Chaiyaphum province" label="Chaiyaphum province"/>
<link wikidata="Q876526" start="598" end="607" title="Khon Kaen" label="Khon Kaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q665286" start="716" end="725" title="luk thung" label="luk thung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="774" end="787" title="Thai language" label="Thai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="800" end="804" title="Isan language" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1103" end="1115" title="Rock Salaeng" label="Rock Salaeng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1120" end="1131" title="Rock Sadert" label="Rock Sadert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="1148" end="1155" title="Mor lam" label="Mor lam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488147" wikidata="Q910862" url="?curid=488147" title="George Peabody">
<text>George Peabody (; February 18, 1795 – November 4, 1869) was an American financier and philanthropist. He is often considered the father of modern philanthropy.

Born into a poor family in Massachusetts, Peabody went into business in dry goods and later into banking. In 1837 he moved to London (which was then the capital of world finance) where he became the most noted American banker and helped to establish the young country&#x27;s international credit. Having no son of his own to whom he could pass on his business, Peabody took on Junius Spencer Morgan as a partner in 1854 and their joint business would go on to become the global financial services firm J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. after Peabody&#x27;s 1864 retirement.

In his old age, Peabody won worldwide acclaim for his philanthropy. He founded the Peabody Trust in Britain and the Peabody Institute and George Peabody Library in Baltimore, and was responsible for many other charitable initiatives. For his generosity, he was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal and made a Freeman of the City of London, among many other honors.

==Biography==

Peabody was born in 1795 in what was then South Danvers (now Peabody), Massachusetts. His family had Puritan ancestors in the state. As one of seven children in a poor family, George suffered some deprivations during his childhood, and was able to attend school for only a few years. When he was a teenager, his father died, and he worked in his brother&#x27;s shop to support his widowed mother and six siblings. He later expressed &quot;I have never forgotten and never can forget the great privations of my early years&quot;. These factors influenced his later devotion to both thrift and philanthropy.

In 1816, he moved to Baltimore, where he made his career and would live for the next 20 years. He established his residence and office in the old Henry Fite House, and became a businessman and financier.

At that time London, Amsterdam, Paris and Frankfurt were at the center of international banking and finance. As all international transactions were settled in gold or gold certificates, a developing nation like the United States had to rely upon agents and merchant banks to raise capital through relationships with merchant banking houses in Europe. Only they held the quantity of reserves of capital necessary to extend long-term credit to a developing economy like that of the US.

Peabody first visited England in 1827, seeking to use his firm and his agency to sell American states&#x27; bond issues, to raise capital for those states&#x27; various programs of &quot;internal improvements&quot; (principally the transportation infrastructure, such as roads, railroads, docks and canals). Over the next decade Peabody made four more trans-Atlantic trips, starting in 1835 and establishing a branch office in Liverpool. Later he established the banking firm of &quot;George Peabody &amp; Company&quot; (later stylised as J.S. Morgan &amp; Co.) in London. In 1837, he took up permanent residence in London, where he lived for the rest of his life.

In the 1840s, the state of Maryland defaulted on its debt and Peabody, having marketed about half of Maryland&#x27;s securities to individual investors in Europe, became &quot;persona non grata&quot; around London. &quot;The Times&quot; of London noted that while Peabody was an &quot;American gentleman of the most unblemished character&quot;, the Reform Club had blackballed him for being a citizen of a country that reneged on its debts. At first, Peabody sent letters to scold Baltimore friends about the need for the state to resume interest payment and rewarded reporters with small gratuities for favourable articles about the state.

At last, in 1845 he conspired with Barings to push Maryland into resuming payment by setting up a political slush fund to spread propaganda for debt resumption and elect legislators who would placate their investors. By means of a secret account, the two firms transferred a thousand sterling to Baltimore and even bribed Daniel Webster, the orator and statesman, to make speeches for debt repayment. Their attempts were successful: pro-resumption Whigs were elected and London bankers started to receive payments. Barings duplicated the same tactics in Pennsylvania. Florida and Mississippi were the most persistent debtors and as such were excluded from Peabody&#x27;s later philanthropies.

Although Peabody was briefly engaged in 1838 (and later allegedly had a mistress in Brighton, England, who bore him a daughter), he never married. Ron Chernow describes him as &quot;homely&quot;, with &quot;a rumpled face ... knobby chin, bulbous nose, side whiskers, and heavy-lidded eyes.&quot;

Peabody frequently entertained and provided letters of introduction for American businessmen visiting London, and became known for the Anglo-American dinners he hosted in honor of American diplomats and other worthies, and in celebration of the Fourth of July. In 1851, when the US Congress refused to support the American section at the Great Exhibition at the Crystal Palace, Peabody advanced £3000 (then worth $15,000; worth about $550,000 in 2022 dollars) to improve the exhibit and uphold the reputation of the United States. In 1854, he offended many of his American guests at a Fourth of July dinner when he chose to toast Queen Victoria before US President Franklin Pierce; Pierce&#x27;s future successor, James Buchanan, then Ambassador to London, left in a huff. At around this time, Peabody began to suffer from rheumatoid arthritis and gout.

In February 1867, on one of several return visits to the United States, and at the height of his financial success, Peabody was suggested by Francis Preston Blair, an old crony of President Andrew Jackson and an active power in the smoldering Democratic Party as a possible Secretary of the Treasury in the cabinet of President Andrew Johnson. At about the same time, Peabody was also mentioned in newspapers as a future presidential candidate. Peabody described the presidential suggestion as a &quot;kind and complimentary reference&quot;, but considered that, at age 72, he was too old for either office.
==Business==
While serving as a volunteer in the War of 1812, Peabody met Elisha Riggs, who, in 1814, provided financial backing for what became the wholesale dry goods firm of Riggs, Peabody &amp; Co. The firm specialized in importing dry goods from Britain. Branches were opened in New York and Philadelphia in 1822. Riggs retired in 1829, and the firm became Peabody, Riggs &amp; Co., with the names reversed as Peabody became the senior partner.

Peabody first visited England in 1827 to purchase wares, and to negotiate the sale of American cotton in Lancashire. He subsequently opened a branch office in Liverpool, and British business began to play an increasingly important role in his affairs. He appears to have had some help in establishing himself from Sir William Brown, 1st Baronet, of Richmond Hill and James Brown, sons of another highly-successful Baltimore businessman, the Irishman Alexander Brown (founder of the investment and banking firm of Alex. Brown &amp; Sons in 1801), who managed their father&#x27;s Liverpool office, which opened in 1810.

In 1837, Peabody took up residence in London, and the following year, he started a banking business trading on his own account. The banking firm of George Peabody and Company was not, however, established until 1851. It was founded to meet the increasing demand for securities issued by the American railroads, and, although Peabody continued to deal in dry goods and other commodities, he increasingly focused his attentions on merchant banking, specializing in financing governments and large companies. The bank rose to become the premier American house in London.

In Peabody&#x27;s early years in London, American state governments were notorious for defaulting on their debts to British lenders, and as a prominent American financier in London, Peabody often faced scorn for America&#x27;s poor credit. (On one occasion, he was blackballed from membership in a gentlemen&#x27;s club.) Peabody joined forces with Barings Bank to lobby American states for debt repayment, particularly his home state of Maryland. The campaign included printing propaganda and bribing clergy and politicians, most notably Senator Daniel Webster. Peabody made a significant profit when Maryland, Pennsylvania and other states resumed payments, having previously bought up state bonds at a low cost. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; cites him as having &quot;helped establish U.S. credit abroad.&quot;

Peabody took Junius Spencer Morgan (father of J. P. Morgan) into partnership in 1854 to form Peabody, Morgan &amp; Co., and the two financiers worked together until Peabody&#x27;s retirement in 1864; Morgan had effective control of the business from 1859 on. During the run on the banks of 1857, Peabody had to ask the Bank of England for a loan of £800,000; although rivals tried to force the bank out of business, it managed to emerge with its credit intact.

Following this crisis, Peabody began to retire from active business, and in 1864, retired fully (taking much of his capital, amounting to over $10,000,000, or £2,000,000). Peabody, Morgan &amp; Co. then took the name J.S. Morgan &amp; Co. The former UK merchant bank Morgan Grenfell (now part of Deutsche Bank), international universal bank JPMorgan Chase and investment bank Morgan Stanley can all trace their roots to Peabody&#x27;s bank.

==Philanthropy==

Though thrifty, even miserly with his employees and relatives, Peabody gave generously to public causes. He became the acknowledged father of modern philanthropy, having established the practice later followed by Johns Hopkins, Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rockefeller and Bill Gates. In the United States, his philanthropy largely took the form of educational initiatives. In Britain, it took the form of providing housing for the poor.

In America, Peabody founded and supported numerous institutions in New England, the South, and elsewhere. In 1867–68, he established the Peabody Education Fund with $3.5 million to &quot;encourage the intellectual, moral, and industrial education of the destitute children of the Southern States.&quot; His grandest beneficence, however, was to Baltimore, the city in which he achieved his earliest success.
In April 1862, Peabody established the Peabody Donation Fund, which continues to this day as the Peabody Trust, to provide housing of decent quality for the &quot;artisans and labouring poor of London&quot;. The trust&#x27;s first dwellings, designed by H. A. Darbishire in a Jacobethan style, were opened in Commercial Street, Spitalfields in February 1864.
George Peabody provided benefactions of well over $8 million ($240,000,000 in 2023 dollars), most of them in his lifetime.

Some of the organizations which have been confirmed as recipients of Peabody&#x27;s funds includ:
* 1852, The Peabody Institute (now the Peabody Institute Library), Peabody, Mass: $217,000
* 1856, The Peabody Institute, Danvers, Mass (now the Peabody Institute Library of Danvers): $100,000
* 1857, The Peabody Institute (now the Peabody Institute of the Johns Hopkins University), Baltimore: $1,400,000. By including a complex involving a library, an academy of music, and an art gallery, his goal was to promote the moral, intellectual and artistic opportunities for the People of Baltimore.
* 1862, The Peabody Donation Fund, London: $2,500,000
* 1866, The Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University: $150,000
* 1866, The Peabody Museum of Natural History, Yale University: $150,000 (at the suggestion of his nephew Othniel Charles Marsh, son of his younger sister Mary Peabody, and America&#x27;s first professor of paleontology)
* 1866, The Georgetown Peabody Library, the public library of Georgetown, Massachusetts
* 1866, The Thetford Public Library in Thetford, Vermont: $5,000
* 1867, The Peabody Academy of Science, Salem, Mass: $140,000 (now the Peabody Essex Museum)
* 1867, The Peabody Institute, Georgetown, District of Columbia: $15,000 (today the Peabody Room, Georgetown Branch, DC Public Library)
* 1867, Peabody Education Fund: $2,000,000
* 1875, George Peabody College for Teachers, now the Peabody College of Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee. The funding came from the Peabody Education Fund
* 1877, Peabody High School, Trenton, Tennessee, established with funds provided by Peabody
* 1901, The Peabody Memorial Library, Sam Houston State University, Texas
* 1913, George Peabody Building, University of Mississippi
* 1913, Peabody Hall, housing the Department of Curriculum and Instruction, University of Arkansas: $40,000
* 1913, Peabody Hall, housing the School of Education (now Philosophy and Religion), University of Georgia: $40,000
* 1913, Peabody Hall, housing the College for Teachers (now part of Criser Student Services Center), University of Florida: $40,000
* Peabody Hall, housing the college of Human Science and Education, Louisiana State University
* 1914, Peabody Hall, housing the Curry Memorial School of Education (now Office of the Dean of Students and the Office of Admission), University of Virginia

==Death==

Peabody died in London on November 4, 1869, aged 74, at the house of his friend Sir Curtis Lampson. At the request of the Dean of Westminster, and with the approval of Queen Victoria, he was given a funeral and temporary grave in Westminster Abbey.

His will provided that he be buried in the town of his birth, South Danvers, Massachusetts (now Peabody). Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone arranged for Peabody&#x27;s remains to be returned to America on HMS &quot;Monarch&quot;, the newest and largest ship in the Royal Navy, arriving at Portland, Maine, where they were received by US Admiral David Farragut. He was laid to rest in Harmony Grove Cemetery, in Salem, Massachusetts, on February 8, 1870. Peabody&#x27;s death and the pair of funerals were international news, through the newly completed trans-Atlantic underwater telegraph cable. Hundreds of people participated in the ceremonies and thousands more attended or observed.

==Impact on American philanthropy==
Historian Roderick Nash argues that Peabody made his millions quietly in groceries and real estate, while contemporary millionaires were building more visible empires in oil, iron, land and especially railroads. As a disciple of Benjamin Franklin, Peabody combined hard work with frugality, punctuality, and a strong public spirit. Peabody was a pioneer, whose success in philanthropy set a new standard for American millionaires. By contrast, philanthropy in Europe was more typically dispensed by aristocratic families with inherited landed wealth, which built palaces and museums that were eventually opened to the public. The American way was for the self-made millionaires to become self-made philanthropists, a model perfected in the next generation by Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) and John D. Rockefeller (1839–1937). They agreed with Peabody that riches produced a duty to give most of it back to the community through specialized permanent foundations.

Peabody was especially imaginative, and relied on his own memories of poverty and self-education to introduce new ways to educate and culturally enrich the next generation of poor youth, and thereby promote greater equality in American society. Jacksonian Democracy promoted equality in politics; he promoted equality and culture through libraries, schools, museums and colleges. He rejected doling out cash to the poor as a waste of money in comparison to building permanent institutions that produced a steady stream of benefits. His last great benefaction was the Peabody Education Fund, which had a dramatic impact in improving southern public schools. It was the first major philanthropic institution that gave large sums to poor blacks on the same terms as whites, albeit within the limits of racial segregation. Even more important was the institutional framework that Peabody devised, of a permanent professional foundation run by experts in philanthropy, who were guided by and indeed invented the best practices of the day.

==Recognition and commemoration==
Peabody&#x27;s philanthropy won him many admirers in his old age. He was praised by European contemporaries such as Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone and author Victor Hugo, and Queen Victoria offered him a baronetcy, which he declined.

In 1854, the Arctic explorer Elisha Kane named the waterway off the north-west coast of Greenland Peabody Bay, in honor of Peabody, who had funded his expedition. The waterway was later renamed the Kane Basin, but Peabody Bay survives as the name of a smaller bay at the eastern side of the basin.

On July 10, 1862, he was made a Freeman of the City of London, the motion being proposed by Charles Reed in recognition of his financial contribution to London&#x27;s poor. He became the first of only two Americans (the other being Dwight D. Eisenhower) to receive the award. On March 16, 1867, he was awarded the United States Congressional Gold Medal, an honorary doctorate of laws by Harvard University, and an honorary doctorate in civil law by Oxford University. On March 24, 1867, Peabody was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society

Peabody&#x27;s birthplace, South Danvers, Massachusetts, changed its name in 1868 to the town (now city) of Peabody, in his honor. In 1869, the Peabody Hotel in Memphis, Tennessee, was named in his memory. A number of Elementary and High Schools in the United States are named after Peabody.
A statue sculpted by William Wetmore Story stands next to the Royal Exchange in the City of London, unveiled by the Prince of Wales in July 1869: Peabody himself was too unwell to attend the ceremony, and died less than four months later. A replica of the same statue, erected in 1890, stands next to the Peabody Institute, in Mount Vernon Park, part of the Mount Vernon neighborhood of Baltimore, Maryland.

In 1900, Peabody was one of the first 29 honorees to be elected to the Hall of Fame for Great Americans, located on what was then the campus of New York University (and is now that of Bronx Community College), at University Heights, New York.

His birthplace at 205 Washington Street in the City of Peabody is now operated and preserved as the George Peabody House Museum, a museum dedicated to interpreting his life and legacy. There is a blue plaque on the house where he died in London, No. 80 Eaton Square, Belgravia, erected in 1976.

On March 16, 2018, Google honored Peabody with a Google Doodle on the 151st anniversary of Peabody being awarded the Congressional Gold Medal. The mural reproduced in the Google Doodle is physically located within the lunchroom of the George Peabody Elementary School in San Francisco.

The Georgetown Neighborhood Library in Washington, D.C., houses the Peabody Room, named after the original neighborhood Peabody Library founded by Peabody. The Peabody Room contains historical information about the Georgetown neighborhood.

==See also==
* Philanthropy in the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;George Peabody.&quot; in &quot;Dictionary of American Biography&quot; (1936) Online
* Adam, Thomas. &quot;Buying respectability: Philanthropy and urban society in transnational perspective, 1840s to 1930s&quot; (Indiana University Press, 2009).
*
* Curry, Jabez Lamar Monroe. &quot;A Brief Sketch of George Peabody: And a History of the Peabody Education Fund Through Thirty Years&quot; (Negro Universities Press, 1969).
* Dillingham, George A. &quot;The Foundation of the Peabody Tradition&quot; (University Press of America, 1989).
* Harmon, Elizabeth. &quot;The Transformation of American Philanthropy: From Public Trust to Private Foundation, 1785-1917&quot;. (PhD Dissertation, University of Michigan, 2017) Online.
* Hellman, Geoffrey T. &quot;The First Great Cheerful Giver&quot; &quot;American Heritage&quot; (June 1966) 17#4 pp 28+
* Hidy, Muriel E. &quot;George Peabody, merchant and financier: 1829–1854&quot; (Ayer, 1978).
* Hidy, Ralph W., and Muriel E. Hidy. &quot;Anglo-American Merchant Bankers and the Railroads of the Old Northwest, 1848-1860.&quot; &quot;Business History Review&quot; 34.2 (1960): 150–169.
* Kiger, Joseph. &quot;Peabody, Sage, Carnegie, and Rockefeller.&quot; in &quot;Philanthropists and Foundation Globalization&quot; (Routledge, 2017) pp. 29–54.
*, a major scholarly biography
* Tarn, John Nelson. &quot;The Peabody Donation Fund: the role of a housing society in the nineteenth century.&quot; &quot;Victorian Studies&quot; 10.1 (1966): 7-38. online
*

==External links==
*Phillips Library, Peabody Essex Museum. Repository of 145 linear feet of Peabody&#x27;s business and personal papers.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q910862" start="0" end="14" title="George Peabody" label="George Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="72" end="81" title="financier" label="financier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="146" end="158" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="188" end="201" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707967" start="233" end="242" title="dry goods" label="dry goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118236" start="538" end="559" title="Junius Spencer Morgan" label="Junius Spencer Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="663" end="684" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7334263" start="807" end="820" title="Peabody Trust" label="Peabody Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156934" start="840" end="857" title="Peabody Institute" label="Peabody Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543273" start="862" end="884" title="George Peabody Library" label="George Peabody Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="888" end="897" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="997" end="1021" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="1033" end="1040" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1048" end="1062" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q54136" start="1166" end="1173" title="Peabody, Massachusetts" label="Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="1206" end="1213" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="1697" end="1709" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1733" end="1742" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721247" start="1858" end="1874" title="Henry Fite House" label="Henry Fite House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921438" start="2174" end="2187" title="merchant bank" label="merchant bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="2510" end="2514" title="Bond (finance)" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104364" start="2887" end="2915" title="George Peabody &amp;amp; Co." label="George Peabody &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104364" start="2941" end="2962" title="J.S. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.S. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="3244" end="3261" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3289" end="3298" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q962177" start="3417" end="3428" title="Reform Club" label="Reform Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q790455" start="3745" end="3752" title="Barings Bank" label="Barings"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="4158" end="4163" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="4488" end="4496" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24302" start="4551" end="4562" title="Ron Chernow" label="Ron Chernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="4947" end="4961" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4981" end="4992" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="5040" end="5056" title="The Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="5064" end="5078" title="The Crystal Palace" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="5097" end="5098" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="5115" end="5116" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5332" end="5346" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="5367" end="5382" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="5416" end="5430" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="5525" end="5545" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="5550" end="5554" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q937791" start="5698" end="5719" title="Francis Preston Blair" label="Francis Preston Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="5747" end="5761" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="5800" end="5816" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="5831" end="5856" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="5885" end="5899" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="6214" end="6225" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361802" start="6239" end="6251" title="Elisha Riggs" label="Elisha Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707967" start="6324" end="6333" title="dry goods" label="dry goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6449" end="6457" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6462" end="6474" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="6721" end="6731" title="Lancashire, England" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="6775" end="6784" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529513" start="6930" end="6978" title="Sir William Brown, 1st Baronet, of Richmond Hill" label="Sir William Brown, 1st Baronet, of Richmond Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526369" start="7066" end="7081" title="Alexander Brown (banker)" label="Alexander Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716582" start="7129" end="7151" title="Alex. Brown &amp;amp; Sons" label="Alex. Brown &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="7318" end="7325" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104364" start="7383" end="7409" title="George Peabody and Company" label="George Peabody and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="7501" end="7511" title="securities" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805977" start="7526" end="7544" title="Timeline of United States railway history" label="American railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921438" start="7664" end="7677" title="merchant bank" label="merchant bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236680" start="8102" end="8123" title="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s club" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s club"/>
<link wikidata="Q790455" start="8153" end="8165" title="Barings Bank" label="Barings Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="8351" end="8365" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="8525" end="8548" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118236" start="8638" end="8659" title="Junius Spencer Morgan" label="Junius Spencer Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="8671" end="8683" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104364" start="8718" end="8743" title="Peabody, Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="Peabody, Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="8944" end="8959" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104364" start="9304" end="9325" title="J.S. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.S. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1921438" start="9340" end="9353" title="merchant bank" label="merchant bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947625" start="9354" end="9369" title="Morgan Grenfell" label="Morgan Grenfell"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="9383" end="9396" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q568041" start="9413" end="9427" title="universal bank" label="universal bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="9428" end="9442" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="9447" end="9462" title="investment bank" label="investment bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="9463" end="9477" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="9696" end="9708" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380418" start="9760" end="9773" title="Johns Hopkins" label="Johns Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="9775" end="9790" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="9792" end="9811" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="9816" end="9826" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157230" start="10119" end="10141" title="Peabody Education Fund" label="Peabody Education Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334263" start="10487" end="10500" title="Peabody Trust" label="Peabody Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997701" start="10644" end="10660" title="Henry Darbishire" label="H. A. Darbishire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119627" start="10666" end="10676" title="Jacobethan" label="Jacobethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122150" start="10699" end="10716" title="Commercial Street (London)" label="Commercial Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q123219" start="10718" end="10730" title="Spitalfields" label="Spitalfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715808" start="11010" end="11035" title="Peabody Institute Library (Peabody, Massachusetts)" label="Peabody Institute Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157240" start="11116" end="11152" title="Peabody Institute (Danvers, Massachusetts)" label="Peabody Institute Library of Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156934" start="11176" end="11193" title="Peabody Institute" label="Peabody Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156934" start="11203" end="11252" title="Peabody Institute" label="Peabody Institute of the Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334263" start="11479" end="11500" title="Peabody Donation Fund" label="Peabody Donation Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249027" start="11533" end="11576" title="Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology" label="Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="11578" end="11596" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="11619" end="11652" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="11654" end="11669" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="11713" end="11734" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303624" start="11890" end="11915" title="Georgetown, Massachusetts" label="Georgetown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28123652" start="11928" end="11951" title="Peabody Library (Thetford, Vermont)" label="Thetford Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348131" start="11955" end="11972" title="Thetford, Vermont" label="Thetford, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065452" start="11993" end="12019" title="Peabody Academy of Science" label="Peabody Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="12021" end="12026" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373790" start="12052" end="12072" title="Peabody Essex Museum" label="Peabody Essex Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q63437240" start="12172" end="12189" title="Georgetown Neighborhood Library" label="Georgetown Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157230" start="12218" end="12240" title="Peabody Education Fund" label="Peabody Education Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157226" start="12261" end="12346" title="Peabody College" label="George Peabody College for Teachers, now the Peabody College of Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265771" start="12427" end="12446" title="Peabody High School (Tennessee)" label="Peabody High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670096" start="12448" end="12466" title="Trenton, Tennessee" label="Trenton, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422594" start="12549" end="12577" title="Sam Houston State University" label="Sam Houston State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="12618" end="12643" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="12720" end="12742" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="12837" end="12858" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="12969" end="12990" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="13068" end="13094" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526373" start="13349" end="13363" title="Curtis Lampson" label="Curtis Lampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q820595" start="13387" end="13406" title="Dean of Westminster" label="Dean of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="13433" end="13447" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="13495" end="13512" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q54136" start="13577" end="13605" title="Peabody, Massachusetts" label="South Danvers, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="13636" end="13659" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992696" start="13725" end="13748" title="HMS Monarch (1868)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Monarch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="13785" end="13795" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="13809" end="13824" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q315607" start="13865" end="13879" title="David Farragut" label="David Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659505" start="13904" end="13926" title="Harmony Grove Cemetery" label="Harmony Grove Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="13931" end="13951" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="14073" end="14114" title="Transatlantic telegraph cable" label="trans-Atlantic underwater telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356661" start="14254" end="14267" title="Roderick Nash" label="Roderick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="14473" end="14490" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="15003" end="15018" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="15035" end="15054" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="15451" end="15471" title="Jacksonian Democracy" label="Jacksonian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="16406" end="16429" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="16441" end="16452" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="16487" end="16494" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330750" start="16547" end="16558" title="Elisha Kane" label="Elisha Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="16606" end="16615" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510928" start="16716" end="16726" title="Kane Basin" label="Kane Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000700" start="16732" end="16743" title="Peabody Bay" label="Peabody Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16849" end="16856" title="Freedom of the City#Freedom of the City of London" label="Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="16864" end="16878" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081967" start="16909" end="16921" title="Charles Reed (British politician)" label="Charles Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="17049" end="17069" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="17145" end="17169" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="17204" end="17222" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="17266" end="17283" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="17340" end="17368" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q54136" start="17478" end="17485" title="Peabody, Massachusetts" label="Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157239" start="17514" end="17527" title="Peabody Hotel" label="Peabody Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="17531" end="17549" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157231" start="17588" end="17598" title="Peabody Elementary School (disambiguation)" label="Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157236" start="17603" end="17614" title="Peabody High School (disambiguation)" label="High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335728" start="17683" end="17704" title="William Wetmore Story" label="William Wetmore Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="17724" end="17738" title="Royal Exchange (London)" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="17778" end="17793" title="Edward VII" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543272" start="17903" end="17929" title="George Peabody (sculpture)" label="replica of the same statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156934" start="17967" end="17984" title="Peabody Institute" label="Peabody Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924327" start="18020" end="18032" title="Mount Vernon, Baltimore" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="18049" end="18068" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508557" start="18142" end="18174" title="Hall of Fame for Great Americans" label="Hall of Fame for Great Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="18215" end="18234" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974180" start="18255" end="18278" title="Bronx Community College" label="Bronx Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551341" start="18284" end="18302" title="University Heights, Bronx" label="University Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543275" start="18415" end="18442" title="George Peabody House Museum" label="George Peabody House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="18511" end="18522" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192677" start="18568" end="18580" title="Eaton Square" label="Eaton Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q123024" start="18582" end="18591" title="Belgravia" label="Belgravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="18660" end="18673" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63437240" start="18902" end="18933" title="Georgetown Neighborhood Library" label="Georgetown Neighborhood Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="18937" end="18953" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="19113" end="19123" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182933" start="19154" end="19187" title="Philanthropy in the United States" label="Philanthropy in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488148" wikidata="Q726590" url="?curid=488148" title="Immanuel Nobel">
<text>Immanuel Nobel the Younger ( , ; 24 March 1801 – 3 September 1872) was a Swedish engineer, architect, inventor and industrialist. He was the inventor of the rotary lathe used in plywood manufacturing. He was a member of the Nobel family and the father of Robert Nobel, Ludvig Nobel, Alfred Nobel and  Emil Oskar Nobel. In 1827 he married the children&#x27;s mother, Andriette Ahlsell. He also often experimented with nitroglycerin with his sons, which led to his son Emil Oskar&#x27;s death because of an explosion at his father&#x27;s factory Heleneborg in Stockholm in 1864.

Nobel moved to Russia from Sweden in 1838, to sell his inventions in Saint Petersburg, where he lived for two decades with his family. In Saint Petersburg he was attached to the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Katarina along with other Swedes such as Johan Patrik Ljungström, with whom he may have collaborated. Among his successful creations was an improved version of an underwater exploding mine that personally interested Tsar Nicholas I of Russia. Immanuel founded a war supplies factory, Fonderies et Ateliers Mécaniques Nobel Fils, which turned out to be a very profitable business. However, the death of Nicholas I in 1855 and the end of the Crimean War in 1856 brought about a shift in Russian policies and the new Tsar Alexander II ordered a severe cut in the military budget that eventually placed Immanuel&#x27;s company in serious economic difficulties. In 1859, the technical management of Nobel Fils was passed to Immanuel&#x27;s son Ludvig and the former returned to Sweden. In 1862, Immanuel&#x27;s firm was finally sold by his creditors.

==References==
==Sources==
*Schück, Henrik, Ragnar Sohlman, Anders Österling, Carl Gustaf Bernhard, the Nobel Foundation, and Wilhelm Odelberg, eds. Nobel: The Man and His Prizes. 1950. 3rd ed. Coordinating Ed., Wilhelm Odelberg. New York: American Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc., 1972, p. 14. (10). (13). (Originally published in Swedish as Nobelprisen 50 år: forskare, diktare, fredskämpar.)
*Yergin, Daniel (2003): The Prize: the Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power, Free Press, p. 58. 
*Åsbrink, Brita (2001): Ludvig Nobel: &quot;Petroleum har en lysande framtid!&quot; Wahlström &amp; Widstrand, p. 19. 

==External links==
*Immanuel Nobel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726590" start="0" end="26" title="Immanuel Nobel" label="Immanuel Nobel the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="73" end="80" title="Swedish people" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="157" end="169" title="Lathe (tool)" label="rotary lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="178" end="185" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366833" start="224" end="236" title="Nobel family" label="Nobel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398286" start="255" end="267" title="Robert Nobel" label="Robert Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q706189" start="269" end="281" title="Ludvig Nobel" label="Ludvig Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="283" end="295" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="300" end="317" title=" Emil Oskar Nobel" label=" Emil Oskar Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813118" start="366" end="383" title="Andriette Nobel" label="Andriette Ahlsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="417" end="430" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10519458" start="544" end="554" title="Heleneborg" label="Heleneborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="558" end="567" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="647" end="663" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651583" start="756" end="801" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Katarina" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Katarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q59850693" start="834" end="857" title="Johan Patrik Ljungström" label="Johan Patrik Ljungström"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="977" end="981" title="naval mine" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1009" end="1024" title="Tsar Nicholas I" label="Tsar Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="1195" end="1205" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="1233" end="1244" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1307" end="1324" title="Tsar Alexander II" label="Tsar Alexander II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488154" wikidata="Q905140" url="?curid=488154" title="Secondary emission">
<text>In particle physics, secondary emission is a phenomenon where primary incident particles of sufficient energy, when hitting a surface or passing through some material, induce the emission of secondary particles. The term often refers to the emission of electrons when charged particles like electrons or ions in a vacuum tube strike a metal surface; these are called secondary electrons. In this case, the number of secondary electrons emitted per incident particle is called secondary emission yield. If the secondary particles are ions, the effect is termed &quot;secondary ion emission&quot;. Secondary electron emission is used in photomultiplier tubes and image intensifier tubes to amplify the small number of photoelectrons produced by photoemission, making the tube more sensitive. It also occurs as an undesirable side effect in electronic vacuum tubes when electrons from the cathode strike the anode, and can cause parasitic oscillation.

== Applications ==

=== Secondary emissive materials ===

Commonly used secondary emissive materials include
* alkali antimonide
* Beryllium oxide (BeO)
* Magnesium oxide (MgO)
* Gallium phosphide (GaP)
* Gallium arsenide phosphide (GaAsP)
* Lead oxide (PbO)

=== Photo multipliers and similar devices ===

In a photomultiplier tube, one or more electrons are emitted from a photocathode and accelerated towards a polished metal electrode (called a dynode). 
They hit the electrode surface with sufficient energy to release a number of electrons through secondary emission. These new electrons are then accelerated towards another dynode, and the process is repeated several times, resulting in an overall gain (&#x27;electron multiplication&#x27;) in the order of typically one million and thus generating an electronically detectable current pulse at the last dynodes.

Similar electron multipliers can be used for detection of fast particles like electrons or &quot;ions&quot;.

== Historic applications ==

=== Special amplifying tubes ===

In the 1930s special amplifying tubes were developed which deliberately &quot;folded&quot; the electron beam, by having it strike a dynode to be reflected into the anode. This had the effect of increasing the plate-grid distance for a given tube size, increasing the transconductance of the tube and reducing its noise figure. A typical such &quot;orbital beam hexode&quot; was the RCA 1630, introduced in 1939. Because the heavy electron current in such tubes damaged the dynode surface rapidly, their lifetime tended to be very short compared to conventional tubes.

=== Early computer memory tubes ===

The first random access computer memory used a type of cathode-ray tube called the Williams tube that used secondary emission to store bits on the tube face. Another random access computer memory tube based on secondary emission was the Selectron tube. Both were made obsolete by the invention of magnetic-core memory.

=== Undesirable effects - the tetrode ===
Secondary emission can be undesirable such as in the tetrode thermionic valve (tube). In this instance the positively charged screen grid can accelerate the electron stream sufficiently to cause secondary emission at the anode (plate). This can give rise to excessive screen grid current. It is also partly responsible for this type of valve (tube), particularly early types with anodes not treated to reduce secondary emission, exhibiting a &#x27;negative resistance&#x27; characteristic, which could cause the tube to become unstable. This side effect could be put to use by using some older valves (e.g., type 77 pentode) as dynatron oscillators. This effect was prevented by adding a third grid to the tetrode, called the suppressor grid, to repel the electrons back toward the plate. This tube was called the pentode.

== See also ==

* Electron-cloud effect
* Malter effect
* Sputtering

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="3" end="19" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="21" end="39" title="Secondary emission" label="secondary emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="79" end="88" title="particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="103" end="109" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="253" end="261" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q587553" start="268" end="284" title="charged particle" label="charged particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="304" end="307" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="314" end="325" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582911" start="367" end="386" title="secondary electrons" label="secondary electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="476" end="500" title="Secondary emission" label="secondary emission yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q339053" start="635" end="655" title="photomultiplier tube" label="photomultiplier tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q861692" start="661" end="678" title="image intensifier" label="image intensifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="716" end="729" title="photoelectron" label="photoelectron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="849" end="860" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="886" end="893" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="905" end="910" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135952" start="926" end="947" title="parasitic oscillation" label="parasitic oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q422714" start="1081" end="1102" title="Beryllium oxide" label="Beryllium oxide (BeO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="1105" end="1126" title="Magnesium oxide" label="Magnesium oxide (MgO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q421416" start="1129" end="1152" title="Gallium phosphide" label="Gallium phosphide (GaP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381504" start="1155" end="1189" title="Gallium arsenide phosphide" label="Gallium arsenide phosphide (GaAsP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q407879" start="1192" end="1208" title="Lead(II) oxide" label="Lead oxide (PbO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="1262" end="1277" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891923" start="1325" end="1337" title="photocathode" label="photocathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269210" start="1399" end="1405" title="dynode" label="dynode"/>
<link wikidata="Q902750" start="1830" end="1849" title="electron multiplier" label="electron multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="2611" end="2624" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="2656" end="2672" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="2684" end="2697" title="Williams tube" label="Williams tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q583664" start="2838" end="2852" title="Selectron tube" label="Selectron tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="2898" end="2918" title="magnetic-core memory" label="magnetic-core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q176212" start="3016" end="3023" title="tetrode" label="tetrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="3024" end="3040" title="thermionic valve" label="thermionic valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q176212" start="3089" end="3100" title="screen grid" label="screen grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="3184" end="3189" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202198" start="3191" end="3196" title="Plate electrode" label="plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q925339" start="3411" end="3430" title="negative resistance" label="negative resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q176207" start="3591" end="3599" title="Dynatron oscillator" label="dynatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="3600" end="3610" title="oscillator" label="oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q176161" start="3777" end="3784" title="pentode" label="pentode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358134" start="3805" end="3826" title="Electron-cloud effect" label="Electron-cloud effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q898846" start="3829" end="3842" title="Malter effect" label="Malter effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="3845" end="3855" title="Sputtering" label="Sputtering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488155" wikidata="Q6791326" url="?curid=488155" title="Matthew Tilghman">
<text>Matthew Tilghman (February 17, 1718 – May 4, 1790) was an American planter, and Revolutionary leader from Maryland. He served as a delegate to the Continental Congress from 1774 to 1776, where he signed the 1774 Continental Association.

==Early life==

Tilghman was born on the family plantation, &quot;The Hermitage&quot;, near Centreville in Queen Anne&#x27;s County, Maryland. Tilghman was the grandson of one of the early settlers in Maryland. His grandfather, Richard Tilghman (1626–1675) had been a surgeon in the British navy and established the family plantation at the Hermitage. His father, also named Richard Tilghman (1672–1738), was a planter.

He was educated through private tutoring before moving to Talbot County on the Eastern Shore (of Chesapeake Bay). Tilghman married Anne Lloyd (1723–1794) on April 6, 1741. The couple took up residence on a large plantation in Claiborne, Maryland, known as Rich Neck Manor.

Tilghman&#x27;s first public service was as a justice of the peace for Talbot County. In 1751 he was elected to the Maryland House of Delegates. He served there through the remainder of its service to the colony, although in 1760 and 1761 he represented Queen Anne&#x27;s County. (Maryland, like several other colonies, permitted a representative to be elected by any district in which he owned property.) He was elected the speaker of the House from 1773 to its end in 1775.

==Revolutionary period==

In the early days of the American Revolution, Tilghman was in the forefront of the political revolution in Maryland. He was an early member of the colony&#x27;s committee of correspondence. For three years (1774–1776) he effectively headed the revolution in Maryland. He was the chairman of the Committee of Safety, president of the revolutionary assembly known as the Annapolis Convention, and the head of the Maryland delegation to the Continental Congress.

While in the Congress, Tilghman debated and supported the Declaration of Independence. He voted for its final approval but was replaced in the Congress by Charles Carroll of Carrollton before a copy was signed. Tilghman had to return home to preside over a longer session of the Annapolis Convention that established a new government for Maryland. Besides being president of the Convention, he headed the committee that drafted the &quot;Charter of Rights and Plan of Government&quot; that became Maryland&#x27;s constitution. When the state government went into effect later in 1776, Tilghman was elected to the state Senate. He served there until 1783, and from 1780 to 1783 he was president of the Senate.

==Later life and family==

In 1771 Tilghman acquired property near his Rich Neck Manor on Sherwood&#x27;s Neck. In 1783 he retired from public life and attended to his properties. Tilghman died at his home &quot;Rich Neck Manor&quot; on May 4, 1790, and was buried in a family cemetery there.

Matthew and his wife Anna Lloyd Tilghman (1723–1794) had five children: Margaret (1742–1817), Matthew Ward (1743–1753), Richard (1747–1806), Lloyd (1749–1811), and Anna Maria (1755–1843). Margaret married Charles Carroll, Barrister. Richard served as a major in militia of Queen Anne&#x27;s County during the Revolutionary War. Anna Maria married her cousin Tench Tilghman on June 9, 1783.

Tilghman&#x27;s son Lloyd built his own home on Sherwood&#x27;s Neck, known as Sherwood Manor. Sherwood Manor was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1977. Both Rich Neck Manor and Sherwood Manor are private property.

==See also==
* Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence
* Talbot Resolves

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6791326" start="0" end="16" title="Matthew Tilghman" label="Matthew Tilghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="67" end="74" title="Planter class" label="planter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="106" end="114" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="147" end="167" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="212" end="235" title="Continental Association" label="Continental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q754606" start="330" end="341" title="Centreville, Maryland" label="Centreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q511150" start="345" end="369" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q511084" start="717" end="730" title="Talbot County, Maryland" label="Talbot County"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="756" end="770" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125053" start="885" end="904" title="Claiborne, Maryland" label="Claiborne, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495548" start="915" end="930" title="Sherwood Manor (St. Michaels, Maryland)" label="Rich Neck Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="979" end="999" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q165752" start="1049" end="1076" title="Maryland House of Delegates" label="Maryland House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="1358" end="1378" title="Speaker (politics)" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1461" end="1480" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986806" start="1597" end="1624" title="Committees of correspondence" label="committee of correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985399" start="1731" end="1750" title="Committee of safety (American Revolution)" label="Committee of Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996239" start="1805" end="1825" title="Annapolis Convention (1774–1776)" label="Annapolis Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="1955" end="1982" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466009" start="2052" end="2081" title="Charles Carroll of Carrollton" label="Charles Carroll of Carrollton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164205" start="2394" end="2422" title="Constitution of Maryland" label="Maryland&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076118" start="3106" end="3132" title="Charles Carroll (barrister)" label="Charles Carroll, Barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3210" end="3227" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699551" start="3259" end="3273" title="Tench Tilghman" label="Tench Tilghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495548" start="3371" end="3385" title="Sherwood Manor (St. Michaels, Maryland)" label="Sherwood Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3419" end="3455" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895034" start="3543" end="3604" title="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence" label="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q130529973" start="3607" end="3622" title="Talbot Resolves" label="Talbot Resolves"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488157" wikidata="Q2927475" url="?curid=488157" title="Buckley's">
<text>W. K. Buckley Limited is a Canadian company which produces the Buckley&#x27;s brand of cold medicines. It is known for its marketing that takes deprecating pride in the syrup&#x27;s unpleasant taste. It also offers children&#x27;s medicine, which is sold under the brand name Jack &amp; Jill. The company is located in Mississauga, Ontario. It is a subsidiary of Novartis.

The company was founded in 1919 by William Knapp Buckley (18901978), In 1978, after W. K. Buckley&#x27;s death, his adopted son Frank Buckley became the president of the company. In the mid-1980s, Frank became spokesperson and the brand began using the slogan &quot;It tastes awful. And it works.&quot;

Novartis purchased W. K. Buckley Ltd. in 2002.

== Buckley&#x27;s Mixture ==
Buckley&#x27;s Original Mixture is a cough syrup invented in 1919 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and still produced . Noted for the strongly unpleasant taste referenced by the brand&#x27;s slogan, its ingredients include ammonium carbonate, potassium bicarbonate, camphor, menthol, Canada balsam (&quot;Abies balsamea&quot;), sodium cyclamate, pine needle oil, and a tincture of capsicum. It is promoted for relief of coughs and congestion.

In March 2017, Health Canada issued a recall of Buckley&#x27;s products due to a choking hazard from a faulty plastic seal.

The company stopped selling Buckley&#x27;s DM, which contained dextromethorphan, in Canada in 2016. However, other mixtures containing this ingredient, such as Buckley&#x27;s Dry Cough, are still sold.

== See also ==
* Antitussive
* Cough

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2927475" start="0" end="21" title="Buckley&amp;#x27;s" label="W. K. Buckley Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="78" end="83" title="brand name" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q584209" start="87" end="100" title="cold medicine" label="cold medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="319" end="330" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="332" end="339" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="363" end="371" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="409" end="430" title="William Knapp Buckley" label="William Knapp Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16088797" start="502" end="515" title="Francis Buckley (businessman)" label="Frank Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255921" start="527" end="536" title="president (corporate title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q17221" start="584" end="596" title="spokesperson" label="spokesperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30515" start="627" end="633" title="slogan" label="slogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="678" end="686" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q584209" start="792" end="803" title="cough syrup" label="cough syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="824" end="831" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="833" end="840" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q204873" start="974" end="992" title="ammonium carbonate" label="ammonium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410529" start="994" end="1015" title="potassium bicarbonate" label="potassium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="1017" end="1024" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q407418" start="1026" end="1033" title="menthol" label="menthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q767912" start="1035" end="1048" title="Canada balsam" label="Canada balsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428023" start="1056" end="1070" title="Balsam Fir" label="Abies balsamea"/>
<link wikidata="Q990187" start="1097" end="1112" title="pine oil" label="pine needle oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q969804" start="1120" end="1128" title="tincture" label="tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="1132" end="1140" title="capsicum" label="capsicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057591" start="1210" end="1223" title="Health Canada" label="Health Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q407781" start="1383" end="1399" title="dextromethorphan" label="dextromethorphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q584209" start="1540" end="1551" title="Antitussive" label="Antitussive"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="1554" end="1559" title="Cough" label="Cough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488159" wikidata="Q1891923" url="?curid=488159" title="Photocathode">
<text>A photocathode is a surface engineered to convert light (photons) into electrons using the photoelectric effect. Photocathodes are important in accelerator physics where they are utilised in a photoinjector to generate high brightness electron beams. Electron beams generated with photocathodes are commonly used for free electron lasers and for ultrafast electron diffraction. Photocathodes are also commonly used as the negatively charged electrode in a light detection device such as a photomultiplier, phototube and image intensifier.

== Important Properties ==

=== Quantum Efficiency (QE) ===
Quantum efficiency is a unitless number that measures the sensitivity of the photocathode to light. It is the ratio of the number of electrons emitted to the number of incident photons. This property depends on the wavelength of light being used to illuminate the photocathode. For many applications, QE is the most important property as the photocathodes are used solely for converting photons into an electrical signal.
Quantum efficiency may be calculated from photocurrent (formula_1), laser power (formula_2), and either the photon energy (formula_3) or laser wavelength (formula_4) using the following equation.

formula_5

=== Mean Transverse Energy (MTE) and Thermal Emittance ===
For some applications, the initial momentum distribution of emitted electrons is important and the mean transverse energy (MTE) and thermal emittance are popular metrics for this. The MTE is the variance of the transverse momentum in a direction along the photocathode&#x27;s surface and is most commonly reported in units of milli-electron volts.

formula_6

In high brightness photoinjectors, the MTE helps to determine the initial emittance of the beam which is the area in phase space occupied by the electrons. The emittance (formula_7) can be calculated from MTE and the laser spot size on the photocathode (formula_8) using the following equation.

formula_9

where formula_10 is the rest mass of an electron. In commonly used units, this is as follows.

formula_11

Because of the scaling of transverse emittance with MTE, it is sometimes useful to write the equation in terms of a new quantity called the thermal emittance. The thermal emittance is derived from MTE using the following equation.

formula_12

It is most often expressed in the ratio um/mm to express the growth of emittance in units of um as the laser spot grows (measured in units of mm).

An equivalent definition of MTE is the temperature of electrons emitted in vacuum. The MTE of electrons emitted from commonly used photocathodes, such as polycrystalline metals, is limited by the excess energy (the difference between the energy of the incident photons and the photocathode&#x27;s work function) provided to the electrons. To limit MTE, photocathodes are often operated near the photoemission threshold, where the excess energy tends to zero. In this limit, the majority of photoemission comes from the tail of the Fermi distribution. Therefore, MTE is thermally limited to formula_13, where formula_14 is the Boltzmann constant and formula_15 is the temperature of electrons in the solid. 

Due to conservation of transverse momentum and energy in the photoemission process, the MTE of a clean, atomically-ordered, single crystalline photocathode is determined by the material&#x27;s band structure. An ideal band structure for low MTEs is one that does not allow photoemission from large transverse momentum states. 

Outside of accelerator physics, MTE and thermal emittance play a role in the resolution of proximity-focused imaging devices that use photocathodes. This is important for applications such as image intensifiers, wavelength converters, and the now obsolete image tubes.

=== Lifetime ===
Many photocathodes require excellent vacuum conditions to function and will become &quot;poisoned&quot; when exposed to contaminates. Additionally, using the photocathodes in high current applications will slowly damage the compounds as they are exposed to ion back-bombardment. These effects are quantified by the lifetime of the photocathode. Cathode death is modeled as a decaying exponential as a function of either time or emitted charge. Lifetime is then the time constant of the exponential.

==Uses==
For many years the photocathode was the only practical method for converting light to an electron current. As such it tends to function as a form of &#x27;electric film&#x27; and shared many characteristics of photography. It was therefore the key element in opto-electronic devices, such as TV camera tubes like the orthicon and vidicon, and in image tubes such as intensifiers, converters, and dissectors. Simple phototubes were used for motion detectors and counters.

Phototubes have been used for years in movie projectors to read the sound tracks on the edge of movie film.

The more recent development of solid state optical devices such as photodiodes has reduced the use of photocathodes to cases where they still remain superior to semiconductor devices.

==Construction==
Photocathodes operate in a vacuum, so their design parallels vacuum tube technology. Since
most cathodes are sensitive to air the construction of photocathodes typically occurs after the enclosure has been evacuated. In operation the photocathode requires an electric field with a nearby positive anode to assure electron emission. Molecular beam epitaxy is broadly applied in today&#x27;s manufacturing of photocathode. By using a substrate with matched lattice parameters, crystalline photocathodes can be made and electron beams can come out from the same position in lattice&#x27;s Brillouin zone to get high brightness electron beams.

Photocathodes divide into two broad groups; transmission and reflective. A transmission type is typically a coating upon a glass window in which the light strikes one surface and electrons exit from the opposite surface. A reflective type is typically formed on an opaque metal electrode base, where the light enters and the electrons exit from the same side. A variation is the double reflection type, where the metal base is mirror-like, causing light that passed through the photocathode without causing emission to be bounced back for a second try. This mimics the retina on many mammals.

The effectiveness of a photocathode is commonly expressed as quantum efficiency, that being the ratio of emitted electrons vs. impinging quanta (of light). The efficiency varies with construction as well, as it can be improved with a stronger electric field.

==Characterization== 
The surface of photocathodes can be characterized by various surface sensitive techniques like scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.

==Coatings==
Although a plain metallic cathode will exhibit photoelectric properties, the specialized coating greatly increases the effect. A photocathode usually consists of alkali metals with very low work functions.

The coating releases electrons much more readily than the underlying metal, allowing it to detect the low-energy photons in infrared radiation. The lens transmits the radiation from the object being viewed to a layer of coated glass. The photons strike the metal surface and transfer electrons to its rear side. The freed electrons are then collected to produce the final image.

==Photocathode materials==
*Ag-O-Cs, also called S-1. This was the first compound photocathode material, developed in 1929. Sensitivity from 300 nm to 1200 nm. Since Ag-O-Cs has a higher dark current than more modern materials, photomultiplier tubes with this photocathode material are nowadays used only in the infrared region with cooling. 
*Sb-Cs (antimony-caesium) has a spectral response from UV to visible and is mainly used in reflection-mode photocathodes. 
*Bialkali (antimony-rubidium-caesium Sb-Rb-Cs, antimony-potassium-caesium Sb-K-Cs). Spectral response range similar to the Sb-Cs photocathode, but with higher sensitivity and lower dark current than Sb-Cs. They have sensitivity well matched to the most common scintillator materials and so are frequently used for ionizing radiation measurement in scintillation counters. 
*High temperature bialkali or low noise bialkali (sodium-potassium-antimony, Na-K-Sb). This material is often used in oil well logging since it can withstand temperatures up to 175 °C. At room temperatures, this photocathode operates with very low dark current, making it ideal for use in photon counting applications. 
*Multialkali (sodium-potassium-antimony-caesium, Na-K-Sb-Cs), also called S-20. The multialkali photocathode has a wide spectral response from the ultraviolet to near infrared region. It is widely used for broad-band spectrophotometers and photon counting applications. The long wavelength response can be extended to 930 nm by a special photocathode activation processing. With the broadened response, this is sometimes referred to as S-25.
*GaAs (gallium(II) arsenide). This photocathode material covers a wider spectral response range than multialkali, from ultraviolet to 930 nm. GaAs photocathodes are also used in accelerator facilities where polarized electrons are required. One of the important property of GaAs photocathode is, it can achieve Negative Electron Affinity due to Cs deposition on the surface. However GaAs is very delicate and loses Quantum Efficiency(QE) due to couple of damage mechanism. Ion Back Bombardment is one of the main cause of GaAs cathode QE decay.
*InGaAs (indium gallium arsenide). Extended sensitivity in the infrared range compared to GaAs. Moreover, in the range between 900 nm and 1000 nm, InGaAs has a much better signal-to-noise ratio than Ag-O-Cs. With special manufacturing techniques this photocathode can operate up to 1700 nm. 
*Cs-Te, Cs-I (caesium-telluride, caesium iodide). These materials are sensitive to vacuum UV and UV rays but not to visible light and are therefore referred to as solar blind. Cs-Te is insensitive to wavelengths longer than 320 nm, and Cs-I to those longer than 200 nm.

==References==

==External links==
*Photomultiplier Tubes Basics and Applications from Hamamatsu Photonics
*RCA Technical Manual PT-60 Basics and Applications and a list of EIA &quot;S&quot; spectral-response designations on pages 21 and 88</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1891923" start="2" end="14" title="Photocathode" label="photocathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="57" end="64" title="Photon" label="photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="91" end="111" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q492496" start="144" end="163" title="accelerator physics" label="accelerator physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999497" start="193" end="206" title="photoinjector" label="photoinjector"/>
<link wikidata="Q52343" start="224" end="234" title="Beam emittance" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q586386" start="317" end="337" title="Free-electron laser" label="free electron lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356231" start="346" end="376" title="ultrafast electron diffraction" label="ultrafast electron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="441" end="450" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="489" end="504" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787027" start="506" end="515" title="phototube" label="phototube"/>
<link wikidata="Q861692" start="520" end="537" title="image intensifier" label="image intensifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q900625" start="600" end="618" title="Quantum efficiency" label="Quantum efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q113288866" start="1388" end="1410" title="mean transverse energy" label="mean transverse energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52343" start="1723" end="1732" title="Beam emittance" label="emittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670447" start="4579" end="4594" title="Video camera tube" label="TV camera tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="4653" end="4665" title="Night vision device" label="intensifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247728" start="4683" end="4693" title="Image dissector" label="dissectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787027" start="4702" end="4711" title="phototube" label="phototube"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682774" start="4827" end="4839" title="Sound-on-film" label="sound tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q175943" start="4935" end="4945" title="photodiode" label="photodiode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="5131" end="5142" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="5329" end="5343" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q898542" start="5402" end="5424" title="Molecular beam epitaxy" label="Molecular beam epitaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="5656" end="5670" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q52343" start="5683" end="5693" title="Beam emittance" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045562" start="6280" end="6286" title="Tapetum lucidum" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="6682" end="6717" title="scanning tunneling microscope" label="scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q899559" start="6722" end="6754" title="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy" label="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="6932" end="6944" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q783800" start="6960" end="6973" title="work function" label="work function"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="7585" end="7600" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="7708" end="7716" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="7717" end="7724" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="7755" end="7757" title="UV" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="7761" end="7768" title="optical spectrum" label="visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="7834" end="7842" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="7843" end="7851" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="7852" end="7859" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="7870" end="7878" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="7879" end="7888" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="7889" end="7896" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265973" start="8004" end="8016" title="dark current (physics)" label="dark current"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="8083" end="8095" title="scintillator" label="scintillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="8137" end="8155" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q718145" start="8171" end="8192" title="scintillation counter" label="scintillation counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="8246" end="8252" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="8253" end="8262" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="8263" end="8271" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383566" start="8314" end="8330" title="well logging" label="oil well logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126172" start="8485" end="8500" title="photon counting" label="photon counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="8530" end="8536" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="8537" end="8546" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="8547" end="8555" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="8556" end="8563" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q332084" start="8733" end="8750" title="spectrophotometer" label="spectrophotometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126172" start="8756" end="8771" title="photon counting" label="photon counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="8965" end="8985" title="gallium(II) arsenide" label="gallium(II) arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="9136" end="9147" title="Particle accelerator" label="accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618059" start="9512" end="9535" title="indium gallium arsenide" label="indium gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="9675" end="9696" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="9809" end="9816" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q417116" start="9817" end="9826" title="telluride (chemistry)" label="telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q50703" start="9828" end="9842" title="caesium iodide" label="caesium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="9878" end="9887" title="vacuum UV" label="vacuum UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644023" start="10153" end="10172" title="Hamamatsu Photonics" label="Hamamatsu Photonics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488160" wikidata="Q16088797" url="?curid=488160" title="Francis Buckley (businessman)">
<text>Francis &quot;Frank&quot; C. Buckley, (April 8, 1921 – February 1, 2016) was president and spokesperson for the Buckley&#x27;s company, founded by his adoptive father W.K. Buckley, in 1920. In 2005, the company was sold to Novartis.

In 2003, he was made a Member of the Order of Canada for being &quot;an inspiring example of how one can positively influence the lives of many&quot;.

==Life==

Buckley was born in Toronto, Ontario, Canada in 1921 and adopted by William Buckley, who had founded Buckley&#x27;s Company in 1920; one year prior to Francis&#x27; adoption. He attended St. Michael&#x27;s College School and graduated from the University of Toronto in 1942 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in commerce and finance. Shortly after graduating Buckley enlisted in the Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm as a carrier-based fighter pilot and served in World War II during his time with the Royal Navy Fleet. He started his career in the family business as a traveling door to door salesman for three years.

After Buckley had served his family business as a salesman, he took a position in the Management department. Frank Buckley was more interested in broadcast media, finance, and administration type of business while William was first and foremost a salesman; this dynamic element between the father-son combo proved to be an extremely and immensely effective tandem. William K. Buckley died in 1978. Frank Buckley assumed his adoptive father&#x27;s position in the family business as the president.

In the mid-1980s Buckley became the spokesman for Buckley&#x27;s. He first came on the scene as the spokesman when the company implemented the satirically honest ad campaign that owned up to Buckley&#x27;s &quot;awful taste&quot;. This campaign was featured on many television and radio commercials. Because of Buckley&#x27;s time and success as the company&#x27;s spokesman on the many featured commercials, he became a recognizable public figure.

Since Buckley was a small boy, he always sustained an interest in the pharmaceutical industry. Buckley served as the Proprietary Association of Canada&#x27;s president—which as since been changed to the Non-Prescription Drug Manufacturers Association of Canada—and remained a member until his death. Buckley was always very active throughout his life and involved with many community service organizations. He died on February 1, 2016, in Toronto at the age of 94.

==References==
==External links==
* Buckley&#x27;s Website: About Frank Buckley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16088797" start="0" end="7" title="Francis Buckley (businessman)" label="Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16088797" start="14" end="19" title="Francis Buckley (businessman)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16088797" start="26" end="36" title="Francis Buckley (businessman)" label="C. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927475" start="112" end="126" title="Buckley&amp;#x27;s" label="Buckley&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927475" start="167" end="179" title="W.K. Buckley" label="W.K. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="223" end="231" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="271" end="286" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590687" start="583" end="616" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College School" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="640" end="661" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="846" end="858" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488162" wikidata="Q1269210" url="?curid=488162" title="Dynode">
<text>A dynode is an electrode in a vacuum tube that serves as an electron multiplier through secondary emission. The first tube to incorporate a dynode was the dynatron, an ancestor of the magnetron, which used a single dynode. Photomultiplier and video camera tubes generally include a series of dynodes, each at a more positive electrical potential than its predecessor. Secondary emission occurs at the surface of each dynode. Such an arrangement is able to amplify the tiny current emitted by the photocathode, typically by a factor of one million.

==Operation==
The electrons emitted from the cathode are accelerated toward the first dynode, which is maintained 90 to 100 V positive concerning the cathode. Each accelerated photoelectron that strikes the dynode surface produces several electrons. These electrons are then accelerated toward the second dynode, held 90 to 100 V more positive than the first dynode. Each electron that strikes the surface of the second dynode produces several more electrons, which are then accelerated toward the third dynode, and so on. By the time this process has been repeated at each of the dynodes, 105 to 107 electrons have been produced for each incident photon, dependent on the number of dynodes. For conventional dynode materials, such as BeO and MgO, a multiplication factor of 10 can normally be achieved by each dynode stage.

==Naming==
The dynode takes its name from the dynatron. Albert Hull did not use the term dynode in his 1918 paper on the dynatron, but used the term extensively in his 1922 paper. In the latter paper, he defined a dynode as a &quot;plate that emits impact electrons ... when it is part of a dynatron.&quot;

==See also==
* Microchannel plate detector
* Photoelectric effect
* Particle detector
* Photodetector

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1269210" start="2" end="8" title="Dynode" label="dynode"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="15" end="24" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="30" end="41" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q902750" start="60" end="79" title="electron multiplier" label="electron multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="88" end="106" title="secondary emission" label="secondary emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q176207" start="155" end="163" title="Dynatron oscillator" label="dynatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="184" end="193" title="magnetron" label="magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="223" end="238" title="Photomultiplier" label="Photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670447" start="243" end="260" title="video camera tube" label="video camera tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="325" end="345" title="electrical potential" label="electrical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="368" end="386" title="Secondary emission" label="Secondary emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891923" start="496" end="508" title="photocathode" label="photocathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="567" end="575" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="594" end="601" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="725" end="738" title="photoelectron" label="photoelectron"/>
<link wikidata="Q176207" start="1421" end="1429" title="Dynatron oscillator" label="dynatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q719033" start="1431" end="1442" title="Albert Hull" label="Albert Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q901863" start="1698" end="1725" title="Microchannel plate detector" label="Microchannel plate detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="1728" end="1748" title="Photoelectric effect" label="Photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q736634" start="1751" end="1768" title="Particle detector" label="Particle detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="1771" end="1784" title="Photodetector" label="Photodetector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488163" wikidata="Q822510" url="?curid=488163" title="Bernard Kettlewell">
<text>Henry Bernard Davis Kettlewell (24 February 1907 – 11 May 1979) was a British geneticist, lepidopterist and medical doctor, who performed research on the influence of industrial melanism on peppered moth (&quot;Biston betularia&quot;) coloration, showing why moths are darker in polluted areas. This experiment is cited as a classic demonstration of natural selection in action. After live video record of the experiment with Niko Tinbergen, Sewall Wright called the study as &quot;the clearest case in which a conspicuous evolutionary process has actually been observed.&quot;

==Early life==
Kettlewell was born in Howden, Yorkshire, and educated at Charterhouse School. During 1926 he studied medicine and zoology at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. During 1929 he began clinical training at St Bartholomew&#x27;s Hospital, London, then during 1935 joined a general medical practice in Cranleigh, Surrey. He also worked as an anaesthetist at St. Luke&#x27;s Hospital, Guildford. During World War II, from 1939 to 1945, he worked for the Emergency Medical Service at Woking War Hospital.

He emigrated to South Africa during 1949, and from then until 1954 was a researcher at the International Locust Control Centre at Cape Town University, investigating methods of locust control and going on expeditions to the Kalahari Desert, the Knysna Forest, the Belgian Congo, and Mozambique.

During 1952 he was appointed to a Nuffield Research Fellowship in the Department of Genetics of the Department of Zoology at Oxford University. Until 1954 he divided his time between South Africa and Oxford, then he gained the position of Senior Research Officer of the Department of Genetics and spent the rest of his career in Oxford as a genetics researcher. He was assigned to investigate peppered moth evolution under the supervision of E. B. Ford.

==Peppered moth experiments==
His grant was to study industrial melanism in general and in particular the peppered moth &quot;Biston betularia&quot; which had been studied by William Bateson during the 1890s. Kettlewell&#x27;s research from three surveys between 1952 and 1972 seemed to show a static pattern with a high frequency of the dark-coloured &quot;carbonaria&quot; phenotype in industrial regions, and the light coloured &quot;typica&quot; moths the most common in more rural areas. In the first of Kettlewell&#x27;s experiments moths were released into an aviary to observe how insectivorous birds reacted. He showed that the birds ate the moths, and found that if the camouflage of the moths made them difficult for him to see against a matching background, the birds too had difficulty in finding the moths. Most famously he then performed experiments involving releasing and then recapturing marked moths in polluted woodlands in Birmingham, and in unpolluted rural woods at Deanend Wood, Dorset, England. He demonstrated experimentally the efficiency of natural selection as an evolutionary force: light-coloured moths are more conspicuous than dark-coloured ones in industrial areas, where the vegetation is darkened by pollution, and are therefore easier prey for birds, but are less conspicuous in unpolluted rural areas, where the vegetation is lighter in colour, and therefore survive predation better. His experiment resulted in better understanding of industrial melanism and its effects on the evolution of species, and can be seen as an important example of urban evolution.

===Criticism===
J. B. S. Haldane was of the opinion that Kettlewell had attempted to capitalise on Haldane&#x27;s own observations, made as early as 1924, of the statistical probability of rate of change from light to melanic forms of the peppered moth. In 1961, Haldane and his graduate student (and later wife) Helen Spurway told Canadian lepidopterist Gary Botting that they questioned Kettlewell&#x27;s data since it too &quot;nicely&quot; approximated Haldane&#x27;s 1924 statistical calculations. Botting and Haldane at that time shared the opinion that some genetic mechanism other than bird predation was at work. However see also for a re-appraisal of Haldane&#x27;s views.

The major argument was made by Theodore David Sargent, professor of zoology at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. He reported that during 1965–1969 he attempted to perform similar experiment, and found that birds did not have preference on moth on either black or white tree trunks. He suspected that Kettlewell trained the birds to pick moths on tree trunk, where they were not normally present.

===&quot;Of Moths and Men&quot;===
Further criticism of Kettlewell&#x27;s peppered moth research came from Judith Hooper in her 2002 book &quot;Of Moths and Men&quot;, in which she claims that Kettlewell&#x27;s field notes could never be found and his experiments were fraudulent, reiterating Sargent&#x27;s allegations that the experimental photographs were faked by planting dead moths on a log. She accuses Ford of being a Darwinian zealot who exploited Kettlewell&#x27;s servitude and criticises scientists in general for credulous and biased acceptance of evolution.

A review in &quot;EMBO Reports&quot; describes the book as &quot;Hooper&#x27;s exhilarating account of the public and private lives of an opinionated and powerful group of evolutionists, who contributed to this shameful episode in the study of evolution.&quot; The book has also been widely quoted by creationists. However, Hooper&#x27;s various allegations have been refuted by the scientific community: David W Rudge summarised that &quot;none of Hooper&#x27;s arguments is found to withstand careful scrutiny&quot; and that all &quot;these charges are baseless and stem from a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of science as a process.&quot;

===Further research vindicating Kettlewell&#x27;s work===
Kettlewell&#x27;s experiments have been vindicated by elaborate research, and the genetic details of the evolutionary process established.

Michael Majerus carried out extensive experiments, examining moths in the wild, to re-examine the findings of Kettlewell&#x27;s experiments in the light of subsequent questions. His work, published posthumously in 2012, provided new data which answered criticisms and validated Kettlewell&#x27;s methodology. Their analysis reaffirmed Kettlewell&#x27;s conclusion that differential selection by birds using their eyesight to find prey was sufficient to explain the changes in melanism, and that this demonstrated the effectiveness of natural selection as an evolutionary force.

==Death==
Because of vigorous field research, Kettlewell suffered from bronchitis, pneumonia, pleurisy and flu, along with heart problems. He fell off a birch tree in 1978 while conducting a field collection and fractured two vertebrae in his back. He never recovered from the injury. On 11 May 1979, he died, allegedly of an accidental overdose of a painkiller.

==Awards and honours==
*Darwin Medal (USSR) in 1959
*Mendel Medal (Czechoslovakia) in 1965
*Official Fellow of Iffley College (later Wolfson College) in 1965
*Elected Emeritus Fellow of Wolfson College 1974
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q822510" start="0" end="30" title="Bernard Kettlewell" label="Henry Bernard Davis Kettlewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126128" start="78" end="88" title="geneticist" label="geneticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442870" start="90" end="103" title="lepidopterist" label="lepidopterist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="108" end="122" title="medical doctor" label="medical doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777028" start="167" end="186" title="industrial melanism" label="industrial melanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="190" end="203" title="peppered moth" label="peppered moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395562" start="300" end="310" title="kettlewell&amp;#x27;s experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="350" end="367" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q153890" start="426" end="440" title="Niko Tinbergen" label="Niko Tinbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="442" end="455" title="Sewall Wright" label="Sewall Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365059" start="617" end="623" title="Howden" label="Howden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="652" end="671" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="709" end="716" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q863940" start="720" end="757" title="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge" label="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q164946" start="801" end="831" title="St Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681944" start="895" end="904" title="Cranleigh" label="Cranleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="977" end="986" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="995" end="1007" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="1046" end="1071" title="Emergency medical services" label="Emergency Medical Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q646225" start="1075" end="1081" title="Woking" label="Woking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1188" end="1223" title="International Locust Control Centre" label="International Locust Control Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q951305" start="1227" end="1247" title="Cape Town University" label="Cape Town University"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="1321" end="1329" title="Kalahari" label="Kalahari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642827" start="1342" end="1355" title="Knysna Forest" label="Knysna Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="1361" end="1374" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="1380" end="1390" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068708" start="1427" end="1455" title="Nuffield Foundation" label="Nuffield Research Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1518" end="1535" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1593" end="1599" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q533632" start="1835" end="1845" title="E. B. Ford" label="E. B. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777028" start="1901" end="1920" title="industrial melanism" label="industrial melanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="1954" end="1967" title="peppered moth" label="peppered moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="2023" end="2038" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="2223" end="2232" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395562" start="2357" end="2385" title="Kettlewell&amp;#x27;s experiment" label="Kettlewell&amp;#x27;s experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2792" end="2802" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="2851" end="2857" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857374" start="3430" end="3445" title="urban evolution" label="urban evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="3464" end="3480" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008288" start="3761" end="3774" title="Helen Spurway" label="Helen Spurway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524731" start="3803" end="3815" title="Gary Botting" label="Gary Botting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="4215" end="4253" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts at Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303469" start="4646" end="4659" title="Judith Hooper" label="Judith Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078789" start="4683" end="4699" title="Of Moths and Men" label="Of Moths and Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323356" start="5130" end="5142" title="EMBO Reports" label="EMBO Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832454" start="5965" end="5980" title="Michael Majerus" label="Michael Majerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007225" start="7041" end="7056" title="Wolfson College, Oxford" label="Wolfson College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488167" wikidata="Q7428627" url="?curid=488167" title="Sawfish (disambiguation)">
<text>A Sawfish is a large, endangered cartilaginous fish with a saw-shaped nose.

Sawfish may also refer to:

* Sawfish (window manager), a window manager for Unix systems running X
* Sawfish harvester, a submersible robot equipped with a chainsaw for harvesting underwater trees</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190736" start="2" end="9" title="Sawfish" label="Sawfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q164036" start="107" end="131" title="Sawfish (window manager)" label="Sawfish (window manager)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428628" start="179" end="196" title="Sawfish harvester" label="Sawfish harvester"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488169" wikidata="Q2918385" url="?curid=488169" title="Arctic roll">
<text>An Arctic roll is a British ice cream cake made of vanilla ice cream wrapped in a thin layer of sponge cake to form a roll, with a layer of raspberry flavoured sauce between the sponge and the ice cream. 

==History==
The dessert was invented in the 1950s by Ernest Velden, an immigrant from then Czechoslovakia. He set up a factory in Eastbourne producing Arctic Roll in 1958, and the dessert soon became a successful product. During the 1980s, more than of Birds Eye Arctic Roll were sold each month. However, sales slumped during the 1990s and eventually the manufacturer of Arctic roll, Birds Eye, stopped producing the dessert. The 2008 economic downturn saw the reappearance of Arctic roll as consumers increasingly looked for low-cost foods.

While some consumers view the Arctic Roll as comfort food, others view it as old fashioned and the food writer Nigel Slater has even described it as tasting of &quot;frozen carpet&quot;. Nonetheless, Birds Eye reported &quot;overwhelming consumer demand&quot; for the dessert. Indeed, from when Birds Eye started marketing Arctic Rolls again in December 2008 until April 2009, sales of the product were estimated at £3.5 million, or 3 million boxes (around of Arctic Roll). Commentators suggest that aside from Arctic Roll&#x27;s low price, many consumers buy the dessert out of feelings of nostalgia. A number of UK supermarkets sell their own brand versions of Arctic Roll, both chocolate and raspberry variants, and did so even when Birds Eye were not marketing the product.

==Flavours==
The original Arctic Roll features vanilla ice cream and raspberry jam; Birds Eye also produce a variant using chocolate ice cream.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2918385" start="3" end="14" title="Arctic roll" label="Arctic roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066251" start="28" end="42" title="ice cream cake" label="ice cream cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="59" end="68" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049852" start="96" end="107" title="sponge cake" label="sponge cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q320657" start="118" end="122" title="Swiss roll" label="roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="336" end="346" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916058" start="591" end="600" title="Birds Eye" label="Birds Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="637" end="659" title="Late-2000s recession" label="2008 economic downturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887327" start="795" end="807" title="comfort food" label="comfort food"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352760" start="861" end="873" title="Nigel Slater" label="Nigel Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="1341" end="1350" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488171" wikidata="Q4808802" url="?curid=488171" title="Asset management in China">
<text>Asset management companies in China came into being in 1998. The founding of commercial Asset management companies (AMC; ) established by the Ministry of Finance tasked with professionally managing third-party assets was a major landmark in the development of China&#x27;s financial system. It marks a transition in Chinese regulation away from an unregulated environment toward a system where specialist companies started to operate according to a defined set of standards and regulations.

== Development of AMCs ==
From 1998 to 1999, the Chinese government created 10 AMCs in China. 4 as bad banks, one for each of the four commercial state-owned banks. and 6 Fund management companies. As of 2018 there are over 130 asset management companies in china, with a combined US$2 billion in assets under management.

The original asset management companies include:
* China Great Wall Asset Management - for the Agricultural Bank of China
* China Orient Asset Management - for the Bank of China
* China Cinda Asset Management - for the China Construction Bank
* China Huarong Asset Management - for the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
* Guotai Asset Management
* China Southern Asset Management
* HuaAn Fund Management
* Bosera Asset Management
* Penghua Fund Management
* China Asset Management

Other AMCs that were established later on include:
* Changsheng Fund Management
* China Universal
* Dacheng Fund Management
* E Fund Management
* Fullgoal Asset Management
* Harvest Fund Management
* ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management
* Tianhong Asset Management

==See also==
*Chinese financial system
*Insurance industry in China
*Economy of China
*State-owned enterprise

==References==
==External links==
*The opportunity in asset management in China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4808802" start="0" end="35" title="Asset management in China" label="Asset management companies in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q873442" start="88" end="114" title="Asset management companies" label="Asset management companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q832407" start="142" end="161" title="Ministry of Finance People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q798630" start="591" end="599" title="bad bank" label="bad bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q741435" start="789" end="812" title="assets under management" label="assets under management"/>
<link wikidata="Q119872148" start="866" end="899" title="China Great Wall Asset Management" label="China Great Wall Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q26298" start="910" end="936" title="Agricultural Bank of China" label="Agricultural Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q27834602" start="939" end="968" title="China Orient Asset Management" label="China Orient Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="979" end="992" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15933437" start="995" end="1023" title="China Cinda Asset Management" label="China Cinda Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q26299" start="1034" end="1057" title="China Construction Bank" label="China Construction Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q21584822" start="1060" end="1090" title="China Huarong Asset Management" label="China Huarong Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q26463" start="1101" end="1140" title="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China" label="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q111744926" start="1169" end="1200" title="China Southern Asset Management" label="China Southern Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q117276195" start="1227" end="1250" title="Bosera Asset Management" label="Bosera Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q117455583" start="1253" end="1276" title="Penghua Fund Management" label="Penghua Fund Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099577" start="1279" end="1301" title="China Asset Management" label="China Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099947" start="1385" end="1400" title="China Universal" label="China Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114019944" start="1429" end="1446" title="E Fund Management" label="E Fund Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q115792259" start="1449" end="1474" title="Fullgoal Fund Management" label="Fullgoal Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q10923995" start="1477" end="1500" title="Harvest Fund Management" label="Harvest Fund Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q123712981" start="1503" end="1538" title="ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management" label="ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023698" start="1541" end="1566" title="Tianhong Asset Management" label="Tianhong Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="1582" end="1606" title="Chinese financial system" label="Chinese financial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050915" start="1608" end="1635" title="Insurance industry in China" label="Insurance industry in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="1637" end="1653" title="Economy of China" label="Economy of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="1655" end="1677" title="State-owned enterprise" label="State-owned enterprise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488172" wikidata="Q6757110" url="?curid=488172" title="Marcia Hines">
<text>Marcia Elaine Hines AM (born July 20, 1953) is an American-born Australian singer and TV personality. Hines made her debut, at the age of 16, in the Australian production of the stage musical &quot;Hair&quot; and followed with the role of Mary Magdalene in &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;.

She achieved her greatest commercial successes as a recording artist during the late 1970s with several hit singles, including cover versions of &quot;Fire and Rain&quot;, &quot;I Just Don&#x27;t Know What to Do with Myself&quot;, &quot;You&quot; and &quot;Something&#x27;s Missing (In My Life)&quot;; and her Top Ten albums &quot;Marcia Shines&quot;, &quot;Shining&quot; and &quot;Ladies and Gentlemen&quot;. Hines was voted &quot;Queen of Pop&quot; by &quot;TV Week&#x27;s&quot; readers for three consecutive years from 1976.

Hines stopped recording in the early 1980s until she returned with &quot;Right Here and Now&quot; in 1994, the same year she became an Australian citizen. She was the subject of the 2001 biography &quot;Diva: the life of Marcia Hines&quot;, which coincided with the release of the compilation album &quot;Diva&quot;. From 2003 to 2009 and again in 2024, she was a judge on &quot;Australian Idol&quot;, and her elevated profile led to a renewed interest in her as a performer. Her 2006 album, &quot;Discotheque&quot;, peaked at number 6 on the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) albums chart. Hines was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame on July 18, 2007.

Hines is the mother of singer Deni Hines, with whom she performed on the duet single &quot;Stomp!&quot; (2006). Hines has sold 2.6 million albums and was the first Australian female artist to have a platinum-selling album, as well as the first female to have seven consecutive top 20 album releases.

==Early life==
Hines was born in Boston, Massachusetts, to Jamaican parents, Eugene and Esmeralda Hines. Eugene died when Hines was six months old due to an operation to remove shrapnel from a war wound. Colin Powell, a former US secretary of state, was her cousin, as is the performer Grace Jones. She was raised with her older brother Dwight by their mother and began singing as a nine-year-old in her church choir. By her teens she was performing with groups in her local area and briefly used the stage-name Shantee Renee. At 14, Hines won a scholarship to the New England Conservatory of Music but left after three months. A month after turning 16, Hines attended the Woodstock Festival. In 1970, at age 16, Hines moved to Australia after landing a role in the Australian stage production of &quot;Hair&quot;.

==Career==
===1970–1974: &quot;Hair&quot; and &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;===
At the age of 16, Hines was discovered by Australian entrepreneur Harry M. Miller and director Jim Sharman who were visiting the U.S. to audition African-American singers in preparation for the new season of the Australian stage production of &quot;Hair&quot;, which had already premiered in Sydney on 6 June 1969. Because she was underage, Miller was made her legal guardian. When she made her debut in April 1970, Hines became the youngest person in the world to play a featured role in any production of &quot;Hair&quot;. It was produced by Miller and directed by Sharman. Fellow performers included Keith Glass, Sharon Redd, Reg Livermore, John Waters and Victor Willis. During the show&#x27;s run Hines learned she was pregnant; her daughter, Deni Hines, was born on 4 September 1970, and nine days later Hines returned to the stage to continue her role. The show was a major success. Hines was well received and an Australian tour followed. Miller and Sharman approached her to play Mary Magdalene in the Australian production of &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot; and Hines assumed the role from Michele Fawdon in the summer of 1973 with Hines&#x27;s tenure in the role until February 1974 making her a major star in Australia. Other cast members included Trevor White, Jon English, Doug Parkinson, Stevie Wright, John Paul Young and Rory O&#x27;Donoghue.

===1974–1984: Queen of Pop and beyond===
When &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot; finished in February 1974, Hines joined the jazz orchestra Daly-Wilson Big Band, releasing the album &quot;Daly-Wilson Big Band featuring Marcia Hines&quot; in 1975. Hines&#x27;s vocals were on the cover songs &quot;Ain&#x27;t No Mountain High Enough&quot; and &quot;Do You Know What It Means to Miss New Orleans?&quot;. Hines toured with Daly-Wilson Big Band from Australia to United States, supporting B. B. King and Wilson Pickett in Los Angeles, then to Europe and into Soviet Union for a month. During late 1974 Hines also performed as the backing vocalist on Jim Keays&#x27; solo concept album &quot;The Boy from the Stars&quot;.

A record contract with Robie Porter&#x27;s Wizard Records in July 1974 led to Hines&#x27;s first solo single, a cover version of James Taylor&#x27;s &quot;Fire and Rain&quot;, that peaked at number 17 on the Australian singles charts in May 1975. Five Top Ten singles were released between 1976 and 1979, including her cover versions of Artie Wayne&#x27;s &quot;From the Inside&quot;, Burt Bacharach/Hal David&#x27;s &quot;I Just Don&#x27;t Know What to Do with Myself&quot;, &quot;What I Did for Love&quot; (from &quot;A Chorus Line&quot;) and Karen Carpenter&#x27;s &quot;Something&#x27;s Missing (in My Life)&quot;.

Hines&#x27;s biggest hit was with Tom Snow&#x27;s &quot;You&quot;, which reached number 2 in the singles charts in Australia in October 1977. It was an up-tempo dance song, later covered in the U.S. by Rita Coolidge. The song, however, nearly didn&#x27;t make it to Marcia. Robie Porter had put the song into his &quot;don&#x27;t use&quot; pile. Mark Kennedy, her backing band&#x27;s drummer (ex-Spectrum, Doug Parkinson in Focus, Ayers Rock), saw the sheet music in the studio and began arguing the songs&#x27; worth to Porter. Porter subsequently changed his mind about the song.

Top Ten Australian album chart success also occurred in the 1970s with &quot;Marcia Shines&quot; peaking at number 4 in January 1976, &quot;Shining&quot; number 3 in November 1976, &quot;Ladies and Gentlemen&quot; number 6 in August 1977 and &quot;Marcia Hines Live Across Australia&quot; number 7 in March 1978. Her albums have sold close to a million copies and Hines was the first Australian female performer to attain a Platinum record.

Hines was voted &quot;Queen of Pop&quot;, the country&#x27;s most popular female performer, each year from 1976 to 1978, by the readers of &quot;TV Week&quot;. Hines was Australia&#x27;s best-selling local act for 1977 and 1978, and she was the top concert attraction for 1976–1979 inclusive. Her success had been boosted by appearances on Australian Broadcasting Corporation&#x27;s (ABC) popular TV music show &quot;Countdown&quot;. Her touring band, the Marcia Hines Band, included Kennedy, bass guitarist Jackie Orszaczky, lead guitarist Stephen Housden (later of Little River Band) and drummer/percussionist Peter Whitford. Hines was married to Kennedy during the late-1970s; he designed and made an elaborate and colourful stage costume for her. In 1978 and 1979, Hines also had her own TV series, &quot;Marcia Hines Music&quot; on the ABC.

By November 1979, Hines had fallen out with Wizard Records&#x27; owner Robie Porter, and moved on to the Midnight label under Warner Music Australia, after waiting out her contract she returned to recording to achieve a few more hits including the dance track version of Dusty Springfield&#x27;s &quot;Your Love Still Brings Me to My Knees&quot;, which reached Top Ten in 1981. A compilation &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, released by Porter&#x27;s Wizard Records, peaked at number 2 in January 1982. In April 1981, Hines&#x27;s brother Dwight committed suicide, and Hines later recalled being given the news by her mother.

Hines combined with fellow &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot; artist Jon English to release a duet single &quot;Jokers &amp; Queens&quot; and an associated six-track mini-album &quot;Jokers and Queens&quot; in July 1982. The album reached No. 36 and the single peaked at number 62 on their respective charts. Her next album, &quot;Love Sides&quot;, and its singles, &quot;Love Side&quot; and &quot;Shadow in the Night&quot;, did not chart. Hines returned to theatre for a &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot; revival in late 1983, and she then decided to devote more time to raising her daughter. During this time, she suffered with health and relationship problems.

===1984–1994: Hiatus===
Theatre projects for Hines, from 1984, included &quot;Big River&quot;, &quot;Are You Lonesome Tonight?&quot; and &quot;Jerry&#x27;s Girls&quot;. In 1986, a fall in her kitchen resulted in the diagnosis of her diabetes, which was treated by daily injections of insulin, careful monitoring of her diet and a commitment to fitness. Hines performed the closing act of the 1990 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras. It was a turning point for her and she later described the crowd ovation her most pleasing audience reception ever. Hines decided she would return to singing, while her daughter Deni was achieving her own successes initially singing with Rockmelons for their top-five hits &quot;Ain&#x27;t No Sunshine&quot; and &quot;That Word (L.O.V.E.)&quot; and then solo for her top-five &quot;It&#x27;s Alright&quot;. Hines returned to the stage with a performance in &quot;The Masters of Rhythm and Taste&quot; in 1993.

===1994–2002: Recording again===
In March 1994, Hines toured nationally for the first time in seven years. She signed a new contract with Warner Music Australia to release &quot;Right Here and Now&quot; in October, which peaked at number 21; its singles included &quot;Rain (Let the Children Play)&quot;, which peaked at number 47, and &quot;Give it All You&#x27;ve Got&quot;, which had less success. Her career was gradually revived with concert and TV appearances. By 1998, Hines enlisted Rockmelons&#x27; members Bryon Jones and Ray Medhurst as producers for &quot;Time of Our Lives&quot;, which charted from August 1999 and peaked at number 17. The singles &quot;Flashdance, What a Feeling&quot; (originally recorded by Irene Cara) and &quot;Time of Our Lives&quot; were released with the latter peaking at No. 31. Hines recorded &quot;Rise&quot;, an official song for the Australian team at the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games. In September 2001, music producer and writer, Karen Dewey wrote Hines&#x27;s fully authorised biography &quot;Diva: the life of Marcia Hines&quot; and Hines released a companion compilation CD, &quot;Diva&quot;, in October.

===2003–2010: &quot;Australian Idol&quot; and more===
In May 2003, Hines endured the illness and death of her mother Esme; she returned to the public eye with her role as a judge on the television show &quot;Australian Idol&quot; from July 27, 2003. She has been described as &quot;the nice judge&quot; and has been accused of being a &quot;fence-sitter&quot; – unable to provide criticism of any kind. Hines counters such criticism with: &quot;Well, you know, I&#x27;m living it, if you get my drift, so the advice I give the kids is the advice I&#x27;m living.&quot; The success of the program has led to further interest in her as a recording artist, and in 2004 she released an album of cover versions, titled &quot;Hinesight – Songs from the Journey&quot; which featured a duet, with former &quot;Home and Away&quot; star Belinda Emmett, &quot;Shower the People&quot;. In 2005, Hines released a remixed version of her earlier hit &quot;You&quot;, followed in 2006 by &quot;Discotheque&quot;, an album containing her versions of disco classics, which peaked at number 6. Hines made a cameo appearance on &quot;Neighbours&quot; in early 2007; on 18 July, she was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame. In November 2007, Hines released a new album, &quot;Life&quot;, and during December she toured in support of Lionel Richie. From August 31, 2008, the sixth season of &quot;Australian Idol&quot; was broadcast, with Hines continuing as a judge, and she is the only judge to appear in every season of Australian Idol.

===2010–present: continued success and return to &quot;Idol&quot;===

In October 2010, Hines released &quot;Marcia Sings Tapestry&quot;, a tribute to Carole King&#x27;s 1971 album &quot;Tapestry&quot;; it peaked at number 16. In April 2014, Hines released her first album of original material in two decades, called &quot;Amazing&quot;. It spawned three singles and peaked at No. 27 in Australia. In 2015, Hines starred on stage in the disco musical &quot;Velvet&quot;, with performances at the Adelaide Fringe, Brisbane and Edinburgh. Velvet played at the Sydney Opera House from late 2015. In early 2015, Marcia Hines covered the song &quot;These Boots Are Made for Walkin&#x27;&quot;, specifically for the trailer of season two of &quot;The Real Housewives of Melbourne&quot;.

In January 2023, Hines returned to the Channel 7 reboot of &quot;Australian Idol&quot;, after the show&#x27;s fourteen-year hiatus, as a judge in the top 50 rounds for three episodes while regular judge Meghan Trainor was in New York due to other commitments. In 2024, Hines will be rejoining &quot;Australian Idol&quot; as a main judge alongside returning judges Kyle Sandilands and Amy Shark, permanently replacing Trainor.

Later in 2023, Hines released two songs under the same singles package, which was titled &quot;Last One Standing&quot;. The two songs were called &quot;Last One Standing&quot; and &quot;Hard to Breathe&quot;. These two songs then went on to feature in her brand new greatest hits album, &quot;Still Shining: The 50th Anniversary Ultimate Collection&quot;, which was officially released in July 2023, through ABC Music. The album was supported by an Australian tour from July to November 2023. On 25 August 2023, Hines released a cover of Bill Withers&#x27; &quot;Lean On Me&quot;, which featured as the lead single for her forthcoming fifteenth studio album. The album&#x27;s second single &quot;Loves Me Like A Rock&quot;, was released on 13 October 2023. The album, which was titled &quot;The Gospel According to Marcia&quot;, was officially released on 3 November 2023. Hines has said that the inspiration for the album came when she performed several live shows titled &quot;The Gospel According to Marcia Hines&quot; alongside a rhythm section and a 12-member choir. These shows received positive reviews inspired Hines to record a gospel album. &quot;The Gospel According to Marcia&quot; did not reach the ARIA top 50, but peaked at number 15 on the ARIA Australian Artist chart and at number 2 on the Australian Independent Label Albums chart.

==Personal life==
Hines has a daughter, Deni Hines, who was born in Australia on September 4, 1970. Hines had been performing in &quot;Hair&quot; since she was 16 years old. Hines has been married four times: French businessman Andre DeCarpentry, keyboard player Jamie McKinley, businessman Ghassan Bayni, and, in April 2005, she married Christopher Morrissey, whom she divorced in 2014.

Hines grew up with asthma, missing months of schooling as a result of life-threatening attacks, and was diagnosed with diabetes after collapsing at her home in 1986. Her elder brother Dwight&#x27;s death by suicide, in April 1981, devastated Hines, but her mother Esmeralda (Esme) helped her through their grief. Esme relocated to Australia to live with Hines and Deni in the 1980s, and she died in May 2003.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Marcia Shines&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Shining&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Ladies and Gentlemen&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Ooh Child&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Take It from the Boys&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Jokers and Queens&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Love Sides&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Right Here and Now&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Time of Our Lives&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Hinesight&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Discotheque&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Life&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Marcia Sings Tapestry&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Amazing&quot; (2014)
* &quot;The Gospel According to Marcia&quot; (2023)

==Awards and nominations==
===ARIA Music Awards===
The ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony that recognises excellence, innovation, and achievement across all genres of Australian music. They commenced in 1987. Hines was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 2007.
|-
| 1989
| &quot;The Lords Prayer&quot; 
| Best Female Artist
|-
| 2000
| &quot;Time of Our Lives&quot;
| Best Adult Contemporary Album
|-
| 2007
| herself
| ARIA Hall of Fame
|-
| 2016
| &quot;Velvet&quot;
| Best Original Soundtrack, Cast or Show Album
|-
===Australia Day Honours===
On January 26, 2009, Hines was appointed as Member, Order of Australia &quot;for service to the entertainment industry as a performer, judge and mentor, and to the community through a range of charitable organisations&quot;.

===Australian Women in Music Awards===
The Australian Women in Music Awards is an annual event that celebrates outstanding women in the Australian Music Industry who have made significant and lasting contributions in their chosen field. They commenced in 2018.
|-
| 2019
| Marcia Hines
| Lifetime Achievement Award


===King of Pop Awards===
The King of Pop Awards were voted by the readers of TV Week. The King of Pop award started in 1967 and ran through to 1978.
|-
| 1976
| herself
| Queen of Pop 
|-
| 1977
| herself
| Queen of Pop 
|-
| 1978
| herself
| Queen of Pop 
|-
===Mo Awards===
The Australian Entertainment Mo Awards (commonly known informally as the Mo Awards), were annual Australian entertainment industry awards. They recognise achievements in live entertainment in Australia from 1975 to 2016. Marcia Hines won one award in that time.
 (wins only)
| 2004
| Marcia Hines
| Classic Rock Performer of the Year
|-
===TV Week / Countdown Awards===
&quot;Countdown&quot; was an Australian pop music TV series on national broadcaster ABC-TV from 1974 to 1987, it presented music awards from 1979 to 1987, initially in conjunction with magazine &quot;TV Week&quot;. The TV Week / Countdown Awards were a combination of popular-voted and peer-voted awards.
|-
| 1979
| herself
| Most Popular Female Performer
|-
| 1981
| herself
| Most Popular Female Performer
|-
==References==
==External links==
* Marcia Hines at the National Film and Sound Archive
* Marcia Hines at Nostalgia Central</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6757110" start="0" end="19" title="Marcia Hines" label="Marcia Elaine Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="20" end="22" title="Order of Australia" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394452" start="178" end="191" title="Music theatre" label="stage musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="198" end="202" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="239" end="253" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="263" end="285" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="421" end="434" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451533" start="445" end="458" title="Fire and Rain (song)" label="Fire and Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986604" start="472" end="517" title="I Just Don&amp;#x27;t Know What to Do with Myself" label="I Just Don&amp;#x27;t Know What to Do with Myself"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390427" start="531" end="534" title="You (Marcia Hines song)" label="You"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944870" start="551" end="588" title="Something&amp;#x27;s Missing (In My Life)" label="Something&amp;#x27;s Missing (In My Life)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757144" start="625" end="638" title="Marcia Shines" label="Marcia Shines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378346" start="652" end="659" title="Shining (Marcia Hines album)" label="Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388531" start="676" end="696" title="Ladies and Gentlemen (Marcia Hines album)" label="Ladies and Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="726" end="738" title="Australian pop music awards#1967–1978: King of Pop Awards" label="Queen of Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="754" end="761" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095813" start="896" end="914" title="Right Here and Now (Marcia Hines album)" label="Right Here and Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095814" start="1128" end="1132" title="Diva (Marcia Hines album)" label="Diva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="1202" end="1217" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281724" start="1321" end="1332" title="Discotheque (Marcia Hines album)" label="Discotheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="1366" end="1407" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653736" start="1457" end="1474" title="ARIA Hall of Fame" label="ARIA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022464" start="1524" end="1534" title="Deni Hines" label="Deni Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618759" start="1585" end="1591" title="Stomp! (Brothers Johnson song)" label="Stomp!"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1828" end="1834" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="1999" end="2011" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="2022" end="2043" title="US secretary of state" label="US secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q450429" start="2081" end="2092" title="Grace Jones" label="Grace Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347162" start="2360" end="2393" title="New England Conservatory of Music" label="New England Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="2468" end="2486" title="Woodstock Festival" label="Woodstock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670803" start="2761" end="2776" title="Harry M. Miller" label="Harry M. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689216" start="2790" end="2801" title="Jim Sharman" label="Jim Sharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384408" start="3298" end="3309" title="Keith Glass" label="Keith Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490189" start="3311" end="3322" title="Sharon Redd" label="Sharon Redd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307817" start="3324" end="3337" title="Reg Livermore" label="Reg Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q363876" start="3339" end="3350" title="John Waters (actor)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298882" start="3355" end="3368" title="Victor Willis" label="Victor Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836745" start="3798" end="3812" title="Michele Fawdon" label="Michele Fawdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357464" start="3972" end="3983" title="Jon English" label="Jon English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300807" start="3985" end="3999" title="Doug Parkinson" label="Doug Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347814" start="4001" end="4014" title="Stevie Wright (Australian singer)" label="Stevie Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q205583" start="4016" end="4031" title="John Paul Young" label="John Paul Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429155" start="4036" end="4056" title="Rory O&amp;#x27;Donoghue" label="Rory O&amp;#x27;Donoghue"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121779" start="4199" end="4219" title="Daly-Wilson Big Band" label="Daly-Wilson Big Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828126" start="4356" end="4390" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Mountain High Enough" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Mountain High Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286339" start="4407" end="4453" title="Do You Know What It Means to Miss New Orleans?" label="Do You Know What It Means to Miss New Orleans?"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="4544" end="4554" title="B. B. King" label="B. B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q312270" start="4559" end="4573" title="Wilson Pickett" label="Wilson Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4614" end="4626" title="USSR" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196033" start="4705" end="4714" title="Jim Keays" label="Jim Keays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352191" start="4800" end="4812" title="Robie Porter" label="Robie Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="4889" end="4902" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="4906" end="4918" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801004" start="5114" end="5125" title="Artie Wayne" label="Artie Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="5162" end="5176" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q449030" start="5177" end="5186" title="Hal David" label="Hal David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986604" start="5200" end="5245" title="I Just Don&amp;#x27;t Know What to Do with Myself" label="I Just Don&amp;#x27;t Know What to Do with Myself"/>
<link wikidata="Q123014631" start="5259" end="5278" title="What I Did for Love (A Chorus Line)" label="What I Did for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q189427" start="5297" end="5310" title="A Chorus Line" label="A Chorus Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250861" start="5322" end="5337" title="Karen Carpenter" label="Karen Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817640" start="5431" end="5446" title="Tom Snow (songwriter)" label="Tom Snow&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390427" start="5453" end="5456" title="You (Marcia Hines song)" label="You"/>
<link wikidata="Q268604" start="5599" end="5612" title="Rita Coolidge" label="Rita Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063595" start="5743" end="5755" title="Mark Kennedy (musician)" label="Mark Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575268" start="5793" end="5801" title="Spectrum (band)" label="Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300807" start="5803" end="5817" title="Doug Parkinson" label="Doug Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831191" start="5828" end="5838" title="Ayers Rock (band)" label="Ayers Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757144" start="6057" end="6070" title="Marcia Shines" label="Marcia Shines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378346" start="6120" end="6127" title="Shining (Marcia Hines album)" label="Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388531" start="6167" end="6187" title="Ladies and Gentlemen (Marcia Hines album)" label="Ladies and Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389147" start="6228" end="6262" title="Marcia Hines Live Across Australia" label="Marcia Hines Live Across Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="6567" end="6574" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="6762" end="6797" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176829" start="6839" end="6848" title="Countdown (Australian TV series)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q226022" start="6930" end="6946" title="Jackie Orszaczky" label="Jackie Orszaczky"/>
<link wikidata="Q111046767" start="6963" end="6978" title="Stephen Housden" label="Stephen Housden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474932" start="6989" end="7006" title="Little River Band" label="Little River Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="7263" end="7266" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352191" start="7340" end="7352" title="Robie Porter" label="Robie Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969735" start="7395" end="7417" title="Warner Music Australia" label="Warner Music Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219782" start="7540" end="7557" title="Dusty Springfield" label="Dusty Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025572" start="7571" end="7608" title="Your Love Still Brings Me to My Knees" label="Your Love Still Brings Me to My Knees"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="7649" end="7660" title="Compilation album" label="compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095755" start="7667" end="7680" title="Greatest Hits (Marcia Hines album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078339" start="8073" end="8090" title="Jokers and Queens" label="Jokers and Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078333" start="8221" end="8231" title="Love Sides" label="Love Sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="8789" end="8797" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="8840" end="8847" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809145" start="8953" end="8986" title="Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras" label="Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355511" start="9226" end="9236" title="Rockmelons" label="Rockmelons"/>
<link wikidata="Q406292" start="9267" end="9289" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Sunshine" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25218826" start="9306" end="9326" title="That Word (L.O.V.E.)" label="That Word (L.O.V.E.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25218832" start="9370" end="9387" title="It&amp;#x27;s Alright (Deni Hines song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Alright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969735" start="9637" end="9659" title="Warner Music Australia" label="Warner Music Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095813" start="9677" end="9695" title="Right Here and Now (Marcia Hines album)" label="Right Here and Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599000" start="9768" end="9796" title="Rain (Let the Children Play)" label="Rain (Let the Children Play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880009" start="10067" end="10084" title="Time of Our Lives (Marcia Hines album)" label="Time of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415045" start="10166" end="10192" title="Flashdance... What a Feeling" label="Flashdance, What a Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q234169" start="10223" end="10233" title="Irene Cara" label="Irene Cara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="10399" end="10424" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="Sydney 2000 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095814" start="10626" end="10630" title="Diva (Marcia Hines album)" label="Diva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="10859" end="10874" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874311" start="11371" end="11405" title="Hinesight" label="Hinesight – Songs from the Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324189" start="11453" end="11466" title="Home and Away" label="Home and Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q436571" start="11478" end="11492" title="Belinda Emmett" label="Belinda Emmett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503233" start="11500" end="11517" title="Shower the People" label="Shower the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281724" start="11629" end="11640" title="Discotheque (Marcia Hines album)" label="Discotheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="11684" end="11689" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="11765" end="11775" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653736" start="11835" end="11852" title="ARIA Hall of Fame" label="ARIA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353712" start="11906" end="11910" title="Life (Marcia Hines album)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="11963" end="11976" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824265" start="12004" end="12016" title="Australian Idol (season 6)" label="sixth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824265" start="12026" end="12041" title="Australian Idol (season 6)" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352567" start="12278" end="12299" title="Marcia Sings Tapestry" label="Marcia Sings Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q217787" start="12320" end="12331" title="Carole King" label="Carole King"/>
<link wikidata="Q411032" start="12356" end="12364" title="Tapestry (Carole King album)" label="Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351524" start="12492" end="12499" title="Amazing (Marcia Hines album)" label="Amazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637033" start="12626" end="12632" title="Velvet (musical)" label="Velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="12727" end="12745" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535296" start="12813" end="12850" title="These Boots Are Made for Walkin&amp;#x27;" label="These Boots Are Made for Walkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027748" start="12910" end="12942" title="The Real Housewives of Melbourne" label="The Real Housewives of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343362" start="13016" end="13031" title="Australian Idol" label="Australian Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403494" start="13154" end="13168" title="Meghan Trainor" label="Meghan Trainor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213757" start="13315" end="13330" title="Kyle Sandilands" label="Kyle Sandilands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530098" start="13335" end="13344" title="Amy Shark" label="Amy Shark"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13671" end="13726" title="Still Shining: The 50th Anniversary Ultimate Collection" label="Still Shining: The 50th Anniversary Ultimate Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q28487642" start="13786" end="13795" title="ABC Music" label="ABC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q346565" start="13916" end="13928" title="Bill Withers" label="Bill Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423445" start="13941" end="13951" title="Lean on Me (song)" label="Lean On Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q123310710" start="14169" end="14199" title="The Gospel According to Marcia" label="The Gospel According to Marcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022464" start="14770" end="14780" title="Deni Hines" label="Deni Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15138" end="15144" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="15238" end="15246" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757144" start="15573" end="15586" title="Marcia Shines" label="Marcia Shines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378346" start="15608" end="15615" title="Shining (Marcia Hines album)" label="Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388531" start="15637" end="15657" title="Ladies and Gentlemen (Marcia Hines album)" label="Ladies and Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020843" start="15679" end="15688" title="Ooh Child (album)" label="Ooh Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078331" start="15710" end="15731" title="Take It from the Boys" label="Take It from the Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078339" start="15753" end="15770" title="Jokers and Queens" label="Jokers and Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078333" start="15792" end="15802" title="Love Sides" label="Love Sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095813" start="15824" end="15842" title="Right Here and Now (Marcia Hines album)" label="Right Here and Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880009" start="15864" end="15881" title="Time of Our Lives (Marcia Hines album)" label="Time of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874311" start="15903" end="15912" title="Hinesight" label="Hinesight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281724" start="15934" end="15945" title="Discotheque (Marcia Hines album)" label="Discotheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353712" start="15967" end="15971" title="Life (Marcia Hines album)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352567" start="15993" end="16014" title="Marcia Sings Tapestry" label="Marcia Sings Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351524" start="16036" end="16043" title="Amazing (Marcia Hines album)" label="Amazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123310710" start="16065" end="16095" title="The Gospel According to Marcia" label="The Gospel According to Marcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="16165" end="16182" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114644" start="16289" end="16305" title="Australian music" label="Australian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653732" start="16386" end="16390" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599001" start="16399" end="16415" title="The Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer (David Fanshawe song)" label="The Lords Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653728" start="16425" end="16443" title="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist" label="Best Female Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653749" start="16449" end="16453" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880009" start="16462" end="16479" title="Time of Our Lives (Marcia Hines album)" label="Time of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208805" start="16488" end="16517" title="ARIA Award for Best Adult Contemporary Album" label="Best Adult Contemporary Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653757" start="16523" end="16527" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653736" start="16540" end="16557" title="ARIA Hall of Fame" label="ARIA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129517" start="16563" end="16567" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637033" start="16576" end="16582" title="Velvet (musical)" label="Velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053510" start="16591" end="16635" title="ARIA Award for Best Original Soundtrack, Cast or Show Album" label="Best Original Soundtrack, Cast or Show Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="16719" end="16737" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q86124920" start="16936" end="16968" title="Australian Women in Music Awards" label="Australian Women in Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114644" start="17029" end="17054" title="Music of Australia" label="Australian Music Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106322296" start="17159" end="17163" title="2019 Australian Women in Music Awards" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17235" end="17257" title="Australian pop music awards#1967–1978: King of Pop Awards" label="The King of Pop Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="17287" end="17294" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886164" start="17559" end="17568" title="Mo Awards" label="Mo Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176829" start="17862" end="17871" title="Countdown (Australian TV series)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="17940" end="17946" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="18056" end="18063" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488180" wikidata="Q832407" url="?curid=488180" title="Ministry of Finance (China)">
<text>The Ministry of Finance of the People&#x27;s Republic of China is the constituent department of the State Council of the People&#x27;s Republic of China which administers macroeconomic policies and the annual budget. It also handles fiscal policy, economic regulations and government expenditure for the state. The ministry also records and publishes annual macroeconomic data on China&#x27;s economy. This includes information such as previous economic growth rates in China, central government debt and borrowing and many other indicators regarding the economy of mainland China.

The Ministry of Finance&#x27;s remit is smaller than its counterparts in many other states. Macroeconomic management is primarily handled by the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC). State-owned industries are the responsibility of the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, and there are separate regulators for banking, insurance and securities. It also does not handle regulation of the money markets or interest rates. These, together with other aspects of monetary policy, are governed by the People&#x27;s Bank of China (PBC), mainland China&#x27;s central bank. The Ministry, NDRC and PBC are equal in status, with their political heads all sitting on the State Council.

== History ==
The Ministry of Finance of the People&#x27;s Republic of China was formerly known as the Ministry of Finance of the Central People&#x27;s Government, which was established on October 1,1949. In September 1954, the First Session of the First National People&#x27;s Congress was held in Beijing, at which the Constitution of the People&#x27;s Republic of China and the Organic Law of the State Council of the People&#x27;s Republic of China were adopted. The former Ministry of Finance of the Central People&#x27;s Government was transformed into the Ministry of Finance of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, which took over the related work and became a constituent department of the State Council.

On 1 July 1967, during the Cultural Revolution, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, the State Council and the Central Military Commission decided to implement military rule over the ministry; the Director of the Military Control Commission Yin Chengzhen became the head of the ministry. In 1969, the State Council approved the consolidation of PBC&#x27;s headquarters as a bureau within the Ministry of Finance. Local PBC branches were merged into local government finance departments. The Military Control Commission was replaced with a Revolutionary Committee on 22 June 1970.

The ministry was reorganized and restored its ministerial system in January 1975. In 1978, the PBC was separated from the Ministry of Finance.

The Ministry held China&#x27;s first bond auction in 1996.

In 2009, the Ministry converted its ownership of $200 billion of China Investment Corporation&#x27;s debt into equity, a result which relieved CIC of interest payments on the special treasury bonds that had initially capitalized it and instead resulted in CIC paying an annual dividend to the Ministry.

The Ministry has sought to implement property taxes since the early 2010s, but has been opposed on this issue by the National People&#x27;s Congress and many local governments. As of at least early 2024, property taxes have been kept off the legislative agenda.

The Ministry is among the state entities which contribute to the China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund, which was established in an effort to decrease China&#x27;s reliance on foreign semiconductor companies. The fund was established in 2014.

In 2015, the Ministry of Finance allocated 2 billion RMB to establish e-commerce centers in some of the least developed areas of rural China. This approach has since inspired similar strategies in Egypt, India, and Vietnam.

== Role ==
During the pre-Reform period of centrally planned public finance, capitalization of industrial and infrastructure projects has handled through public expenditure. The State Planning Commission designated projects and the Ministry allocated revenue to them.

The main functions of the Ministry is to carry out the following duties of the state:

The Ministry of Finance in involved the foreign aid process through making China&#x27;s donations to multilateral financial institutions.

== Organizational structure ==
Organizational structure obtained from the Ministry of Finance website:

*General Office
*Policy &amp; Programme Department
*Legal Department
*Tax Policy Department
*Tariff Policy Department
*Budget Department
*Treasury Department
*National Defense Department
*Administrative &amp; Law Enforcement Department
*Education, Science &amp; Culture Department
*Economic Construction Department
*Agriculture Department
*Social Security Department
*State Equity &amp; Corporate Finance Department
*Finance Department
*International Department 
*Accounting Regulatory Department
*Supervision Department
*State Rural Development Office
*Personnel &amp; Education Department

== Leadership ==

All of the leaders are members of the Ministry&#x27;s Communist Party Committee, with Lan Fo&#x27;an as its secretary.

== As shareholder ==
The MOF also acted as the controlling shareholder for a number of financial service companies of China, such as People&#x27;s Insurance Company of China, China Life Insurance Group (parent of China Life), China Taiping Insurance Group (parent of China Taiping Insurance Holdings), etc. The Ministry also owned Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China, the Bank of Communications, China Great Wall Asset Management, China Cinda Asset Management, China Orient Asset Management, China Huarong Asset Management and China Re, etc.

MOF also owned China Railway, China Tobacco and CITIC Group.

== See also ==
*Chinese financial system
*Taxation in China
*People&#x27;s Bank of China
*Ministries of the People&#x27;s Republic of China

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q832407" start="4" end="62" title="Ministry of Finance (China)" label="Ministry of Finance of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294273" start="70" end="92" title="Constituent departments of the State Council" label="constituent department"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="100" end="152" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="171" end="184" title="macroeconomic" label="macroeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271855" start="209" end="215" title="Government budget" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="233" end="246" title="fiscal policy" label="fiscal policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500849" start="248" end="267" title="economic regulation" label="economic regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929688" start="273" end="295" title="government expenditure" label="government expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="358" end="371" title="macroeconomic" label="macroeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="380" end="400" title="China&amp;#x27;s economy" label="China&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="445" end="460" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="485" end="500" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="505" end="514" title="Debt" label="borrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186190" start="728" end="770" title="National Development and Reform Commission" label="National Development and Reform Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629075" start="832" end="892" title="State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission" label="State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073219" start="932" end="939" title="China Banking Regulatory Commission" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q843516" start="941" end="950" title="China Insurance Regulatory Commission" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q642889" start="955" end="965" title="China Securities Regulatory Commission" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q627543" start="1009" end="1021" title="money market" label="money market"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="1026" end="1039" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="1080" end="1095" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q249203" start="1117" end="1144" title="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="1282" end="1295" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="2040" end="2059" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="2065" end="2113" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="2141" end="2168" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2271" end="2284" title="Yin Chengzhen" label="Yin Chengzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="2331" end="2344" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="2792" end="2796" title="Bond (finance)" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824816" start="2880" end="2915" title="China Investment Corporation" label="China Investment Corporation&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="2926" end="2932" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="3156" end="3168" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q117354848" start="3447" end="3496" title="China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund" label="China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q111460071" start="3578" end="3591" title="Semiconductor industry in China" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325776" start="3708" end="3718" title="E-commerce in China" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380591" start="3767" end="3778" title="Rural society in China" label="rural China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321499" start="3842" end="3847" title="E-commerce in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="3906" end="3923" title="Planned economy" label="centrally planned"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692520" start="3958" end="3968" title="Technological and industrial history of China" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186190" start="4041" end="4066" title="State Planning Commission (China)" label="State Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001080" start="4259" end="4270" title="Chinese foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q30950293" start="5158" end="5172" title="Lan Fo&amp;#x27;an" label="Lan Fo&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807264" start="5325" end="5365" title="People&amp;#x27;s Insurance Company of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Insurance Company of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224121" start="5367" end="5393" title="China Life Insurance Group" label="China Life Insurance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073306" start="5405" end="5415" title="China Life" label="China Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036130" start="5459" end="5491" title="China Taiping Insurance Holdings" label="China Taiping Insurance Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q26463" start="5523" end="5562" title="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China" label="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q26298" start="5568" end="5594" title="Agricultural Bank of China" label="Agricultural Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q806680" start="5600" end="5622" title="Bank of Communications" label="Bank of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q119872148" start="5624" end="5657" title="China Great Wall Asset Management" label="China Great Wall Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q15933437" start="5659" end="5687" title="China Cinda Asset Management" label="China Cinda Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q27834602" start="5689" end="5718" title="China Orient Asset Management" label="China Orient Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q21584822" start="5720" end="5750" title="China Huarong Asset Management" label="China Huarong Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873285" start="5755" end="5763" title="China Re" label="China Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073489" start="5786" end="5799" title="China Railway" label="China Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003789" start="5801" end="5814" title="China Tobacco" label="China Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q856322" start="5819" end="5830" title="CITIC Group" label="CITIC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="5849" end="5873" title="Chinese financial system" label="Chinese financial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312674" start="5875" end="5892" title="Taxation in China" label="Taxation in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q249203" start="5894" end="5921" title="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294273" start="5923" end="5972" title="Ministries of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministries of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488182" wikidata="Q2620762" url="?curid=488182" title="Pentagrid converter">
<text>The pentagrid converter is a type of radio receiving valve (vacuum tube) with five grids used as the frequency mixer stage of a superheterodyne radio receiver.

The pentagrid was part of a line of development of valves that were able to take an incoming RF signal and change its frequency to a fixed intermediate frequency, which was then amplified and detected in the remainder of the receiver circuitry. The device was generically referred to as a &quot;frequency changer&quot; or just &quot;mixer&quot;.

==Origins==
The first devices designed to change frequency in the manner described above seem to have been developed by the French, who simply put two grids into what would otherwise have been an ordinary triode valve (the bi-grille or bi-grid). Although technically a four electrode device, neither the term tetrode nor the tetrode valve as it is known today had yet appeared. The bi-grid differed from the later tetrode because the second (outer) grid was coarsely wound compared with the tetrode&#x27;s screen grid which had to be finely wound to provide its screening effect. Each grid was able to accept one of the incoming signals, and the non-linearity of the device produced the sum and difference frequencies. The valve would have been very inefficient, but, most importantly, the capacitive coupling between the two grids would have been very large. It would therefore have been quite impossible to prevent the signal from one grid coupling out of the other. At least one reference claims that the bi-grille was self-oscillating, but this has not been confirmed.

In 1918, Edwin Armstrong used only triodes when he invented the superheterodyne receiver. One triode operated in a conventional oscillator circuit. Another triode acted as a mixer by coupling the oscillator signal into the mixer&#x27;s cathode and the received signal to the grid. The sum and difference frequencies were then available in the mixer&#x27;s anode circuit. Once again, the problem of coupling between the circuits would be ever present.

Shortly after Armstrong invented the superheterodyne, a triode mixer stage design was developed that not only mixed the incoming signal with the local oscillator, but the same valve doubled as the oscillator. This was known as the autodyne mixer. Early examples had difficulty oscillating across the frequency range because the oscillator feedback was via the first intermediate frequency transformer primary tuning capacitor, which was too small to give good feedback. Keeping the oscillator signal out of the antenna circuit was also difficult.

The invention of the tetrode demonstrated the idea of screening electrodes from each other by using additional earthed (grounded) grids (at least, as far as the signal was concerned). In 1926, Philips invented a technique of adding yet another grid to combat the secondary emission that the tetrode suffered from. All the ingredients for the pentagrid were now in place.

==Pentagrid==
The development of the pentagrid or heptode (seven-electrode) valve was a novel development in the mixer story. The idea was to produce a single valve that not only mixed the oscillator signal and the received signal and produced its own oscillator signal at the same time but, importantly, did the mixing and the oscillating in different parts of the same valve.

The invention of the device at first sight doesn&#x27;t seem to be obscure, but it would appear that it was developed in both America and the United Kingdom, more or less at the same time. However, the UK device is different from its American counterpart.

It is known that Donald G. Haines of RCA applied for a patent for the pentagrid on 28 March 1933 (subsequently granted on 29 March 1939) under US patent number 2,148,266. The pentagrid also featured in a UK patent (GB426802) granted on 10 April 1935. However, the Ferranti company of Great Britain entered the valve business with the first known UK-produced pentagrid, the VHT4, late in 1933 (though it must have been in development, and would certainly have existed as a prototype well before that time).

The pentagrid proved to be a much better mixer. Since the oscillator circuit was more or less self-contained, good feedback for reliable oscillation across the frequency range was easy to obtain. Some manufacturers that had adopted the autodyne mixer converted some, if not all, of their designs to pentagrid mixers.

What was the goal to develop a reliable self-oscillating mixer? The reasons were to differ from the UK to America. The UK radio manufacturers had to pay a royalty of £1 per valve holder to the British Valve Association to cover use of their members&#x27; patent rights. Further, they dictated that not more than one electrode structure could be contained in a single envelope (which would have evaded the royalty - at least in part). The Americans appeared to be driven by the desire to produce a low-cost &#x27;every expense spared&#x27; design which was to lead to the All American Five. By making the mixer self-oscillate, the necessity of providing a separate oscillator valve is avoided. The All American Five was to use a pentagrid converter from when it first appeared in 1934, right up until valves became obsolete when transistors took over.

In the UK, the five grids operated thus. Grid 1 acted as the oscillator grid in conjunction with grid 2 which acted as its anode. Grid 4 accepted the incoming signal with the remaining two grids, 3 and 5 connected together (usually internally) which acted as screen grids to screen the anode, grid 4 and grid 2 from each other. Because grid 2 was a &#x27;leaky&#x27; anode in that it allowed part of the modulated electron stream through, the oscillator was coupled into the mixing section of the valve. In fact, in some designs, grid 2 consisted of just the support rods, the actual grid wire itself being omitted.

In America, the configuration was different. Grid 1 acted as the oscillator grid as before, but in this case, grids 2 and 4 were connected together (again usually internally). Grid 2 functioned as both a screen and the oscillator anode; in this case the grid wire had to be present to provide the screening. Grid 3 accepted the incoming signal. Grid 4 screened this from the anode, and grid 5 was a suppressor grid to suppress secondary emission. This configuration limited the oscillator design to one where the oscillator &#x27;anode&#x27; was operated from the HT+ (B+) rail. This was often accomplished by using a Hartley Oscillator circuit and taking the cathode to the tap on the coil.

The UK version would have had significant secondary emission and would also have had a tetrode kink. This was exploited in providing the non linearity necessary to produce good sum and difference signals. The American devices although having no secondary emission due to the suppressor grid, nevertheless were able to get the required non linearity by biasing the oscillator such that the valve was overdriven. The American version was also a little more sensitive because the grid that accepted the signal was closer to the cathode increasing the amplification factor.

The pentagrid converter in either guise operated extremely well, but it suffered from the limitation that a strong signal was able to &#x27;pull&#x27; the oscillator frequency away from a weaker signal. This was not considered a major problem in broadcast receivers where the signals were likely to be strong, but it became a problem when trying to receive weak signals that were close to strong signals. Some short wave radios managed quite satisfactorily with these devices. Special high frequency versions appeared after World War II for the 100 MHz FM bands. Examples are the 6SB7Y (1946) and the 6BA7 (1948). The pulling effect had a beneficial side effect in that it gave a degree of automatic tuning.

Another disadvantage was that in spite of the presence of the screen grids, the electron beam, modulated by the oscillator electrodes, still had to pass through the signal grid, and coupling of the oscillator into the signal circuit was inevitable. The American Federal Communications Commission (FCC) started requiring radio manufacturers to certify that their products avoided this interference under Part 15 of their rules. In the UK, the Postmaster General (who was responsible for radio licensing at this time), laid down a set of stringent rules concerning radio interference.

==Hexode==
The hexode (six-electrode) was actually developed after the heptode or pentagrid. It was developed in Germany as a mixer but was designed from the start to be used with a separate triode oscillator. Thus the grid configuration was grid 1, signal input; grids 2 and 4 screen grids (connected together - again, usually internally) and grid 3 was the oscillator input. The device had no suppressor grid. A major advantage was that by using grid 1 as the signal input grid, the device was more sensitive to weak signals.

It was not long before the triode and hexode structures were placed in the same glass envelope - by no means a new idea. The triode grid was usually internally connected to the hexode grid 3, but this practice was dropped in later designs when the mixer section operated as a straight IF amplifier in AM/FM sets when operating on FM, the mixing being carried out in a dedicated FM frequency changing section.

The UK manufacturers were initially unable to use this type of mixer because of the BVA prohibition on multiple structures (and indeed unwilling to use separate valves because of the levy). One UK company, MOV, successfully enforced the cartel rules against the German Lissen company in 1934 when they attempted to market a radio in the UK which had the triode-hexode mixer.

Following pressure from the UK manufacturers, the BVA were compelled to relax the rules and the UK started to adopt triode-hexode mixers. The Mullard ECH35 was a popular choice.

One company, Osram, made an ingenious move. One of their popular pentagrid converter designs was the MX40, initially marketed in 1934. They put on sale in 1936, the X41 triode-hexode frequency changer. The clever bit was that the X41 was a direct plug-in pin-compatible replacement for the MX40. Thus a pentagrid radio could easily be converted to a triode-hexode without any other circuit modifications.

America never really adopted the triode-hexode and it was seldom used, even though the 6K8 triode-hexode was available to manufacturers in 1938.

In some designs, a suppressor grid was added to produce yet another heptode design. Mullard&#x27;s ECH81 became popular with the move to miniature nine-pin valves.

==Octode==

Although not strictly a pentagrid (in that it has more than five grids), the octode (eight-electrode) nevertheless operates on the pentagrid principle. It resulted simply from the addition of an extra screen grid to the UK version of the pentagrid heptode. This was done mainly to improve the antenna/oscillator separation and to reduce the power consumption for use in radio sets operated by dry-cell batteries that were becoming increasingly popular.

In North America, the only octode manufactured was the 7A8. Introduced by Sylvania in 1939 (and used mostly by Philco), this valve was the product of adding a suppressor grid to type 7B8, which was the loctal version of type 6A7. Adding the suppressor allowed Sylvania to lower the current of the 6.3-volt heater from 320 milliamperes to 150 milliamperes while maintaining the same conversion transconductance (550 microsiemens). This allowed Philco to use this valve in every line of radio throughout the 1940s.

The Philips EK3 octode was designated as a &quot;beam octode&quot;. The novel part about the design was that grids 2 and 3 were constructed as beam-forming plates. This was done in such a way that Philips claimed that the oscillator electron beam and the mixer electron beams were separated as much as possible and thus the pulling effect was minimised. No information is available as to the degree of success. The manufacturer&#x27;s information also notes that the valve&#x27;s high performance comes at a cost of a high heater current of 600 mA – double that of more conventional types.

==Pentode==

The use of a pentode would seem an unlikely choice for a frequency converter because it only has one control grid. However, during the Great Depression, many American radio manufacturers used pentode types 6C6, 6D6, 77 and 78 in their lowest priced AC/DC receivers because they were cheaper than pentagrid type 6A7. In these circuits, the suppressor (grid 3) acted as the oscillator grid, and the valve operated in a similar manner to a true pentagrid.

One UK company, Mazda/Ediswan, produced a triode-pentode frequency changer, the AC/TP. Designed for low-cost AC radios, the device was deliberately designed to allow strong signals to pull the oscillator without the risk of radiating the oscillator signal from the aerial. The cathode was common to both sections of the valve. The cathode was connected to a secondary coil on the oscillator coil and thus coupled the oscillator into the pentode mixer section, the signal being applied to grid 1 in the conventional manner. The AC/TP was one of the AC/ range of valves designed for low-cost radios. They were considered durable for their time (even the AC/TP frequency changer, which was normally troublesome). Any AC/ valves encountered today are likely to be brand new as service shops stocked up on spares which were seldom required.

==Nomenclature==
In order to distinguish between the two versions of the heptode, manufacturers data often describes them as &quot;heptode of the hexode type&quot; for a heptode without a suppressor grid, and a &quot;heptode of the octode type&quot;, where a suppressor grid is present.

==Examples==
===True pentagrids===
*2A7 and 6A7 – The first of the RCA pentagrids, 1933
*VHT1 – Ferranti pentagrid, 1933
*MX40 – Osram pentagrid, 1934
*6SA7 and 6BE6/EK90 – Pentagrids produced by RCA, Mullard, etc.
*6SB7Y and 6BA7 – VHF pentagrids, 1946
*1LA6 and later 1L6 – Battery pentagrid for Zenith Trans-Oceanic and other high-end portable short-wave radios
*DK91/1R5, DK92/1AC6, DK96/1AB6, DK192 – Battery pentagrids
*1C8,1E8 - Subminiature battery pentagrids

===Octodes (operating on the pentagrid principle)===
*EK3 – Beam octode produced by Philips
*7A8 – The only octode produced in America by Sylvania, 1939

===Triode/hexode types (not operating on the pentagrid principle)===
*X41 – Osram triode-hexode, 1936; plug-in replacement for MX40 above
*ECH35 – Mullard triode-hexode
*ECH81 (Soviet 6И1П) – Mullard triode-heptode of the octode type
*6K8 – American triode-hexode, 1938

This list is by no means exhaustive.

==See also==

*Beam deflection tube

==Notes==
== References ==
*Valve Manuals
**General Electric Essential Characteristics, 1970
**Sylvania Technical Manual, 1958
*Other Books
**Sibley, Ludwell, &quot;Tube Lore&quot;, 1996
**Stokes, John W, &quot;70 Years of Radio Tubes and Valves&quot; 1997
**Thrower, Keith, &quot;History of the British Radio Valve to 1940&quot;

==External links==

*Mullard FC4
*Octode
*AC/TP data sheet
*2A7 data sheet
*6SA7/12SA7 datasheet
*12BE6 datsheet
*12BA7 Datasheet
*Reflex Converter patent Oct 12 1933</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2620762" start="4" end="23" title="Pentagrid converter" label="pentagrid converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="60" end="71" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357187" start="101" end="116" title="frequency mixer" label="frequency mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332683" start="128" end="143" title="superheterodyne" label="superheterodyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q244948" start="300" end="322" title="intermediate frequency" label="intermediate frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q176129" start="713" end="719" title="triode" label="triode"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="782" end="791" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q176212" start="817" end="824" title="tetrode" label="tetrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q333987" start="1591" end="1606" title="Edwin Armstrong" label="Edwin Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q332683" start="1646" end="1670" title="superheterodyne receiver" label="superheterodyne receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="1938" end="1943" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056207" start="2265" end="2273" title="autodyne" label="autodyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q244948" start="2400" end="2422" title="intermediate frequency" label="intermediate frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="2423" end="2434" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="2545" end="2552" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="2845" end="2863" title="secondary emission" label="secondary emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056207" start="4333" end="4341" title="autodyne" label="autodyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971193" start="4608" end="4633" title="British Valve Association" label="British Valve Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728573" start="4986" end="5003" title="All American Five" label="All American Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q587500" start="6502" end="6520" title="Hartley Oscillator" label="Hartley Oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q176212" start="6664" end="6676" title="tetrode" label="tetrode kink"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="8119" end="8152" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971193" start="9464" end="9467" title="British Valve Association" label="BVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757777" start="9586" end="9589" title="Marconi-Osram Valve" label="MOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952198" start="9898" end="9905" title="Mullard" label="Mullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q310481" start="9948" end="9953" title="Osram" label="Osram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046021" start="11192" end="11200" title="Osram Sylvania" label="Sylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714331" start="11229" end="11235" title="Philco" label="Philco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504887" start="11320" end="11326" title="Loctal base" label="loctal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632964" start="11511" end="11527" title="transconductance" label="transconductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q176161" start="12249" end="12256" title="pentode" label="pentode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12371" end="12387" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098677" start="12706" end="12711" title="Mazda (light bulb)" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991655" start="12712" end="12719" title="Edison and Swan Electric Light Company" label="Ediswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839458" start="14762" end="14782" title="Beam deflection tube" label="Beam deflection tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="14828" end="14844" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046021" start="14879" end="14887" title="Osram Sylvania" label="Sylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488193" wikidata="Q2749661" url="?curid=488193" title="Culture of Colombia">
<text>Many aspects of Colombian culture can be traced back to the early culture of Spain of the 16th century and its collision with Colombia&#x27;s native civilizations (see: Muisca, Tayrona). The Spanish brought Catholicism, the feudal encomienda system, and a caste system that favored European descendants. 

After independence from Spain, the &quot;criollos&quot; struggled to establish a pluralistic political system, between conservative and liberal ideals. The conservatives supported the involvement of the Catholic Church in the state, while liberals favored the separation of these. The conservatives managed to outsource public education to the Catholic Church, and for many years, the church controlled the country&#x27;s education system. Both parties engaged in multiple civil wars resulting in a slow development of the country and the isolation of regions until the end of the 19th century. Ethno-racial groups maintained their ancestral heritage culture: whites tried to keep themselves, despite the growing number of illegitimate children of mixed African or indigenous ancestry. These people were labeled with any number of descriptive names, derived from the &quot;casta&quot; system, such as mestizo, mulatto and moreno. Blacks and indigenous people of Colombia also mixed to form zambos, creating a new ethno-racial group in society. This mix also created a fusion of cultures. Carnivals for example became an opportunity for all classes and colors to congregate without prejudice. The introduction of the bill of rights of men and the abolishment of slavery (1851) eased the segregationist tensions between the races.

==Influences==


===Geography and climate===

The hydrography of Colombia is one of the richest in the world. Its main rivers are Magdalena, Cauca, Guaviare, and Caquetá. Colombia has four main drainage systems: the Pacific drain, the Caribbean drain, the Orinoco Basin and the Amazon Basin. The Orinoco and Amazon Rivers mark limits with Colombia to Venezuela and Peru respectively.

The striking variety in temperature and precipitation results principally from differences in elevation. Temperatures range from very hot at sea level to relatively cold at higher elevations but vary little with the season. Temperatures generally decrease about 3.5°F (2°C) for every 1,000-ft (300-m) increase in altitude above sea level, presenting perpetual snowy peaks to hot river valleys and basins. Rainfall is concentrated in two wet seasons (roughly corresponding to the spring and autumn of temperate latitudes) but varies considerably by location. Colombia&#x27;s Pacific coast has one of the highest levels of rainfall in the world, with the south east often drenched by more than 200 in (500 cm) of rain per year. On the other hand, rainfall in parts of the Guajira Peninsula seldom exceeds 30 in (75 cm) per year. Rainfall in the rest of the country runs between these two extremes.

Colombians customarily describe their country in terms of the climatic zones. Below in elevation is the tierra caliente (hot land), where temperatures vary between . The most productive land and the majority of the population can be found in the tierra templada (temperate land, between ), which provide the best conditions for the country&#x27;s coffee growers, and the tierra fría (cold land, ), where wheat and potatoes dominate. In the tierra fría mean temperatures range between . Beyond the tierra fría lie the alpine conditions of the zona forestada (forested zone) and then the treeless grasslands of the páramos. Above , where temperatures are below freezing, is the tierra helada, a zone of permanent snow and ice.

About 86% of the country&#x27;s total area lies in the tierra caliente. Included in this, and interrupting the temperate area of the Andean highlands, are the long and narrow extension of the Magdalena Valley and a small extension in the Cauca Valley. The tierra fría constitutes just 6% of the total area, but supports about a quarter of the country&#x27;s population.

====Natural regions====

Because of its natural structure, Colombia can be divided into six very distinct natural regions.

* Amazon Region: Comprises the part South of the eastern region of Colombia, flat low-lying region. It is the region of the Amazon jungle of Colombia.
* Andean Region: The Colombian part of the Andes, including the inter-Andean valleys of the rivers Cauca and Magdalena.
* Caribbean Region: The region of the Colombian Caribbean coastal plains and mountainous groups which do not belong to the Andes as the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta.
* Insular Region: comprises the areas outside the continental territories of Colombia in the Caribbean region as the islands of San Andrés and Providencia and the islands of Gorgona and Malpelo in the Pacific Ocean.
* Orinoquía Region: North of the eastern region of Colombia that belongs to the Orinoco River watershed, flat low-lying region. Also known colloquially as the Eastern Plains.
* Pacific Region: It includes the coastal plains of the pacific coast and the mountainous groups which do not belong to the Andes, in particular the Serranía del Baudó.

===Cultural influences===
====Indigenous influences====

The culture of Colombia has vibrant indigenous influences within its culture. Full Indigenous peoples of Colombia are estimated to be around 4-10% of the country’s population, however most still hold on to indigenous traditions and folklore. Indigenous influences in Colombian culture include cuisine, music, architecture, language, folklore, clothing, etymology, and artisan crafts. The national hat of Colombia, the Sombrero Vueltiao, comes from the Zenú, and has been worn since pre-hispanic times. Food like the Arepa has been consumed in Colombia for around 3,000 years, and were made by the many indigenous peoples within the Colombian coast. Each Region of Colombia has their own indigenous culture that influenced the local culture, such as the Quechua in the Southwest, the Quimbaya in the Paisa Region, the Zenú and Tairona in the Caribbean, the Calima in Valle del Cauca, and the largest indigenous influence in Colombia, the Muisca in the Altiplano Cundiboyacense. Artisanship remains popular among indigenous peoples in Colombia to this day, one of the most popular being the Arhuaca mochila. 

====Multicultural elements====
====Immigration and foreign influences====

Colombia did not receive substantial immigration after the period of Spanish rule. Some exceptions are the capital city of Bogota, the second largest city Medellín and the Atlantic port city of Barranquilla. Groups of French, Swiss, Dutch, Belgian, German, Italian, Lebanese and Syrian-Lebanese-Palestinian immigrants settled in the city and played a large role in its development. Shakira, a native of Barranquilla, is of partial Lebanese ancestry. Bogotá received some immigrants from Europe in the period following World War II; the eccentric former mayor of Bogotá and semiotics professor Antanas Mockus is the son of Lithuanian immigrants. Most Chinese in Colombia originally came from Panama, where they helped in the building of the railways of the Panama Canal, to help in building the train and road routes between the Pacific port of Buenaventura and the interior city of Cali. Today, in the surrounding area of the Cauca Valley, virtually every town has a Chinese restaurant.

A few Japanese families settled in Colombia, inspired by the bucolic description of the Cauca Valley in Jorge Isaacs&#x27; novel &quot;María&quot;. The heads-of-household of Japanese descent would be interred in prisons near Zipaquirá, during World War II.
Colombian politicians, intellectuals, and members of elite society turned to England and France for inspiration in the period, following independence from Spain. Colombian&#x27;s civil code (adopted in 1887) is based on the Napoleonic Code. French architect Gastón Lelarge (1861–1934) designed many of the public edifices in Bogotá, as well as the cupola of the church of Saint Peter Claver in Cartagena.

Starting in the 20th century, North American culture had increasing influence on the culture of Colombia. Shopping malls and tract housing in the style of North American suburbs are very popular. Hollywood films, American fashions, and English-language popular music are also popular.

==Regional identities==

Due to existence of geographical and climatic barriers, regions in Colombia remained isolated for much of their history, boosting strong local identities. This is attributed to the fact that Colombia was not a unified nation during the Pre-Columbian Era and different regions had different indigenous civilizations inhabiting it, such as the Quimbaya in the Paisa region, the Muisca in the Altiplano Cundiboyacense, the Zenú and the Tairona in the Caribbean, the Pubenenses in Popayán, the Incas in Nariño, and the Calima in Valle del Cauca. These strong indigenous identities in each region led to the regions developing their own distinct dialects of Spanish influenced by the indigenous languages and distinct and unique cultures.

Despite the constitution of 1886 tried to establish an unified national identity around Spanish language and Catholic faith, Panama successfully seceded from Colombia in 1903. Even today, national consciousness remains low in much of the country.

During 20th century, government encouraged migration from inner regions to Amazon basin and San Andrés island, fostering a process of &quot;colombianization&quot; (&quot;see: Colombianization of Leticia, Putumayo and Caquetá&quot;).

However, separatism is a significant political force in San Andrés and Providencia, where raizals (Protestant Afro Caribbean group) are up one-third of population.

Other groups with a strong regional identities include:
*Paisas from Paisa region (Antioquia department and Coffee Axis), influenced by Basque and Quimbayan culture, they speak Paisa Spanish;
*Costeños from Caribbean region, influenced by African, Tairona, and Zenú culture and related to other Spanish speaking Caribbean nations, they speak Costeño Spanish;
*Pastusos from Southern Andean region, influenced by Inca culture and related to Ecuadorian Highlands, they speak Pastuso Spanish;
*Chocoanos from Pacific region, influenced mostly by African and Emberá culture, they speak Chocoano Spanish;
*Llaneros from Orinoquia region, influenced by the various indigenous groups and related to border populations from Venezuela, they speak Llanero Spanish.

==Education==

The educational experience of many Colombian children begins with attendance at a preschool academy until age five (&quot;Educación preescolar&quot;). Basic education (&quot;Educación básica&quot;) is compulsory by law. It has two stages: Primary basic education (&quot;Educación básica primaria&quot;) which goes from first to fifth grade – children from six to ten years old, and Secondary basic education (&quot;Educación básica secundaria&quot;), which goes from sixth to ninth grade. Basic education is followed by Middle vocational education (&quot;Educación media vocacional&quot;) that comprises the tenth and eleventh grades. It may have different vocational training modalities or specialties (academic, technical, business, and so on.) according to the curriculum adopted by each school.

After the successful completion of all the basic and middle education years, a high-school diploma is awarded. The high-school graduate is known as a &quot;bachiller&quot;, because secondary basic school and middle education are traditionally considered together as a unit called &quot;bachillerato&quot; (sixth to eleventh grade). Students in their final year of middle education take the ICFES test (now renamed Saber 11) in order to gain access to higher education (&quot;Educación superior&quot;). This higher education includes undergraduate professional studies, technical, technological and intermediate professional education, and post-graduate studies.

&quot;Bachilleres&quot; (high-school graduates) may enter into a professional undergraduate career program offered by a university; these programs last up to five years (or less for technical, technological and intermediate professional education, and post-graduate studies), even as much to six to seven years for some careers, such as medicine. In Colombia, there is not an institution such as college; students go directly into a career program at a university or any other educational institution to obtain a professional, technical or technological title. Once graduated from the university, people are granted a (professional, technical or technological) diploma and licensed (if required) to practice the career they have chosen. For some professional career programs, students are required to take the Saber-Pro test, in their final year of undergraduate academic education.

Public spending on education as a proportion of gross domestic product in 2012 was 4.4%. This represented 15.8% of total government expenditure. In 2012, the primary and secondary gross enrolment ratios stood at 106.9% and 92.8% respectively. School-life expectancy was 13.2 years. A total of 93.6% of the population aged 15 and older were recorded as literate, including 98.2% of those aged 15–24.

==Family==
The family is a highly important institution to Colombians as engraved by the traditional Roman Catholic church teachings. Members of the extended family are close and children rarely move far away from their parents. There is a deep sense of familial responsibility that stretches through many generations.

Traditionally, men were usually the head of the household, in charge of earning most of the family&#x27;s income, while women were responsible for cooking, housework, and raising children. However, as in most cultures around the world, the dawn of the 20th century brought forth a great empowerment for women who were given a right to vote during the 1950s rule of dictator Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. The Constitution of 1991 gave a wider opportunity for women, and today, the majority of families (regardless of economic class) have two working parents due to the need of an income to sustain a family.

At a child&#x27;s baptism, the parents of the child will choose godparents, &quot;padrinos&quot;. A child&#x27;s &quot;padrinos&quot; will play an important role in their life, giving advice.

==Political attitudes==

The Politics of Colombia take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Colombia is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of Congress, the Senate, and the House of Representatives of Colombia. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
==Food==
There is a large variety of dishes that take into account the difference in regional climates. For example:
* In the city of Medellín, the typical dish is the bandeja paisa. It includes beans, rice, ground meat or carne asada, chorizo, fried egg, arepa, and chicharrón. It is usually accompanied by avocado, tomato, and special sauces.
* In the city of Cali, the most traditional dish is &quot;sancocho de gallina&quot; - a soup composed mostly of chicken, plantain, corn, coriander, yuca root, and other seasonings.
* In Bogotá and the Andean region, ajiaco is the traditional dish. It is also a type of soup made of chicken, potatoes, and flavoured with a locally grown herb called &quot;guasca&quot;. Traditionally, cream and capers are added just before eating. Both soups are served with white rice, salads with a hint of lemon, avocado, or plantain chips, sweet or salty. For breakfast people often eat changua, a milk, scallion, and egg soup.
* In the Caribbean coast, seafood is popular, including fish and lobster. Coconut rice is a common dish along the coastal cities, as are patacones, or fried plantain patties.
* In the Llanos, meat from the barbecue, such as the &quot;ternera llanera&quot; is common, and also typical river fishes like the &quot;amarillo&quot;.
* In the Amazonas, the cuisine is influenced by Brazilian and Peruvian traditions.
Inland, the dishes reflect the mix of cultures, inherited mainly from Amerindian and European cuisine, and the produce of the land mainly agriculture, cattle, river fishing, and other animals&#x27; raising. Such is the case of the sancocho soup in Valledupar, the arepas (a corn based bread-like patty). Local species of animals like the guartinaja, part of the wayuu Amerindian culture.
* In the Tolima region, the Tamales Tolimenses are a delicacy. These tamales are made of a corn dough and feature peas, carrots, potatoes, rice, chicken, pork, and various spices. They are wrapped in plantain leaves and boiled for three to four hours. It also typical to have Pandebono for breakfast, with hot chocolate.
* On the Islands of San Andres, Providencia, and Santa Catalina, the main dish is &quot;rondon&quot;, a seafood dish made of coconut milk, fish, conch, cassava root (yuca), sweet potato, white yams, and pumpkin seasoned with chili peppers and herbs. They also have a crab soup which is considered a delicacy. It is made with the same ingredients as &quot;rondon&quot;, without the fish.
* Ají picante, a spicy, cilantro-based sauce, is used as a condiment for many dishes and sides, including empanadas, patacones, and soups. This traditional sauce is from the city of Antioquia.

==Festivals in Colombia==

==Folklore==

Colombia has many traditional folk tales and stories about legendary creatures, which are transmitted orally and kept for next generations to come. Some of them are common with other Latin American countries. The Colombian folklore has strong influences from Spanish culture, with elements of Native American and African cultures.
==Painting==

Colombians have been producing art for thousands of years. Ornate golden figures, and jewelry from millennia ago have been discovered by both ruthless conquistadors and careful archaeological digs.

In the colonial time, the painting was characterized by the works of the three Figueroa, pioneers of this art: Baltasar de Figueroa, the old; Gaspar the Figueroa, his son and Baltazar de Figueroa, the young. Gaspar was the teacher of important artists, lie Gregorio Vásquez de Arce y Ceballos. José María Espinoza Prieto, painter and engraver, also is important for his portraits, landscapes and caricatures. Epifanio Garay is highlighted, especially by his portraits.

After the war of independence, in 1819, the Colombian art still was dependent of the figurative. Some people explain that delay in the evolution of the Colombian artistic style is due to the geography of the country, that make difficult a contact and dialogue between the different creative tendencies

In the decades between 1920 and 1940, Marco Tobón Mejía, José Horacio Betancur, Pedro Nel Gómez, Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo, Santiago Martínez Delgado, and Alipio Jaramillo created some dynamics in the elaboration of murals. They were influenced by the Mexican art, although with neoclassic and Art Nouveau characteristics. At the beginning of the 1940 decade, are created works that was new in Colombia, inspired in the post-impressionism and the academic French style.

Many historians of art believe that the Colombian art only began to have a distinctive character in the second half of the 20th century, with a new point of view, integrating the cultural and artistic traditional elements, with the concepts of the art in the 20th century. Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo, for example, combine the new techniques with cultural elements, in his Portrait to the Greiff Brothers. Pedro Nel Gómez, highlighted in the drawing, the water color, the fresco, the oil painting, and the sculpture in wood, stone, and bronze, shows, for example in &quot;Autorretrato con sombrero&quot; (1941), his familiarity with the works of Gauguin and Van Gogh. In other works, he reveal the influence of Cézanne. Alejandro Obregon, considered by many as the father of the Colombian art (most by his originality), has been acclaimed by critics and the public, because of his painting of national landscapes characterized by violent strokes and the symbolic and expressionist use of animals (specially birds, like the condor). His work is influenced by Picasso and Graham Sutherland.

In last years, some Colombian artists, such as Fernando Botero, Enrique Grau, David Manzur, Luis Caballero, Santiago Martinez Delgado, Ignacio Gomez Jaramillo, Débora Arango, Kajuma and have received international fame, awards and wide public acclaim.

==Religion==


Studies suggest that about 70.9% of Colombians are Roman Catholic. However, Colombians are notable for their acceptance of other creeds and faith.

The National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) does not collect religious statistics, and accurate reports are difficult to obtain. However, based on various studies and a survey, about 90% of the population adheres to Christianity, the majority of which (70.9%) are Roman Catholic, while a significant minority (16.7%) adhere to Protestantism (primarily Evangelicalism). Some 4.7% of the population is atheist or agnostic, while 3.5% claim to believe in God but do not follow a specific religion. 1.8% of Colombians adhere to Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses and Adventism and less than 1% adhere to other religions, such as Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Mormonism, Hinduism, Indigenous religions, Hare Krishna movement, Rastafari movement, Eastern Orthodox Church, and spiritual studies. The remaining people either did not respond or replied that they did not know. In addition to the above statistics, 35.9% of Colombians reported that they did not practice their faith actively.

While Colombia remains a mostly Roman Catholic country by baptism numbers, the 1991 Colombian constitution guarantees freedom of religion and all religious faiths and churches are equally free before the law.

==Literature==
Gabriel García Márquez, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1982, is from Aracataca, Colombia. His novel &quot;One Hundred Years of Solitude&quot; is recognized as a landmark of the literary movement known as &quot;magical realism (realismo mágico)&quot;.

Other important writers are Álvaro Mutis, winner of the Cervantes Prize, Jorge Isaacs, who wrote &quot;María&quot;, Gonzalo Arango, founder of the Nadaismo movement, Fernando Vallejo, winner of the Rómulo Gallegos prize, José Asunción Silva, precursor of Latin American romanticism, Raúl Gómez Jattin, Efraím Medina, Andrés Caicedo, the poets Piedad Bonnet and María Mercedes Carranza, Aurelio Arturo, the novelist Germán Espinosa, Augusto Pinilla, and Rafael Chaparro Madiedo. The most important literary magazines are El Malpensante, Arcadia, Número, La Movida Literaria, Universidad de Antioquia, and Puesto de Combate.

==Colombian theatre==
*Cali Festival Theater
*Cali Performance Festival
*Carnavalada - Theater to the Streets - Open Air Theater Festival of Barranquilla
*Colombian Theater Festival of Medellin - Medellin en Escena
*Festival de teatro Gitanos en Macondo - first week of September in Aracataca, Madalena.
*Iberoamerican Theater Festival of Bogota
*International Theater Festival and Storytellers Encounter of Popayan
*International Theater Festival of Barrancabermeja - Theater for the Peace
*International Theater Festival of Manizales

==Film and television==

The interest for the film production came late to Colombia. Vicenzo and Francesco Di Doménico, of Italian origin, were the pioneers in the films production. In 1912, it is inaugurated the first movie theater in Colombia: the Salón Olympia, with a capacity of three thousand people.
The most outstanding directors of the film production are Sergio Cabrera, Felipe Aljure, Luis Ospina, Víctor Gaviria, and Carlos Mayolo. Between the most recent proposals, we find to Andy Baíz and Juan Felipe Orozco, director of &quot;Al final del espectro&quot;. The work of Dago García and Rodrigo Triana is in a commercial line.

==Sports==

Soccer, or, Association Football (Spanish: &quot;fútbol&quot;) is the most popular sport in Colombia. Soccer games are popular social events in Colombia. Baseball has become popular in recent years; it is especially popular along the coast, and is strongly promoted all around the country. Édgar Rentería is an example of a famous Colombian baseball player, but football is still the main sport in the country. Boxing and martial arts are also very popular amongst the male population, and all of these are practiced avidly by the youth.

An ancient game called &quot;Tejo&quot;, inherited from the Muisca, is also played. The object of &quot;tejo&quot; is to throw a small metal disk at a gunpowder detonator in a small circular area. The winner is calculated by the number of explosions compared to number of throws.

==Comedy==

Colombian comedy&#x27;s original birthplace is the radio, since this was the first original mass media with wide coverage of the national territory rendering radio a very important medium for the promotion of comedy. A distinctive representative of Colombian comedy on the radio and who was praised by generations, even before television became popular was Colombian comedian Gullermo Zuluaga, better known by his stage name Montecristo. Since then, many other comedians and storytellers have shaped Colombian&#x27;s concept of what is humorous in many cases at the expense of the tragedies of war, economic distress, and misbehaved politicians.

==Music==
Modern Colombian music is a mixture of Native Indigenous, European, and African influences, as well as more modern American, Puerto Rico and other Caribbean music forms, such as Trinidadian, Cuban, and Jamaican. The music varies greatly between regions but cumbia is widely accepted as the national musical genre.

Cumbia is a mixture of Spanish, Native Indigenous, and African music, the latter brought by slaves. The style of dance is designed to recall the shackles worn around the ankles of the slaves. In the 19th century, slavery was abolished and Africans, Indians, and other ethnic groups mixed more fully. Styles like bambuco, vallenato, and porro were especially influential. When the waltz became popular in the 19th century, a Colombian version called pasillo was invented. International Latin, a type of pop, ballad, and salsa music are best-represented by Charlie Zaa and Joe Arroyo, respectively.

Music and dancing are very popular in Colombia, with dozens of popular vibrant styles. The most popular local musical styles are Vallenato, salsa, &quot;Merengue&quot;, Cumbia and &quot;Bambuco&quot;. The latter is a very complicated dance with many differently named steps.

Colombian rock developed after an influence of Rock en español generating fusion of Rock Music with traditional Colombian music and other musical styles.

The musical genre of Colombian pop music has been growing recently with artists like Fonseca, San Alejo, Lucas Arnau or Mauricio y Palo de Agua. Pop with strong traces of traditional Colombian music is also currently rising. Los De Adentro and Maía represent this trend. Many Colombian artists are recognized internationally including among others, Shakira, who is the most recognized Colombian artist in the world.

==Symbols==
==See also==

* Architecture of Colombia
* Carnival in Colombia
* Colombia in popular culture
* Hispanic culture
* Latin American culture
* List of Colombians
* List of festivals in Colombia
* List of Major League Baseball players from Colombia

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==

* Digital collection at Luis Ángel Arango Library , 
* Music Llanera
* Dancing Devils in Corpus Christi Festival, Sierra Nevada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2749661" start="16" end="33" title="Culture of Colombia" label="Colombian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327022" start="66" end="82" title="culture of Spain" label="culture of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="169" end="175" title="Muisca people" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645057" start="177" end="184" title="Tayrona" label="Tayrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="207" end="218" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="231" end="241" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="256" end="261" title="Casta" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="347" end="355" title="Criollo (people)" label="criollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="509" end="524" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="1179" end="1184" title="casta" label="casta"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="1207" end="1214" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="1216" end="1223" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130244" start="1228" end="1234" title="pardo" label="moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q145573" start="1296" end="1301" title="zambo" label="zambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263282" start="1394" end="1403" title="Carnival in Colombia" label="Carnivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="1766" end="1775" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q853332" start="1777" end="1782" title="Cauca River" label="Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q272885" start="1784" end="1792" title="Guaviare Department" label="Guaviare"/>
<link wikidata="Q171840" start="1798" end="1805" title="Caquetá River" label="Caquetá"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="1932" end="1939" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="1944" end="1950" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42289" start="2287" end="2288" title="Fahrenheit" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="2292" end="2293" title="Celsius" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="2458" end="2468" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="2791" end="2808" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118281" start="3022" end="3037" title="tierra caliente" label="tierra caliente"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116825" start="3164" end="3179" title="tierra templada" label="tierra templada"/>
<link wikidata="Q797948" start="3265" end="3271" title="Colombian coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354534" start="3289" end="3300" title="tierra fría" label="tierra fría"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3460" end="3474" title="Zona Forestal" label="zona forestada"/>
<link wikidata="Q427038" start="3531" end="3537" title="páramo" label="páramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492909" start="3594" end="3607" title="tierra helada" label="tierra helada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970725" start="4121" end="4135" title="natural region" label="natural region"/>
<link wikidata="Q130183" start="4141" end="4154" title="Amazon Region, Colombia" label="Amazon Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q130359" start="4292" end="4305" title="Andean Region, Colombia" label="Andean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="4333" end="4338" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q853332" start="4389" end="4394" title="Cauca River" label="Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="4399" end="4408" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q130185" start="4412" end="4428" title="Caribbean Region, Colombia" label="Caribbean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="4546" end="4574" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312322" start="4578" end="4592" title="Insular Region (Colombia)" label="Insular Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q130322" start="4794" end="4810" title="Orinoquía Region, Colombia" label="Orinoquía Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q130330" start="4969" end="4983" title="Pacific Region, Colombia" label="Pacific Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479954" start="5116" end="5134" title="Serranía del Baudó" label="Serranía del Baudó"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964512" start="5612" end="5629" title="Sombrero Vueltiao" label="Sombrero Vueltiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q191322" start="5646" end="5650" title="Zenú" label="Zenú"/>
<link wikidata="Q642702" start="5710" end="5715" title="Arepa" label="Arepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134936" start="5947" end="5954" title="Quechua people" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q958351" start="5977" end="5985" title="Quimbaya" label="Quimbaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968015" start="5993" end="6005" title="Paisa (region)" label="Paisa Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645057" start="6020" end="6027" title="Tairona" label="Tairona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002874" start="6035" end="6044" title="Caribbean natural region" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q580167" start="6050" end="6056" title="Calima culture" label="Calima"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990" start="6060" end="6075" title="Valle del Cauca" label="Valle del Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="6131" end="6137" title="Muisca people" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362189" start="6145" end="6169" title="Altiplano Cundiboyacense" label="Altiplano Cundiboyacense"/>
<link wikidata="Q129917" start="6283" end="6298" title="Arhuaca mochila" label="Arhuaca mochila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="6500" end="6506" title="Bogota" label="Bogota"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="6532" end="6540" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="6571" end="6583" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="6759" end="6766" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="6817" end="6825" title="ancestry" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="6950" end="6959" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380026" start="6970" end="6984" title="Antanas Mockus" label="Antanas Mockus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="6999" end="7008" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="7027" end="7034" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="7068" end="7074" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="7133" end="7145" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q996581" start="7221" end="7233" title="Buenaventura, Valle del Cauca" label="Buenaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="7259" end="7263" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990" start="7303" end="7315" title="Valle del Cauca" label="Cauca Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="7344" end="7362" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="7371" end="7379" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703852" start="7469" end="7481" title="Jorge Isaacs" label="Jorge Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474079" start="7500" end="7505" title="María (novel)" label="María"/>
<link wikidata="Q205429" start="7590" end="7599" title="Zipaquirá" label="Zipaquirá"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="7846" end="7861" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="7947" end="7953" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="8016" end="8025" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="8058" end="8080" title="American culture" label="North American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="8134" end="8147" title="Shopping mall" label="Shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140144" start="8153" end="8166" title="tract housing" label="tract housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="8198" end="8205" title="suburbs" label="suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="8224" end="8233" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974899" start="8575" end="8592" title="Pre-Columbian cultures of Colombia" label="Pre-Columbian Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q958351" start="8681" end="8689" title="Quimbaya" label="Quimbaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968015" start="8697" end="8709" title="Paisa (region)" label="Paisa region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782830" start="8715" end="8721" title="Muisca Confederation" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362189" start="8729" end="8753" title="Altiplano Cundiboyacense" label="Altiplano Cundiboyacense"/>
<link wikidata="Q191322" start="8759" end="8763" title="Zenú" label="Zenú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645057" start="8772" end="8779" title="Tairona" label="Tairona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002874" start="8787" end="8796" title="Caribbean natural region" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8802" end="8812" title=":es:Pubenenses" label="Pubenenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q335135" start="8816" end="8823" title="Popayán" label="Popayán"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="8829" end="8833" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q230217" start="8838" end="8844" title="Nariño department" label="Nariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q580167" start="8854" end="8860" title="Calima culture" label="Calima"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990" start="8864" end="8879" title="Valle del Cauca" label="Valle del Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995129" start="9086" end="9106" title="Colombian Constitution of 1886" label="constitution of 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="9162" end="9178" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9183" end="9197" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="9199" end="9205" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q130183" start="9397" end="9409" title="Amazon natural region" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131051" start="9414" end="9431" title="San Andrés (island)" label="San Andrés island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25405359" start="9497" end="9546" title="Colombianization of Leticia, Putumayo and Caquetá" label="Colombianization of Leticia, Putumayo and Caquetá"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="9565" end="9575" title="separatism" label="separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26855" start="9612" end="9638" title="San Andrés and Providencia" label="San Andrés and Providencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285231" start="9646" end="9652" title="raizal" label="raizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968015" start="9790" end="9802" title="Paisa region" label="Paisa region"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="9804" end="9824" title="Antioquia department" label="Antioquia department"/>
<link wikidata="Q27960" start="9829" end="9840" title="Colombian coffee growing axis" label="Coffee Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18223620" start="9857" end="9863" title="Basque Colombians" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q958351" start="9868" end="9876" title="Quimbaya" label="Quimbaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9898" end="9911" title="Colombian Spanish#Dialects" label="Paisa Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002874" start="9928" end="9944" title="Caribbean natural region" label="Caribbean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q388449" start="9960" end="9967" title="Afro-Colombians" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645057" start="9969" end="9976" title="Tairona" label="Tairona"/>
<link wikidata="Q191322" start="9982" end="9986" title="Zenú" label="Zenú"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="10016" end="10050" title="Caribbean" label="Spanish speaking Caribbean nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10063" end="10078" title="Colombian Spanish#Dialects" label="Costeño Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="10133" end="10145" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10161" end="10181" title="Ecuador#Geography" label="Ecuadorian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10194" end="10209" title="Colombian Spanish#Dialects" label="Pastuso Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q130330" start="10227" end="10241" title="Pacific/Chocó natural region" label="Pacific region"/>
<link wikidata="Q388449" start="10264" end="10271" title="Afro-Colombians" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335017" start="10276" end="10282" title="Emberá people" label="Emberá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10303" end="10319" title="Colombian Spanish#Dialects" label="Chocoano Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q130322" start="10336" end="10352" title="Orinoquia natural region" label="Orinoquia region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="10380" end="10397" title="Indigenous peoples of Colombia" label="indigenous groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="10437" end="10446" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10459" end="10474" title="Colombian Spanish#Dialects" label="Llanero Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969556" start="11682" end="11692" title="ICFES Examination" label="ICFES test"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="13388" end="13403" title="extended family" label="extended family"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="13706" end="13713" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="13715" end="13724" title="Homemaking" label="housework"/>
<link wikidata="Q455692" start="13933" end="13954" title="Gustavo Rojas Pinilla" label="Gustavo Rojas Pinilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837647" start="13960" end="13980" title="Colombian Constitution" label="Constitution of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="14178" end="14185" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="14224" end="14233" title="godparent" label="godparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="14434" end="14446" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="14447" end="14472" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="14473" end="14481" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853475" start="14495" end="14516" title="President of Colombia" label="President of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="14525" end="14538" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="14543" end="14561" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="14572" end="14590" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="14592" end="14607" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="14640" end="14657" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284236" start="14715" end="14723" title="Congress of Colombia" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398781" start="14729" end="14735" title="Senate of Colombia" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571756" start="14745" end="14781" title="House of Representatives of Colombia" label="House of Representatives of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="14787" end="14796" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="14984" end="14992" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572447" start="15018" end="15031" title="bandeja paisa" label="bandeja paisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="15045" end="15049" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="15052" end="15056" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400960" start="15058" end="15069" title="ground meat" label="ground meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884766" start="15073" end="15084" title="carne asada" label="carne asada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23374" start="15086" end="15093" title="chorizo" label="chorizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q274151" start="15095" end="15104" title="fried egg" label="fried egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q642702" start="15106" end="15111" title="arepa" label="arepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667736" start="15117" end="15127" title="chicharrón" label="chicharrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="15158" end="15165" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="15167" end="15173" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="15212" end="15216" title="Cali, Colombia" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891863" start="15253" end="15272" title="Sancocho" label="sancocho de gallina"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="15307" end="15314" title="Chicken (food)" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="15316" end="15324" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="15326" end="15330" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="15332" end="15341" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q412754" start="15411" end="15417" title="ajiaco" label="ajiaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="15486" end="15492" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160937" start="15549" end="15555" title="galinsoga parviflora" label="guasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13228" start="15578" end="15583" title="cream" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q156251" start="15588" end="15593" title="caper" label="caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="15686" end="15691" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878791" start="15768" end="15775" title="changua" label="changua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="15779" end="15783" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="15785" end="15793" title="scallion" label="scallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="15799" end="15802" title="Egg (food)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="15865" end="15869" title="Fish (food)" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="15874" end="15881" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139863" start="15883" end="15895" title="Coconut rice" label="Coconut rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="16015" end="16023" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492088" start="16290" end="16300" title="Amerindian cuisine" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="16305" end="16321" title="European cuisine" label="European cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891863" start="16451" end="16459" title="sancocho" label="sancocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q376903" start="16468" end="16478" title="Valledupar" label="Valledupar"/>
<link wikidata="Q642702" start="16484" end="16489" title="arepa" label="arepa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16558" end="16568" title="guartinaja" label="guartinaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q891077" start="16582" end="16587" title="wayuu" label="wayuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q234501" start="16617" end="16623" title="Tolima Department" label="Tolima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="16636" end="16654" title="Tamale" label="Tamales Tolimenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="16722" end="16726" title="peas" label="peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="16728" end="16735" title="carrots" label="carrots"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="16762" end="16766" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="16780" end="16786" title="spices" label="spices"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="17033" end="17040" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="17054" end="17066" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="17081" end="17093" title="cassava root" label="cassava root"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="17102" end="17114" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="17132" end="17139" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="17154" end="17166" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="17172" end="17176" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="17551" end="17559" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="17581" end="17591" title="Folklore" label="folk tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239243" start="17610" end="17629" title="legendary creatures" label="legendary creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="17678" end="17688" title="generation" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="17734" end="17748" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327022" start="17810" end="17825" title="Spanish culture" label="Spanish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="17844" end="17859" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q149416" start="17864" end="17871" title="African culture" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="17927" end="17930" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="17962" end="17966" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="17982" end="17989" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="18047" end="18060" title="conquistadors" label="conquistadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="18073" end="18087" title="Archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178050" start="18906" end="18923" title="Marco Tobón Mejía" label="Marco Tobón Mejía"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997322" start="18948" end="18963" title="Pedro Nel Gómez" label="Pedro Nel Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913297" start="18965" end="18988" title="Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo" label="Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826005" start="19118" end="19129" title="Mexican art" label="Mexican art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211606" start="20356" end="20362" title="condor" label="condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272877" start="20470" end="20485" title="Fernando Botero" label="Fernando Botero"/>
<link wikidata="Q558553" start="20487" end="20499" title="Enrique Grau" label="Enrique Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5800153" start="20501" end="20513" title="David Manzur" label="David Manzur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266630" start="20515" end="20529" title="Luis Caballero (painter)" label="Luis Caballero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420315" start="20531" end="20556" title="Santiago Martinez Delgado" label="Santiago Martinez Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913297" start="20558" end="20581" title="Ignacio Gomez Jaramillo" label="Ignacio Gomez Jaramillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821922" start="20583" end="20596" title="Débora Arango" label="Débora Arango"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20598" end="20604" title="Kajuma" label="Kajuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20742" end="20756" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190181" start="20843" end="20891" title="National Administrative Department of Statistics" label="National Administrative Department of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="21071" end="21083" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21119" end="21133" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="21182" end="21195" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="21207" end="21221" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="21255" end="21262" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="21266" end="21274" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="21379" end="21403" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="21408" end="21417" title="Adventism" label="Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="21470" end="21475" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="21477" end="21484" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="21486" end="21494" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="21496" end="21505" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="21507" end="21515" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="21517" end="21537" title="animism" label="Indigenous religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="21539" end="21560" title="Hare Krishna movement" label="Hare Krishna movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="21562" end="21580" title="Rastafari movement" label="Rastafari movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="21582" end="21605" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="21883" end="21890" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="22050" end="22072" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="22088" end="22099" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q178869" start="22169" end="22198" title="One Hundred Years of Solitude" label="One Hundred Years of Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="22273" end="22288" title="magical realism" label="magical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496232" start="22462" end="22470" title="Nadaismo" label="Nadaismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097171" start="22768" end="22791" title="Rafael Chaparro Madiedo" label="Rafael Chaparro Madiedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351545" start="22835" end="22849" title="El Malpensante" label="El Malpensante"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22962" end="22983" title="Cali Festival Theater" label="Cali Festival Theater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22985" end="23010" title="Cali Performance Festival" label="Cali Performance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23012" end="23092" title="Carnavalada - Theater to the Streets - Open Air Theater Festival of Barranquilla" label="Carnavalada - Theater to the Streets - Open Air Theater Festival of Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23094" end="23153" title="Colombian Theater Festival of Medellin - Medellin en Escena" label="Colombian Theater Festival of Medellin - Medellin en Escena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23244" end="23284" title="Iberoamerican Theater Festival of Bogota" label="Iberoamerican Theater Festival of Bogota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23286" end="23354" title="International Theater Festival and Storytellers Encounter of Popayan" label="International Theater Festival and Storytellers Encounter of Popayan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23356" end="23429" title="International Theater Festival of Barrancabermeja - Theater for the Peace" label="International Theater Festival of Barrancabermeja - Theater for the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23431" end="23474" title="International Theater Festival of Manizales" label="International Theater Festival of Manizales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984102" start="23872" end="23883" title="Luis Ospina" label="Luis Ospina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939397" start="23905" end="23918" title="Carlos Mayolo" label="Carlos Mayolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="24128" end="24160" title="Association football" label="Soccer, or, Association Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="24162" end="24169" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="24282" end="24290" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q168880" start="24418" end="24432" title="Édgar Rentería" label="Édgar Rentería"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="24539" end="24545" title="Boxing" label="Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="24550" end="24562" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q939785" start="24696" end="24700" title="Tejo (sport)" label="Tejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="24818" end="24827" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="24828" end="24837" title="detonator" label="detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147951" start="25209" end="25225" title="Colombian comedy" label="Colombian comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169072" start="25554" end="25557" title="Colombian armed conflict (1964–present)" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="25732" end="25740" title="Music of the United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="25742" end="25753" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q10563340" start="25764" end="25779" title="Caribbean music" label="Caribbean music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942303" start="25795" end="25806" title="Music of Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544863" start="25808" end="25813" title="Music of Cuba" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q572717" start="25819" end="25827" title="Music of Jamaica" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q107740285" start="25874" end="25880" title="cumbia" label="cumbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="26145" end="26152" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="26200" end="26213" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q527675" start="26244" end="26251" title="bambuco" label="bambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574985" start="26253" end="26262" title="vallenato" label="vallenato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069904" start="26268" end="26273" title="porro" label="porro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="26312" end="26317" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142141" start="26381" end="26388" title="pasillo" label="pasillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457972" start="26403" end="26422" title="International Latin" label="International Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="26434" end="26437" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="26439" end="26445" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="26451" end="26462" title="salsa music" label="salsa music"/>
<link wikidata="Q741251" start="26487" end="26498" title="Charlie Zaa" label="Charlie Zaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398718" start="26503" end="26513" title="Joe Arroyo" label="Joe Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574985" start="26659" end="26668" title="Vallenato" label="Vallenato"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="26670" end="26675" title="Salsa (music)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="26683" end="26691" title="Merengue (music)" label="Merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q107740285" start="26699" end="26705" title="Cumbia" label="Cumbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q527675" start="26716" end="26723" title="Bambuco" label="Bambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147976" start="26806" end="26820" title="Colombian rock" label="Colombian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994332" start="26853" end="26868" title="Rock en español" label="Rock en español"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="26992" end="27001" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q943904" start="27046" end="27053" title="Juan Fernando Fonseca" label="Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265037" start="27066" end="27077" title="Lucas Arnau" label="Lucas Arnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023229" start="27205" end="27209" title="Maía" label="Maía"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="27310" end="27317" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787121" start="27406" end="27430" title="Architecture of Colombia" label="Architecture of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263282" start="27433" end="27453" title="Carnival in Colombia" label="Carnival in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147910" start="27456" end="27483" title="Colombia in popular culture" label="Colombia in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="27486" end="27502" title="Hispanic culture" label="Hispanic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496275" start="27505" end="27527" title="Latin American culture" label="Latin American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567535" start="27530" end="27548" title="List of Colombians" label="List of Colombians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619475" start="27551" end="27580" title="List of festivals in Colombia" label="List of festivals in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588999" start="27583" end="27634" title="List of Major League Baseball players from Colombia" label="List of Major League Baseball players from Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q531927" start="27716" end="27741" title="Luis Ángel Arango Library" label="Luis Ángel Arango Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488196" wikidata="Q315436" url="?curid=488196" title="Joseph Bertrand">
<text>Joseph Louis François Bertrand (; 11 March 1822 – 5 April 1900) was a French mathematician whose work emphasized number theory, differential geometry, probability theory, economics and thermodynamics.

==Biography==

Joseph Bertrand was the son of physician Alexandre Jacques François Bertrand and the brother of archaeologist Alexandre Bertrand. His father died when Joseph was only nine years old; by that time he had learned a substantial amount of mathematics and could speak Latin fluently.
At eleven years old he attended the course of the École Polytechnique as an auditor. From age eleven to seventeen, he obtained two bachelor&#x27;s degrees, a license and a PhD with a thesis concerning the mathematical theory of electricity, and was admitted to the 1839 entrance examination of the École Polytechnique. Bertrand was a professor at the École Polytechnique and Collège de France, and was a member of the Paris Academy of Sciences of which he was the permanent secretary for twenty-six years.

He conjectured, in 1845, that there is at least one prime number between &quot;n&quot; and 2&quot;n&quot; − 2 for every &quot;n&quot; &gt; 3. Chebyshev proved this conjecture, now termed Bertrand&#x27;s postulate, in 1850. He was also famous for two paradoxes of probability, known now as Bertrand&#x27;s Paradox and the Paradox of Bertrand&#x27;s box. There is another paradox concerning game theory that is named for him, known as the Bertrand Paradox. In 1849, he was the first to define real numbers using what is now termed a Dedekind cut.

Bertrand translated into French Carl Friedrich Gauss&#x27;s work concerning the theory of errors and the method of least squares.

Concerning economics, he reviewed the work on oligopoly theory, specifically the Cournot Competition Model (1838) of French mathematician Antoine Augustin Cournot. His Bertrand Competition Model (1883) argued that Cournot had reached a very misleading conclusion, and he reworked it using prices rather than quantities as the strategic variables, thus showing that the equilibrium price was simply the competitive price.

His book Thermodynamique states in Chapter XII, that thermodynamic entropy and temperature are only defined for reversible processes. He was one of the first people to state this publicly.

In 1858 he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

==Works by Bertrand==
* &quot;Traité de calcul différentiel et de calcul intégral&quot; (Paris : Gauthier-Villars, 1864–1870) (2 volumes treatise on calculus)
* &quot;Rapport sur les progrès les plus récents de l&#x27;analyse mathématique&quot; (Paris: Imprimerie Impériale, 1867) (report on recent progress in mathematical analysis)
* &quot;Traité d&#x27;arithmétique&quot; (L. Hachette, 1849) (arithmetics)
* &quot;Thermodynamique&quot; (Paris : Gauthier-Villars, 1887)
* &quot;Méthode des moindres carrés&quot; (Mallet-Bachelier, 1855) (translation of Gauss&#x27;s work on least squares)
* &quot;Leçons sur la théorie mathématique de l&#x27;électricité / professées au Collège de France&quot; (Paris : Gauthier-Villars et fils, 1890)
* &quot;Calcul des probabilités &quot; (Paris : Gauthier-Villars et fils, 1889)
* &quot;Arago et sa vie scientifique&quot; (Paris : J. Hetzel, 1865) (biography of Arago)
* &quot;Blaise Pascal&quot; (Paris : C. Lévy, 1891) (biography)
* &quot;Les fondateurs de l&#x27;astronomie moderne: Copernic, Tycho Brahé, Képler, Galilée, Newton&quot; (Paris: J. Hetzel, 1865) (biographies)

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* Bertrand curve

==Further reading==

==References==
==External links==

*Bertrand, Joseph Louis Francois (1822–1900)
*Joseph Louis François Bertrand (archived 4 April 2004)
*References for Joseph Bertrand (archived 3 March 2016)
* Joseph Louis François Bertrand
* 
* Author profile in the database zbMATH</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315436" start="0" end="30" title="Joseph Bertrand" label="Joseph Louis François Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="77" end="90" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="113" end="126" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="128" end="149" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="151" end="169" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="171" end="180" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="185" end="199" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833458" start="258" end="293" title="Alexandre Jacques François Bertrand" label="Alexandre Jacques François Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342814" start="327" end="345" title="Alexandre Bertrand" label="Alexandre Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="546" end="565" title="École Polytechnique" label="École Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="847" end="866" title="École Polytechnique" label="École Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="871" end="888" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="914" end="939" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="Paris Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q206012" start="1145" end="1154" title="Pafnuty Chebyshev" label="Chebyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q632546" start="1190" end="1215" title="Bertrand&amp;#x27;s postulate" label="Bertrand&amp;#x27;s postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="1266" end="1277" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q828552" start="1292" end="1315" title="Bertrand paradox (probability)" label="Bertrand&amp;#x27;s Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118084" start="1335" end="1354" title="Bertrand&amp;#x27;s box paradox" label="Bertrand&amp;#x27;s box"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="1392" end="1403" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4344853" start="1440" end="1456" title="Bertrand paradox (economics)" label="Bertrand Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q851333" start="1534" end="1546" title="Dedekind cut" label="Dedekind cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="1581" end="1601" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364905" start="1629" end="1645" title="theory of errors" label="theory of errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="1654" end="1677" title="method of least squares" label="method of least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1691" end="1700" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q103639" start="1726" end="1735" title="oligopoly" label="oligopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q601799" start="1761" end="1786" title="Cournot competition" label="Cournot Competition Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q323245" start="1818" end="1842" title="Antoine Augustin Cournot" label="Antoine Augustin Cournot"/>
<link wikidata="Q828555" start="1848" end="1874" title="Bertrand competition" label="Bertrand Competition Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="2049" end="2060" title="Economic equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908691" start="2214" end="2232" title="reversible process (thermodynamics)" label="reversible process"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="2339" end="2372" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="2930" end="2935" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="2951" end="2964" title="least squares" label="least squares"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3516" end="3530" title="Differentiable curve#Bertrand curve" label="Bertrand curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q190269" start="3814" end="3820" title="Zentralblatt MATH" label="zbMATH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488206" wikidata="Q1565257" url="?curid=488206" title="HMS Repulse">
<text>Twelve ships of the Royal Navy have been named HMS &quot;Repulse&quot;:
* was a 50-gun galleon also known as &quot;Due Repulse&quot;, launched in 1595 and in the records until 1645.
* was a 32-gun fifth rate, originally the . She was captured in 1759 by and foundered in 1776.
* was a 10-gun cutter purchased in 1779 and in the records until 1781.
* was a 64-gun third rate launched in 1780 and wrecked in 1800.
* was a 12-gun cutter purchased in 1780 and wrecked in 1782.
* was a 4-gun vessel purchased in 1794 and broken up a year later.
* was a 74-gun third rate launched in 1803 and broken up in 1820.
* HMS &quot;Repulse&quot; was a screw-propelled 91-gun second rate launched on 27 February 1855 as HMS &quot;Repulse&quot; but renamed HMS &quot;Victor Emmanuel&quot; on 7 December 1855, used as a receiving ship after 1873, and sold in 1899.
* was an ironclad ship launched in 1868 and sold in 1889.
* was a launched in 1892 and sold in 1911.
* was a launched in 1916 and sunk in a Japanese air attack in 1941.
* was a launched in 1967 and laid up in 1997.

==Battle honours==
* Cadiz, 1596
* Martinique, 1762
* The Saints, 1782
* Atlantic, 1939–40
* Norway, 1940
* &quot;Bismarck&quot;, 1941</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="20" end="30" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565257" start="47" end="64" title="HMS Repulse" label="HMS &amp;quot;Repulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q181469" start="87" end="94" title="galleon" label="galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q892554" start="197" end="207" title="fifth rate" label="fifth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="292" end="298" title="Cutter (ship)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="363" end="373" title="third rate" label="third rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="555" end="565" title="third rate" label="third rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634845" start="608" end="631" title="HMS Victor Emmanuel" label="HMS &amp;quot;Repulse&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q892368" start="661" end="672" title="second rate" label="second rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416413" start="803" end="817" title="receiving ship" label="receiving ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="857" end="865" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q700569" start="988" end="1015" title="Sinking of Prince of Wales and Repulse" label="Japanese air attack in 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535988" start="1085" end="1090" title="Capture of Cádiz" label="Cadiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q63431" start="1099" end="1109" title="Invasion of Martinique (1762)" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850800" start="1118" end="1128" title="Battle of the Saintes" label="The Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="1137" end="1145" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="1157" end="1163" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q150857" start="1172" end="1192" title="German battleship Bismarck" label="&amp;quot;Bismarck&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488208" wikidata="Q3590981" url="?curid=488208" title="Standard diving dress">
<text>Standard diving dress, also known as hard-hat or copper hat equipment, deep sea diving suit or heavy gear, is a type of diving suit that was formerly used for all relatively deep underwater work that required more than breath-hold duration, which included marine salvage, civil engineering, pearl shell diving and other commercial diving work, and similar naval diving applications. Standard diving dress has largely been superseded by lighter and more comfortable equipment.

Standard diving dress consists of a diving helmet made from copper and brass or bronze, clamped over a watertight gasket to a waterproofed canvas suit, an air hose from a surface-supplied manually operated pump or low pressure breathing air compressor, a diving knife, and weights to counteract buoyancy, generally on the chest, back and shoes. Later models were equipped with a diver&#x27;s telephone for voice communications with the surface. The term &quot;deep sea diving&quot; was used to distinguish diving with this equipment from &quot;shallow water diving&quot; using a shallow water helmet, which was not sealed to the suit.

Some variants used rebreather systems to extend the use of gas supplies carried by the diver, and were effectively self-contained underwater breathing apparatus, and others were suitable for use with helium based breathing gases for deeper work. Divers could be deployed directly by lowering or raising them using the lifeline, or could be transported on a diving stage. Most diving work using standard dress was done heavy, with the diver sufficiently negatively buoyant to walk on the bottom, and the suits were not capable of the fine buoyancy control needed for mid-water swimming.

==History==
===Early history===
In 1405, Konrad Kyeser described a diving dress made of a leather jacket and metal helmet with two glass windows. The jacket and helmet were lined by sponge to &quot;retain the air&quot; and a leather pipe was connected to a bag of air. A diving suit design was illustrated in a book by Vegetius in 1511.

Borelli designed diving equipment that consisted of a metal helmet, a pipe to &quot;regenerate&quot; air, a leather suit, and a means of controlling the diver&#x27;s buoyancy. In 1690, Thames Divers, a short-lived London diving company, gave public demonstrations of a Vegetius type shallow water diving dress. Klingert designed a full diving dress in 1797. This design consisted of a large metal helmet and similarly large metal belt connected by leather jacket and trousers.

===Development of the standard diving dress===

The first successful diving helmets were produced by the brothers Charles and John Deane in the 1820s. Inspired by a fire accident he witnessed in a stable in England, he designed and patented a &quot;Smoke Helmet&quot; to be used by firemen in smoke-filled areas in 1823. The apparatus comprised a copper helmet with an attached flexible collar and garment. A long leather hose attached to the rear of the helmet was to be used to supply air – the original concept being that it would be pumped using a double bellows. A short pipe allowed breathed air to escape. The garment was constructed from leather or airtight cloth, secured by straps.

The brothers had insufficient funds to build the equipment themselves, so they sold the patent to their employer, Edward Barnard. It was not until 1827 that the first smoke helmets were built, by German-born British engineer Augustus Siebe. In 1828 they decided to find another application for their device and converted it into a diving helmet. They marketed the helmet with a loosely attached &quot;diving suit&quot; so that a diver could perform salvage work but only in a full vertical position, otherwise water entered the suit.


In 1829 the Deane brothers sailed from Whitstable for trials of their new underwater apparatus, establishing the diving industry in the town. In 1834 Charles used his diving helmet and suit in a successful attempt on the wreck of &quot;Royal George&quot; at Spithead, during which he recovered 28 of the ship&#x27;s cannon. In 1836, John Deane recovered timbers, guns, longbows, and other items from the recently rediscovered wreckage of the &quot;Mary Rose&quot;.

By 1836 the Deane brothers had produced the world&#x27;s first diving manual, &quot;Method of Using Deane&#x27;s Patent Diving Apparatus&quot;, which explained in detail the workings of the apparatus and pump, plus safety precautions.

In the 1830s the Deane brothers asked Siebe to apply his skill to improve their underwater helmet design. Expanding on improvements already made by another engineer, George Edwards, Siebe produced his own design: a helmet fitted to a full-length watertight canvas diving suit. The real success of the equipment was a valve in the helmet that meant that it could not flood no matter how the diver moved. This resulted in safer and more efficient underwater work.

Siebe introduced various modifications on his diving dress design to accommodate the requirements of the salvage team on the wreck of , including making the helmet be detachable from the corselet; his improved design gave rise to the typical standard diving dress which revolutionised underwater civil engineering, underwater salvage, commercial diving and naval diving.

In France in the 1860s, Rouquayrol and Denayrouze developed a single-stage demand regulator with a small low pressure reservoir, to make more economical use of surface supplied air pumped by manpower. This was originally used without any form of mask or helmet, but vision was poor, and the &quot;pig-snout&quot; copper mask was developed in 1866 to provide a clearer view through a glass faceplate on a copper mask clamped to the neck opening of the suit. This was soon improved to become a three-bolt helmet supported by a corselet (1867). Later versions were fitted for free-flow air supply.

Later the standard helmet was modified for use with helium mixtures for deep work. This incorporated a carbon dioxide scrubber attached to the back of the helmet, with a venturi powered circulation system to recycle the gas, making it effectively a semi-closed circuit rebreather, much like the Dräger &quot;bubikopf&quot; helmet rebreather system.

===Developments beyond the standard diving dress===
More recent diving helmet designs can be classified as free-flow and demand helmets. They are generally made of stainless steel, fiberglass, or other strong and lightweight material. The copper helmets and standard diving dress are still widely used in parts of the world, but have largely been superseded by lighter and more comfortable equipment.

==General description==
Standard diving dress can be used up to depths of of sea water, provided a suitable breathing gas mixture is used. Air or other breathing gas may be supplied from hand pumps, compressors, or banks of high pressure storage cylinders, generally through a hose from the surface, though some models are autonomous, with built-in rebreathers. In 1912 the German firm Drägerwerk of Lübeck introduced their own version of standard diving dress using a gas supply from an oxygen rebreather and no surface supply. The system used a copper diving helmet and standard heavy diving suit. The breathing gas was circulated by using an injector system in the loop. This was developed further with the &quot;Modell 1915 &quot;Bubikopf&quot;&quot; helmet and the DM20 oxygen rebreather system for depths up to , and the DM40 mixed gas rebreather which used an oxygen cylinder and an air cylinder for the gas supply for depths to .

Another unusual variation was the &quot;pig-snout mask&quot; of Rouquayrol-Denayrouze, which used a copper full-face mask clamped to the diving suit, which was structurally similar to the front of a copper helmet, and functioned in much the same way. It tended to sit quite far forward, making it inconvenient except when looking down, but was quite popular among German amber divers, as they spent most of their time looking down at the bottom.

A continuous flow of compressed air is provided to the helmet and vented to the surrounding water at a pressure very close to the ambient pressure at the exhaust port, which lets the diver breathe normally. The helmet must have a non-return valve at the air inlet port of the helmet, to prevent massive and fatal squeeze, should the air line be cut at the surface. Diving helmets, while very heavy, displace a great deal of water and combined with the air in the suit, would make the diver float with his head out of the water. To overcome this, some helmets are weighted on the corselet, while other divers wear weighted belts which have straps that go over the corselet. Some helmets have an air inlet control valve, while others may have only one control, the exhaust back-pressure. Helmet divers are subject to the same pressure limitations as other divers, such as decompression sickness and nitrogen narcosis.

The full standard diving dress can weigh .

===Suit===

The earliest suits were made of waterproofed canvas invented by Charles Mackintosh. From the late 1800s and throughout most of the 20th century, most suits consisted of a solid sheet of rubber between layers of tan twill. Their thick vulcanized rubber collar is clamped to the corselet making the joint waterproof. The inner collar (bib) was made of the same material as the suit and pulled up inside the corselet and around the diver&#x27;s neck. The space between the bib and corselet would trap most condensation and minor leakage in the helmet, keeping the diver dry. The sleeves could be fitted with integral gloves or rubber wrist seals and the suit legs ended in integral socks.

The twill was available in heavy, medium, and light grades, with the heavy having the best resistance to abrasion and puncture against rough surfaces like barnacles, rocks, and the jagged edges of wreckage. Vulnerable areas were reinforced by extra layers of fabric. Different types of dress are defined by the clamping of the collar seal to the rim of the corselet or to the joint between bonnet and corselet, and the number of bolts used for this purpose. The legs of the suit may be laced at the back to limit inflated volume, which could prevent excess gas from getting trapped in the legs and dragging an inverted diver to the surface. In normal UK commercial diving activities, the legs often did not have the lace up option.

The rubberised fabric was waterproof, as was the seal to the helmet and the cuff seals, so the diver remains dry – a big advantage during long dives – and wears sufficient clothing under the suit to keep warm depending on the water temperature and expected level of exertion. The suit was usually a very baggy fit on the diver, and if over-inflated, would be too bulky to allow the diver to reach the control valves for air supply and exhaust. This contributed to the risk of suit blowup, which could cause an uncontrollable buoyant ascent, with high risk of decompression illness. To add to this problem, a runaway ascent could cause sufficient internal pressure to burst the seal at the corselet, which could result in a loss of buoyancy, and the injured diver sinking back to the bottom in a flooded suit. Consequently, divers would ensure that they remained sufficiently negative when underwater to minimise this risk. The bulkiness of fit, weighted boots and lack of fins made swimming impracticable. At the surface the diver could struggle a short distance using the arms, but underwater would normally walk on the bottom and climb up and down over obstacles, taking care to avoid passing under anything that could foul the air hose.

===Helmet===

The helmet is usually made of two main parts: the bonnet, which covers the diver&#x27;s head, and the corselet which supports the weight of the helmet on the diver&#x27;s shoulders, and is clamped to the suit to create a watertight seal. The bonnet is attached and sealed to the corselet at the neck, either by bolts or an interrupted screw-thread, with some form of locking mechanism.

The helmet may be described by the number of bolts which hold it to the suit or to the corselet, and the number of vision ports, known as lights. For example, a helmet with four vision ports, and twelve studs securing the suit to the corselet, would be known as a &quot;four light, twelve bolt helmet&quot;, and a three-bolt helmet used three bolts to secure the bonnet to the corselet, clamping the flange of the neck seal between the two parts of the helmet.

When the telephone was invented, it was applied to the standard diving dress for greatly improved communication with the diver.

====Bonnet====

The bonnet (UK) or helmet (US) is usually a spun copper shell with soldered brass or bronze fittings. It covers the diver&#x27;s head and provides sufficient space to turn the head to look out of the glazed faceplate and other viewports (windows). The front port can usually be opened for ventilation and communication when the diver is on deck, by being screwed out or swung to the side on a hinge and secured in the closed position by a wing nut against a rubber gasket. The other lights (another name for the viewports) are generally fixed. A common arrangement was a faceplate in front, a right and left sideplate on the sides and a top plate above the faceplate. Viewports were glass on the early helmets, with some of the later helmets using acrylic, and are usually protected by brass or bronze grilles. The helmet has gooseneck fittings to connect the air line and the diver&#x27;s telephone, usually at the back.

All helmets except the very earliest include a non-return valve where the airline is connected, which prevents potentially fatal helmet squeeze if the pressure in the hose is lost. The difference in pressure between the surface and the diver can be so great that if the air line is cut at the surface and there is no non-return valve, the diver would be partly squeezed into the helmet by the external pressure, and injured or possibly killed.

Helmets also have a spring-loaded exhaust valve which allows excess air to leave the helmet. The spring force is adjustable by the diver to prevent the suit from deflating completely or over-inflating and the diver being floated uncontrollably to the surface. The exhaust valve could also be temporarily opened or closed by pressing the internal flange with the chin to let more air out, or by pulling it with the lips to temporarily build up internal volume by closing the valve. The exhaust valve would generally only be adjustable within a specific pressure range. Beyond that limit it would open to release excess pressure, which would prevent a blowup if the diver was upright. Some helmets have an extra manual exhaust valve known as a spit-cock, which was usually a simple quarter-turn valve. This allowed the diver to manually vent excess air when in a position where the main exhaust could not function correctly, and make adjustments to the volume of the air in the suit without changing the exhaust valve setting. Water could also be sucked in through the spitcock and spat onto the viewports to defog them.

====Corselet====

The corselet (UK), also known as a breastplate (US), is an oval or rectangular collar-piece resting on the shoulders, chest and back, to support the helmet and seal it to the suit, usually made from copper and brass, but occasionally steel. The helmet is usually connected to the suit by placing the holes around the rubberised collar of the suit over bolts (studs) along the rim of the corselet, and then clamping the brass straps known as (or ) against the collar with wing nuts to press the rubber against the metal of the corselet rim to make a water-tight seal. Shim washers were used under the ends of the brailes to spread the load on the rubber evenly. An alternative method was to bolt the bonnet to the corselet over a rubber collar bonded to the top of the suit in the three- or two-bolt system.

Most six and twelve bolt helmet bonnets are joined to the corselet by 1/8th turn interrupted thread. The helmet neck thread is placed onto the neck of the corselet facing the divers left front, where the threads do not engage, and then rotated forward, engaging the thread and seating on a leather gasket to make a watertight seal. The helmet usually has a safety lock at the back which prevents the bonnet from rotating back and separating underwater. The lock may be further secured with a cotter pin. Other styles of connection are also used, with the joint secured by clamps or bolts (usually three, occasionally two).

The breastplate rests on the divers shoulders over the top of the suit, and over an optional padded breastplate cushion worn under the suit for comfort.

===Diver&#x27;s weights===

There are two weight systems, both are still in use. The earlier helmet weights are used in pairs. The large horse-shoe type weights hold the buoyant helmet down and are suspended from the corselet by figure eight hooks that go over the breast plate weight studs. The Greek sponge divers simply joined the weights with ropes which went over the corselet like saddle bags. The other system is the weight harness, which is a usually a weight belt that fastens around the waist with shoulder straps which cross at the back and go over the breast plate at the shoulders, often with a crotch strap to prevent the harness from riding up when the diver works in tilted positions. The harness system puts the centre of gravity lower, for better upright stability, and prevents excessive weight shift when the diver must work in awkward positions, but still applies the ballast load to the buoyant helmet assembly when upright through the shoulder straps. The US Navy Mk V weight belt was of this style and weighed about but commercial belts were usually about .

===Weighted shoes===

The helmet divers used heavily weighted shoes to steady them on the bottom. The weighted sole is bolted to a wooden insole, which in turn has a leather, canvas or rubber upper. Lead was the most common sole material, and a pair could weigh (more in the case of the US Navy Mark V mod 1 heliox equipment). Brass soled shoes with canvas uppers were introduced in WWII and are still in use. Some early brass shoes were called sandals because they were a casting held to the diver&#x27;s feet by simple straps. Japanese divers often used iron soled shoes. The diver tends to lean forward against the drag of the water when walking on the bottom, and could often not see where he was putting his feet, so the toes are capped, usually with brass.

===Diver&#x27;s knife===

The diver&#x27;s knife is a tool which is primarily intended for cutting away entanglement with ropes, lines and nets. It can also be used to some extent to pry and hammer, as well as cut, and may have a metal pommel for hammering, but the professional diver generally carries tools better suited to the work, and will use a hammer or pry-bar when that work is planned. The knife often has one side of the blade serrated to cut heavy material such as thick rope, and a sharper plain edge for cutting fine lines such as monofilament fishing line and nets. There are two common styles of traditional diver&#x27;s knife sheaths; one is flat with a spring retention and the other has a circular section with an acme triple-start thread, allowing the diver to insert the knife in any orientation, rotate to engage the threads and lock the knife into the sheath.

===Air supply===

Originally supplied with air by a manually operated diver&#x27;s air pump. Later also supplied by mechanised compressors, but the manual pump remained an option well into the 20th century. Air was supplied through a hose, and a rope strength member added to support the weight of the diver. Later a telephone cable was added and the diver&#x27;s umbilical was the result of combining these items. Air supply passes through a non-return valve at the connection to the helmet, which prevents back flow if the hose is cut.

Flow of air through the helmet could be controlled by manually adjusting the back-pressure on the helmet exhaust valve, usually on the lower right side of the bonnet, and by manually adjusting the inlet supply valve on the airline, usually fastened to the front lower left of the corselet. Flow rate would also be affected by the surface delivery system and depth. Manual pumps would be operated at the speed necessary for sufficient air supply, which could be judged by delivery pressure and feedback from the diver. Many manual pumps had delivery pressure gauges calibrated in units of water depth - feet or metres of water column - which would provide the supervisor with a reasonable indication of diver depth.

====Diver&#x27;s air pump====
Originally manually operated pumps were used to supply breathing air. Later air supply was also possible from powered compressors.

=====Manual systems=====
Three basic pump configurations were in common use. The most primitive was the bellows type, in which pressure was generated by pushing a lever back and forth, one stroke increasing the internal volume of the bellows, and the return stroke decreasing it. non return valves would allow air flow only in one direction, so the suction stroke would draw air into the bellows while the delivery valve prevented back-flow from the hose, and the delivery stroke would push air down the hose, with the inlet valve preventing leakage to the outside. Bellows pumps could be single action, where the delivery flow was interrupted during the intake stroke, or double action, where two bellows worked out of phase, the suction stroke of one coinciding with the delivery stroke of the other.

The lever action pump, with one or two cylinders and single or double ended lever, was a modification using pistons in cylinders in place of the bellows, but otherwise worked in the same way. Cranked pumps, with one to three cylinders, single or double action, were a development of cylinder pumps which used a crankshaft to drive the pistons, and handles on flywheels to operate the crankshaft. The use of flywheels, multiple cylinders and double-action cylinders would make it easier for the operators to produce a smooth airflow at relatively constant effort.

=====Powered compressors=====
Powered low pressure air compressors were also used to supply the diver with breathing air. The motive power could be anything available on the vessel, such as small internal combustion engines, hydraulic, steam or electrical power.

====Air supply hose====
*Air line: The earliest air hoses were made from leather, but by 1859 rubber was in use. rubber was later used as a coating on a strength layer of woven fabric. This could be built up in layers to achieve the required strength to withstand the necessary internal pressure, which was proportional to the depth at which the diver worked.
*Umbilical: A diver&#x27;s umbilical is a cable made up of all the required services to the diver. When used for later versions of standard diving dress this included the air hose, and usually also included a diver telephone cable, which could include a strength member capable of lifting the diver, and sometimes an electric power supply for one or more lights carried by the diver.

====Air control valve====
Most later suits had a screw-down air control valve on the air hose to control air flow rate into the helmet. The early helmets did not have air control valves and the diver signaled the surface with pulls on his rope or air line, indicating that he needed more or less air, and the pump operators would change the rate of pumping to suit.

===Communications===

The earliest form of communication between diver and surface was line signals, and this remains the standard for emergency signalling in the event of voice communications failure for surface-supplied and tethered scuba divers. Line signals involve a code of groups of long and short pulls on the lifeline, and a matching set of responses to indicate that the signal was received and understood. The system is limited but fairly robust. It can fail if there is a snag in the line.

Later, a speaking tube system, patented by Louis Denayrouze in 1874, was tried; this used a second hose with a diaphragm sealing each end to transmit sound, but it was not very successful. A small number were made by Siebe-Gorman, but the telephone system was introduced soon after this and since it worked better and was safer, the speaking tube was soon obsolete, and most helmets which had them were returned to the factory and converted.

In the early 20th century electrical telephone systems were developed which improved the quality of voice communication. These used wires incorporated into the lifeline or air line, and used either headsets worn inside the helmet or speakers mounted inside the helmet. The microphone could be mounted in the front of the helmet or a contact throat-microphone could be used. At first it was only possible for the diver to talk to the surface telephonist, but later double telephone systems were introduced which allowed two divers to speak directly to each other, while being monitored by the attendant. Diver telephones were manufactured by Siebe-Gorman, Heinke, Rene Piel, Morse, Eriksson, and Draeger among others.

==Variations==
Two basic systems of attaching the helmet to the suit were in common use: In one style the perimeter of the corselet was clamped to a rubber gasket by up to 12 bolts, using brass brails to distribute the load and provide a reasonably even clamping pressure to make the watertight seal. In this style the bonnet to corselet seal was independent of the seal to the suit, and often used an interrupted thread system, which involved about a 45 degree rotation to engage the thread fully. The other type used a rubber flange which fitted over the neck hole of the corselet, and over which the bonnet was clamped, usually with two or three bolts. It was also fairly common to clamp the suit to the corselet edge by brails, and connect the helmet to the corselet by two three or four bolts, which could either be studs tapped into the corselet flange, or fold-away bolts hinged to the corselet, and engaged with slots in the helmet flange.

===Three-bolt equipment===
Three bolt equipment, (Tryokhboltovoye snaryazheniye, Russian:Трехболтовое снаряжение, Russian:трехболтовка) consists of an air-hose supplied copper helmet that is fastened to a corselet and waterproof suit by three bolts which clamp the rubber neck flange of the suit between the metal flanges of the bonnet and the corselet, making a watertight seal between the helmet and suit., two lead weights attached to the chest and back, heavy boots made of copper and lead, and a diver&#x27;s knife.

Three bolt equipment was used by the Russian Navy in the 19th and 20th centuries.

Three-bolt equipment was also made in France by Denayrouze-Rouquayrol from 1874 or earlier, and in Germany by Draegerwerk from about 1912.

===Twelve bolt equipment===

In twelve bolt equipment the rim of the corselet is clamped to the gasket of the suit, using brass brails to spread the load evenly.

Twelve bolt equipment was manufactured in the UK by Siebe-Gorman and Heinke, in France by Rouquayrol-Denayrouze, and in the US by several manufacturers for the US Navy.

====US Navy Mk V equipment====
The US Navy Mk V diving equipment was a standard military specification manufactured by several suppliers, including DESCO, Morse Diving, Miller–Dunn and A. Schräder&#x27;s Son, over a fairly long period. The major components were: Spun copper and tobin bronze, 12 bolt, 4 light, 1/8 turn neck connection helmet with breastplate (corselet), clamps (brails) and wingnuts, weight . Weight harness of lead weights on leather belt with adjustable shoulder straps and crotch strap, . Lead soled boots with brass toe caps, canvas uppers with laces and leather straps weighing each. Suit weight , for a total weight of approximately . The Mk V equipment uses a 1/2&quot; air hose with an external 1 1/16&quot; x 17 submarine thread connection on the non-return valve.

===Shallow-water helmets===

Shallow water helmets are not standard diving dress, but were used by divers for shallow work where a dry suit was not required. Generally a shallow water helmet was a single item, which was lowered over the diver&#x27;s head and rested on the shoulders, with an open bottom, so no exhaust valve was required. The helmet retained an air space as long as it was kept reasonably upright, and if the air spilled out it would refill as soon as the diver returned to an upright posture. It is held in place by gravity. The precursor to the standard helmet, Deane&#x27;s helmet, was of this type. This type of equipment is only acceptably safe to use at depths where the diver can simply lift it off and make a free swimming ascent to the surface in an emergency.

===Gas recirculation===
Bernhard Dräger of Lübeck developed an injection system which used a high velocity injection of fresh gas into a divergent nozzle to entrain breathing gas in the loop of a rebreather to circulate the gas at without effort by the diver. By 1899 this had been developed to a stage where it could be used as a portable rebreather. By 1912 it had been developed into a system carried by a diver and used as a semi-closed diving rebreather with a copper helmet which did not need a mouthpiece. This was technically a self-contained underwater breathing apparatus based on the standard diving dress. The 1915 &quot;bubikopf&quot; helmet was a development from this, which used a characteristic overhang at the back of the helmet to keep the loop connections compact.

Competing rebreather systems were produced by Siebe-Gorman, &amp; Co. in England, but were not as effective.

Draeger rebreather back-packs DM20 and DM40 were respectively for use with pure oxygen addition at depths not exceeding 20m, and for a combination of oxygen from one tank and air from the other at depths up to 40m. This combination system was effectively a nitrox system.

A small number of copper Heliox helmets were made for the US Navy by the Second World War. These helmets were Mk Vs modified by the addition of a bulky brass carbon dioxide scrubber chamber at the rear, and are easily distinguished from the standard model. The Mk V Helium weighs about complete (bonnet, scrubber canister and corselet) These helmets and similar models manufactured by Kirby Morgan, Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company and DESCO used the scrubber as a gas extender, a form of semi-closed rebreather system, where helmet gas was circulated through the scrubber by entraining the helmet gas in the flow from an injector supplying fresh gas, a system pioneered by Dräger in 1912.

===Demand systems===

The Frenchman Benoît Rouquayrol patented a breathing apparatus in 1860 for firefighting and use in mines, which used a demand regulator similar in principle to the demand valves later used for open-circuit scuba equipment and eventually lightweight demand helmets. In 1864, after collaboration with Auguste Denayrouze of the French navy, the apparatus was modified for underwater use, originally without a helmet, but later adapted for use with standard copper helmets.

===Mixed gas systems===

Besides the Dräger DM40 nitrox rebreather system, the US Navy developed a variant of the Mark V system for heliox diving. These were successfully used during the rescue of the crew and salvage of the USS Squalus in 1939. The US Navy Mark V Mod 1 heliox mixed gas helmet is based on the standard Mark V Helmet, with a scrubber canister mounted on the back of the helmet and an inlet gas injection system which recirculates the breathing gas through the scrubber to remove carbon dioxide and thereby conserve helium. The helium helmet uses the same breastplate as a standard Mark V except that the locking mechanism is relocated to the front, there is no spitcock, there is an additional electrical connection for heated underwear, and on later versions a two or three-stage exhaust valve was fitted to reduce the risk of flooding the scrubber. The gas supply at the diver was controlled by two valves. The &quot;Hoke valve&quot; controlled flow through the injector to the &quot;aspirator&quot; which circulated gas from the helmet through the scrubber, and the main control valve used for bailout to open circuit, flushing the helmet, and for extra gas when working hard or descending. Flow rate of the injector nozzle was nominally 0.5 cubic foot per minute at 100 psi above ambient pressure, which would blow 11 times the volume of the injected gas through the scrubber. A similar heliox extender helmet was built by Kirby Morgan from 1965, later supplied by Yokohama Diving Apparatus. A cylindrical scrubber canister was permanently mounted on the back of the helmet and loaded with a pre-packed carbon dioxide absorbent cartridge from the inside of the helmet.

==Accessories==
A few accessories were produced that are specific to Standard diving dress, though similar items are available for other diving systems.

Welding visors were made that clamp over the front viewport of the copper helmet. These would have to be made for a specific model helmet as the details of size and shape could vary considerably.

Oil resistant suits were produced once oil-resistant synthetic rubbers became available to coat the exterior of the suit.

Wrist mount diving compasses and watches, and diving lights, are not restricted to use with standard diving equipment, but were produced for use by divers wearing the equipment before other diving equipment became generally available. Underwater lights included hand held torches with a directed beam, and lantern styles, with all-round illumination, and lamps designed to be mounted off the diver to illuminate the work site.

T-spanners (wrenches) and straight spanners for tightening and loosening the wingnuts of the helmet were available from the helmet manufacturers to suit the pattern of wingnut used by the manufacturer.

Cuff expanders were available to allow the diver&#x27;s attendants to assist the diver to get his hands out of the rubber cuff seals.

Diver telephone systems were commonly used.

Air control panels were required when power driven compressors were used. These varied in complexity, and were available for one or two divers.

==Dressing the diver in and out==
The standard diving dress requires an assistant to help with dressing in and out. The cuff seals need an assistant to hold them open to remove the hands. Where lacing is needed, the diver cannot comfortably reach the laces. The corselet seal, fitting of the bonnet and weights are all cumbersome and heavy, and parts cannot be reached by the diver or require inspection from outside. The equipment is heavy and the field of vision restricted, so for safety the diver needs assistance and guidance when moving around with the helmet in place.

===Pre-dive checks===
Before use the equipment would be checked: The air-supply non-return valve would be tested for leaks, the exhaust valve for spring tension and seal, and smooth action of the chin button, the viewport glass and the faceplate seal for good condition, the spitcock for smooth action and sufficient friction, the locking latch for the helmet thread is working, the bonnet seal gasket is lubricated, the studs secure and wingnuts turn freely, and the brails, helmet and breastplate are a matching set (same serial number) and fit properly. The air supply valve would be checked that it has enough friction to be easily turned by the diver, but not be easily changed by accidental bumps. Other items would be visually inspected to ensure there were no apparent defects. Inspection and testing of the air supply was a separate procedure, which would be done before dressing in the diver.

===Dressing in===
Standard practice in the US Navy was for two attendants to dress in the diver. In other circumstances one would be considered sufficient. A standardised order of dressing in would generally be followed, as this is less likely to allow errors. Details would vary for other styles of helmet and weighting system: The diver would put on whatever thermal protective clothing was considered appropriate for the planned dive, then pull on the suit, assisted by the tenders where appropriate. Soapy water might be used to assist getting the hands through the rubber cuff seals where present. The tenders laced up the back of the legs where this is needed, and made sure the lace ends were tucked away. The tenders would then fit the weighted shoes, lacing them securely and buckling over the laces. A tender would then place the breastplate cushion on the diver&#x27;s shoulders and pull the suit bib over it. A tender would then lower the breastplate over the diver&#x27;s head, pull the rubber seal over the rim and pull the bib into place in the neck opening. Most of the loose cloth of the bib would be folded round the back of the head. The rubber seal would be worked into place over the studs and smoothed down in preparation for clamping. The washers would be placed over the studs which would take the brail joints to protect against tearing and ensure even clamping pressure. The brails would be placed in the correct positions, and wingnuts fitted. The wingnuts intended for use at the brail joints could be identified by having wider flanges. The nuts would be tightened down evenly to ensure a good seal, first by hand, then using the appropriate wrench. After this a tender would remove the lower left front nut where the air supply valve link would later be fitted.

The US Navy system used a weight belt with shoulder straps. Other systems of weighting would be fitted differently. The tenders would bring the weight belt to the diver from the front and pass the shoulder straps round the divers arms and in place over the top of the breastplate, crossing at the front and back. The belt was then buckled at the back and the crotch strap buckled to the belt in front, tensioned sufficiently to ensure that the helmet assembly would stay in place during the dive. If the suit had integral gloves, wrist straps would be fitted to prevent over-inflation, otherwise protective rubber covers (snappers) would be fitted over the wrist seal ends.

Before fitting the helmet, the air supply would be connected and running, and the telephone connected and tested. The helmet would be lowered over the diver&#x27;s head, turned to the left to allow it to drop between the interrupted neck threads, and rotated to the right to engage the threads. As soon as the helmet is in place the faceplate would be opened for communication, then the locking mechanism secured. Next the lifeline would be secured to the breastplate, and the air supply valve link clamped on using the wingnut removed earlier for this purpose. The diver would then test the air supply and telephone and a tender would set the exhaust valve to the standard setting. The last item before consigning the diver to the water was closing and securing the faceplate.

After the dive, equipment would be removed in roughly the reverse order. Removing the hands from the wrist seals could be facilitated by inserting special cuff expanders, smooth curved metal plates with handles, which could be slid under the rubber cuff seal along the sides of the wrist, then the tenders could pull then away from each other to stretch the seal enough for the diver to remove his hand more easily.

==Diving procedures==
*Water entry and exit was usually either by a substantial ladder or by lowering the diver into the water and lifting him out on a small platform with handholds known as a diving stage. In earlier days less ergonomically desirable methods have been used, like rope ladders.
*The usual method of descent was for the diver to descend on a shotline. The diver would establish negative buoyancy while holding the line at the surface, then slide down the line, braking as required by holding on with his hands or using a wrap of the shotline round a leg, and with descent speed limited by the tender, who would pay out the umbilical at an appropriate speed. If it was necessary to ascend a bit to assist with ear clearing, the tender could assist on request. Speed of descent was limited by the necessity to equalise and the available flow rate of air to maintain internal volume to avoid suit and helmet squeeze, and adequate exhaust flow to keep carbon dioxide levels down.
*Depth monitoring could be done by monitoring the pressure of the supply air at the pump or panel, which would be slightly greater than the air pressure inside the suit and helmet due to friction losses in the hose. Pressure inside the suit would be the effective depth pressure as this was the pressure of air the diver would be breathing.
*Buoyancy control. The diver controlled buoyancy by adjusting the back pressure of the exhaust valve. The helmet and suit air space were continuous, so air would fill the suit until the deeper parts of the suit exerted sufficient additional pressure to cause the exhaust valve to open. In some helmets, such as the US Navy helmets, the exhaust valve spring pressure could be temporarily overridden by pressing the inside end with the chin to dump or pulling it with the lips to raise the pressure. Longer term adjustments were made by turning the knob on the outside to adjust spring setting. Air volume in the suit would be strongly influenced by posture. Head-up vertical posture was the normal position, and any change from this would require some adjustment of back-pressure to prevent excessive air volume in the suit, which in extreme cases could prevent the diver from reaching control valves, and could lead to a runaway buoyant ascent. Working buoyancy at depth would normally be slightly to considerably negative, known as &quot;diving heavy&quot;. Ascent and descent were done slightly negative, and, where necessary, moving around at the surface would be done buoyant.
*Flushing and flow rate control. Flow rate of the air supply was adjusted to provide sufficient air for the diver depending on work rate. When air was provided by manual cranking of the pump, it was not desirable to overdo the air supply, as this was unnecessary work for the pump crew. If the diver started building up carbon dioxide by working harder than the air supply could compensate, he could either rest for a while, ask for increased flow rate, control the flow rate at the supply valve, or a combination of these options.A 30-second flush on reaching the bottom was a standard procedure for US Navy divers.This would relieve carbon dioxide buildup caused by low exhaust flow during compression.
*Demisting the viewports: Some helmets directed inlet air flow over the inside face of the viewports, which was reasonably effective, but if this was not sufficient, the diver could open the spitcock and suck seawater into his mouth, then spit it onto the inside of a fogged viewport. This would wash off the condensation droplets, and the saliva may have helped defogging, as it is known to be effective as a surfactant for this purpose.
*Ascent: The diver prepared for ascent by setting slightly negative buoyancy so that the tender could pull him up easily and with control of the speed. The diver could hold onto the shotline to control position and speed to some extent.
*Decompression: During the ascent the diver was often required to do in-water decompression stops, which were usually done at constant depth while holding onto the shotline.
*Emergency recompression: If the diver developed symptoms of decompression sickness after surfacing it was possible to treat it by returning the diver to depth in the suit and decompressing more slowly. There was some significant risk to this procedure, but in remote areas such as the pearl shell grounds off northern Australia, it was often the only method of effective treatment available.

===Diver training===

Around 1943, the US Navy training course for Diver 1st class at the diving school was for 20 weeks. This included theory, work skills and diving with several types of equipment, including the Mark V Mod 1 helmet.
Theory subjects listed in the syllabus included:
*Caisson disease – Cause and treatment
*Theory of welding
*Care and upkeep of suits, helmets and attachments
*Diving pumps; care, upkeep, computation of diver air supply and tests of equipment
*Telephones; care and upkeep of various types, elementary theory of circuits, practical work in overhaul, vacuum tube amplification of primary circuit.
*Velocity power tools, practical work
*Bureau of Ships Diving Manual
*Salvage methods and equipment
*Oxygen rescue breathing apparatus; care and maintenance
*Submarine escape apparatus &quot;lung&quot;; care and maintenance
Practical training included dives in the pressure tank up to 300fsw, practical work training including searches and hull cleaning, cutting and welding, and use of the oxygen rescue and submarine escape apparatus.

===Diving manuals===

The US Navy has provided a diving manual for training and operational guidance since 1905:

*1905 - Manual for Divers - Handbook for Seaman Gunners, published by the Naval Torpedo Station, printed in Washington, DC. The book had seven chapters: Requirement of divers; Description of Diving Apparatus; Accidents That May Happen; Rules for Resuscitation; Signals; Duties of the Person in Charge of the Diver and of the Divers Tenders and Assistants; Preparation and Operation of App[aratus; Method of Instruction; Care and Preservation of Apparatus; Diving Outfit; Pressure at Different Depths.
*1916 - U.S. Navy Diving Manual, published by the Navy Department, Washington Government Printing Office. Intended for use as an instruction manual as well as for general use.
*1924 - U.S. Navy Diving Manual – a reprint of Chapter 36 of the Manual of the Bureau of Construction &amp; Repair, Navy Department, which was responsible for US Navy Diving research and development at the time.
*1943 - U.S. Navy Diving Manual, published by the Navy Department, Bureau of Ships, to supersede the 1924 manual. The book has 21 chapters on all aspects of US Navy diving at the time, including diving on Heliox mixtures, which was a new development. The main focus was on the US Navy Mk V helmet, a typical free-flow copper helmet used with standard diving dress, but shallow water diving equipment is also covered.
*1952 - U.S. Navy Diving Manual, document identity NAVSHIPS 250–880, also published by the Navy Department, Bureau of Ships, to supersede the 1943 manual. It has nine parts: History and Development of Diving, Basic Principles of Diving, Diving Equipment, Diving Procedures, Medical Aspects of Diving, Diving with Helium-Oxygen Mixtures, Summary of Safety Precautions, Diving Accidents, and Component Parts of Standard Diving Equipment.
*1959 - U. S. Navy Diving Manual, document NAVSHIPS 250–538, published by the Navy Department, Bureau of Ships to supersede the 1952 manual. This manual is in four parts: General Principles of Diving, Surface Supplied Diving, Self Contained Diving, and Diving Accessories.
*1963 - U.S. Navy Diving Manual, document NAVSHIPS 250–538, published by the Navy Department, Bureau of Ships. In three parts: General Principles of Diving, Surface Supplied Diving, which refers to standard dress diving, including the use of Helium-Oxygen mixtures, and Self Contained Diving.
Later revisions of the U.S. Navy Diving Manual do not refer to the Mark V equipment.

The Royal Navy originally used the Siebe-Gorman diving manual. Siebe-Gorman was the manufacturer of the standard diving dress used by the RN at the time.
*1904 – Manual for Divers: With Information and Instruction in the Use of Siebe, Gorman &amp; Co&#x27;s Diving Apparatus as Used in H. M. Service. Royal Navy Manual G. 14063/04, published by the British Admiralty in 1904. It has chapters covering: Courses of Instruction in Diving, Description of the Apparatus, Directions for Dressing and Working, Practical Hints on Diving, and Temporary Repairs by Divers.
*1907 – Manual for Divers: Royal Navy Manual G.4358/07, published by the British Admiralty to supersede the 1904 manual. It has chapters covering: Description of the apparatus, its care and maintenance, with rules for testing the pump; The physics and physiology of diving; Dressing the diver and sending him down, and duties of the officer in charge of the diving party; and Hints for the diver and methods of doing work.
*1910 – Manual for Divers: Royal Navy Manual G.14251/1909, published by the Admiralty in December 1909 to supersede the 1907 manual. It has chapters covering: Description of the apparatus, its care and maintenance, with rules for testing the pump; The physics and physiology of diving; Dressing the diver, attendance and signals; The management of diving, duties of the officer in charge, and rules as to time and coming up; Hints for the diver, and methods for doing work; First aid to the diver in cases of accident; The Hall Rees apparatus; Extracts from regulations, orders concerning divers, and appendices on &quot;Schedules of gear allowed for one and two divers&quot;. The 1910 addenda contains instructions for the use of the recompression chamber for divers.
*1916 – Diving Manual: Royal Navy Manual G. 24974/16, published by the British Admiralty to supersede the 1910 manual. The chapters covered: Description of the apparatus, its care and maintenance with rules for testing the pump; The physics and physiology of diving; Dressing the diver, attendance and signals; The management of diving, duties of the officer in charge, rules as to time and coming up, and Tables I and II; Hints for the diver and methods of doing work; Treatment of caisson disease by recompression and by sending the diver down again, and first aid to the diver in case of accidents. Pattern No. 200 smoke helmet and shallow water diving equipment; Extracts from regulations, orders &amp;c., concerning divers.
*1936 – The Diving Manual BR155/1936, published by the British Admiralty from 1936 superseded the 1916 manual. The chapters covered: Description of the apparatus, its care and maintenance with rules for testing the pump; The physics and physiology of diving; Dressing the diver, attendance and signals, The management of diving, duties of the officer in charge, rules for decompression in depth up to 200 feet; Hints for the diver and methods of doing work; Diving in deep water using the Davis Submerged Decompression Chamber; Compressed air illness and accidents to the diver; Pneumatic tools and underwater cutting apparatus; Breathing Apparatus Pattern 230 and Oxygen Breathing Apparatus; Orders and regulations concerning divers.
*1943 – Royal Navy Diving Manual BR155/1943, published by the British Admiralty to supersede BR155/1936. The chapters covered: The physics of diving and their effect on the human body; Description of the apparatus, its care and maintenance; Dressing the diver, attendance and signals;4 Practical work underwater, The management of diving, duties of the officer in charge, rules for decompression in depths up to 200 feet; Diving in deep water, using the Davis Submerged Decompression Chamber, Compressed air illness and accidents to the diver; Under-water tools and tubular construction; Breathing Apparatus Pattern 230 and Oxygen Breathing Apparatus; Orders and regulation concerning divers.
*Royal Navy Diving Manual BR155C/1956, published by the British Admiralty to supersede BR155/1943. Printed as a set of softback booklets in a hard binder, the 8 parts were: The Theory of Diving (1956); Diving Regulations (1956); Self-Contained Diving (1957); Standard Diving (1956); Deep Diving (1957); Practical Diving (1956); Marine Salvage (1960); and Diver&#x27;s Loudspeaker Intercommunication Equipment (1958).
*Royal Navy Diving Manual BR 155/1964, published by the British Admiralty to supersede BR155/1956, in a loose leaf ring binder. The 8 parts were: Diving Regulations; The Theory of Diving; Ship and Clearance Diving; Surface and Submersible Chambers; Practical Diving; Marine Salvage; Standard Diving; Diver&#x27;s Loudspeaker Intercommunication Equipment.
*1972 – BR 2806 Diving Manual, published by the Ministry of Defence, Weapons Department (Naval) in a loose leaf spring clip binder. The 7 sections cover: Theory of Diving; Regulations; Conduct of Diving Operations; Breathing Apparatus, Drill and Operation; Decompression; Divers’ Illnesses and Injuries; and Civilian and Expedition Diving; This is the last RN manual covering standard diving equipment.

==Specific hazards==
Most of the hazards to which the standard diver was exposed are much the same as those to which any other surface supplied diver is exposed, but there were a few significant exceptions due to the equipment configuration.

Helmet squeeze is an injury that could occur if the air supply hose was ruptured near or above the surface. The pressure difference between the water around the diver and the air in the hose can then be several bar. The non-return valve at the connection to the helmet will prevent backflow if it is working correctly, but if absent, as in the early days of helmet diving, or if it fails, the pressure difference between the diver depth and the break in the hose will tend to squeeze the diver into the rigid helmet, which can result in severe, sometimes fatal, trauma. The same effect can result from a large and rapid increase in depth if the air supply is insufficient to keep up with the increase in ambient pressure. This could occur if the diver fell off a support when there was a lot of slack in the lifeline, or the angle of the lifeline allowed horizontal distance to swing to vertical distance.

Suit blowup occurs when the diving suit is inflated to the point at which the buoyancy lifts the diver faster than he can vent the suit to reduce buoyancy sufficiently to break the cycle of ascent induced expansion. A blowup can also be induced if air is trapped in areas which are temporarily higher than the helmet exhaust valve, such as if the feet are raised and trap air. A blowup can surface the diver at a dangerous rate, and the risk of lung over-pressure injury is relatively high. Risk of decompression sickness is also raised depending on the pressure profile to that point. Blowup can occur for several reasons. Loss of ballast weight is another cause of buoyancy gain which may not be possible to compensate by venting. The standard diving suit can inflate during a blowup to the extent that the diver cannot bend his arms to reach the valves, and the over-pressure can burst the suit, causing a complete loss of air, and the diver sinking to the bottom to drown.

The standard diving system had no self contained alternative breathing gas supply. It was possible to switch out air supply hoses underwater, and the air already in the suit and helmet was usually sufficient to keep the diver conscious during the time required to disconnect the old hose and connect the new one, but this procedure could only work if the original hose was still providing an air supply. A severed or blocked hose could not be successfully managed.

==Manufacturers==
Standard diving equipment was widely produced over a long period. Manufacturers are listed here in alphabetical order of country:
*Brazil: 
**Charles Person, of São Paulo.
*Canada: 
**John Date, of Montreal.
*Denmark: There was a particular style of corselet rim sealing clamp used in Danish service patented by Peter Hansen Hessing and built under license by various manufacturers, which used only two clamping bolts. 
*East Germany:
** Medi. 3-bolt helmets 
*France: 
**, later Specialites Mecaniques Reunis, then Societe Charles Petit, eventually Rene Piel (several name changes) manufactured both 3-bolt and 12-bolt helmets, and both demand and free-flow air supply systems. Trademarks include Rene Piel of Paris, C H Petit, of Paris. 
**Scauda, of Mareilles. 
*Germany: 
** Clouth Gummiwerke AG of Cöln Nippes.
**Dräger &amp; Gerling, Lubeck, Established 1889. In 1902 name changed to Drägerwerk, Heinr. &amp; Bernh. Dräger. Draegerwerk produced both rebreather and free-flow helmets.
**Friedrich Flohr, Kiel. Established 1890. Manufactured apparatus of Denayrouze type with three-bolt helmets and regulator backpacks. Later also produced free-flow helmets. 
*Netherlands: 
**Bikkers of Rotterdam
*Italy: 
**Galeazzi of La Spezia, (including helmets for mixed gas),
**IAC, 
**SALVAS (Società Anonima Lavorazioni Vari Appararecchi di Salvataggio), manufactured mostly military salvage equipment, including diving helmets. 
*Japan: 
**Kimura (Nagasaki iron works),
**Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company, (helium rebreather)
*Korea: 
**Pusan.
*Russia: 3-bolt, 6-bolt and 12-bolt/3-bolt helmets, including helium helmets.
*Spain: 
**Nemrod,
*Sweden: Some of the Swedish helmets were of the &quot;inverted pot&quot; form, with a substantially cylindrical bonnet with a rounded top.
**Erik Andersson of Stockholm,
**Emil Carlsson of Stockholm,
**C.A. Lindqvist of Stockholm,
**Marinverkst of Karlskrona, 
*United Kingdom: Leading British manufacturers were Siebe Gorman and Heinke. Siebe Gorman manufactured a wide range of models over several years, including 12-bolt oval and square corselets, 6-bolt oval corselets. 3 or 4 lights, usually with screw in front window, with tinned or copper finish and round or oval side windows. Over their production period they used at least two styles of wingnut, and a rebreather model. Occasionally more unusual options were chosen, such as 8 bolt corselets. No-bolt model used similar rubber flange to 3-bolt helmets, but clamped between the bonnet and corselet which were connected at the back by a hinge and the helmet swung forward over the head to close, and locked by a clamp in front with a locking device to prevent inadvertent opening.
*In the United States, the dominant makers were four companies which produced Mark V diving helmets for the US Navy: Diving Equipment and Salvage Co. (later Diving Equipment Supply Co.) of Milwaukee, Wisconsin (DESCO), Morse Diving Equipment Company of Boston, Massachusetts, Miller-Dunn Diving Co. of Miami, Florida and A Schräder&#x27;s Son of Brooklyn, New York. Among others, Morse Diving Equipment of Boston produced the Mark V Helium MOD 1 rebreather helmet. Some Morse helmets had the air intake on the back of the corselet. While the Mark V is a US Navy design and all helmets should have been identical, models from Morse, Schräder, DESCO, and Miller Dunn all had differences. Brails from a Miller Dunn are difficult to fit on another maker&#x27;s helmet. Early Miller Dunn Mark V helmets had gussets on the interior radius of the air and communication elbows. Schräder Mark V helmets used yellow brass castings instead of red brass like other makers. Schräder also canted their spitcock body. The standard Mk V weighs approximately complete. The US Navy Mk V helmet is still in production to order. In 2016 DESCO Corporation purchased the assets of Morse Diving International and began producing Morse helmets under the A. J. Morse and Son brand. The US Navy Mark V Helmet is available in either make with the minor manufacturing differences intact 

==In popular culture==
English charity fundraiser Lloyd Scott has dressed in standard diving dress for many of his events, especially marathons.

==See also==
* 

==References==
===Sources===
== External links ==

*The Historical Diving Society
*US Naval Undersea Museum
*Diving Heritage
*&quot;Iron Men Under The Sea&quot;, January 1931, Popular Mechanics detailed article on salvage divers and diving school in Bremen, Germany
*&quot;Undersea Acrobatics The World Never Sees&quot;, December 1931, Popular Mechanics training given divers to go against current on ocean floor pages 974/975
*History of Diving Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="0" end="21" title="Standard diving dress" label="Standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="37" end="45" title="Standard diving dress" label="hard-hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="49" end="59" title="Standard diving dress" label="copper hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="71" end="91" title="Standard diving dress" label="deep sea diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="95" end="105" title="Standard diving dress" label="heavy gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="120" end="131" title="diving suit" label="diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="256" end="270" title="marine salvage" label="marine salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="272" end="289" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="303" end="309" title="Underwater diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753570" start="320" end="337" title="commercial diving" label="commercial diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="356" end="368" title="naval diving" label="naval diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="513" end="526" title="diving helmet" label="diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="537" end="543" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="548" end="553" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="557" end="563" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="648" end="664" title="surface-supplied diving" label="surface-supplied"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114092" start="683" end="687" title="diver&amp;#x27;s pump" label="pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q852784" start="732" end="744" title="diving knife" label="diving knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088317" start="750" end="757" title="List of weights" label="weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="772" end="780" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="883" end="903" title="Diver communications#Voice communications" label="voice communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="1056" end="1076" title="shallow water helmet" label="shallow water helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25141692" start="1470" end="1482" title="diving stage" label="diving stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519107" start="1679" end="1688" title="mid-water" label="mid-water"/>
<link wikidata="Q77543" start="1741" end="1754" title="Konrad Kyeser" label="Konrad Kyeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q311814" start="2038" end="2045" title="Giovanni Alfonso Borelli" label="Borelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="2204" end="2212" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="2585" end="2598" title="diving helmet" label="diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161752" start="2630" end="2637" title="Charles Anthony Deane" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161750" start="2642" end="2652" title="John Deane (inventor)" label="John Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q76692" start="3434" end="3448" title="Augustus Siebe" label="Augustus Siebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q964785" start="3784" end="3794" title="Whitstable" label="Whitstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194034" start="3975" end="3999" title="HMS Royal George (1756)" label="&amp;quot;Royal George&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783560" start="4003" end="4011" title="Spithead" label="Spithead"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="4193" end="4202" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="4662" end="4668" title="diving helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259259" start="4704" end="4710" title="canvas" label="canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="4711" end="4722" title="diving suit" label="diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208443" start="4764" end="4769" title="valve" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="4892" end="4902" title="underwater" label="underwater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5097" end="5105" title="#Corselet" label="corselet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="5195" end="5205" title="underwater" label="underwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="5206" end="5223" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="5236" end="5243" title="Marine salvage" label="salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753570" start="5245" end="5262" title="commercial diving" label="commercial diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="5267" end="5279" title="naval diving" label="naval diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q818130" start="5306" end="5316" title="Rouquayrol" label="Rouquayrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871151" start="5321" end="5331" title="Denayrouze" label="Denayrouze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037959" start="5981" end="6004" title="carbon dioxide scrubber" label="carbon dioxide scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="6392" end="6407" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="6409" end="6419" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="6738" end="6751" title="breathing gas" label="breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428339" start="6979" end="6989" title="rebreather" label="rebreather"/>
<link wikidata="Q605908" start="7016" end="7022" title="Drägerwerk" label="Dräger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="7633" end="7654" title="Rouquayrol-Denayrouze" label="Rouquayrol-Denayrouze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972089" start="7676" end="7690" title="full-face mask" label="full-face mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="7940" end="7945" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="8886" end="8908" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q581152" start="8913" end="8930" title="nitrogen narcosis" label="nitrogen narcosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q683522" start="9053" end="9071" title="Charles Macintosh" label="Charles Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152241" start="9204" end="9209" title="twill" label="twill"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="9223" end="9240" title="vulcanized rubber" label="vulcanized rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q493205" start="9266" end="9274" title="corselet" label="corselet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326110" start="9292" end="9302" title="Waterproofing" label="waterproof"/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="9831" end="9840" title="barnacles" label="barnacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261779" start="12702" end="12706" title="metal spinning" label="spun"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="12734" end="12739" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="12743" end="12749" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="13710" end="13724" title="Barotrauma" label="helmet squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542304" start="16053" end="16071" title="interrupted thread" label="interrupted thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q918548" start="19330" end="19334" title="Acme thread form" label="acme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19335" end="19354" title="Screw thread#Lead, pitch, and starts" label="triple-start thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114092" start="19551" end="19572" title="diver&amp;#x27;s pump" label="diver&amp;#x27;s air pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="19832" end="19854" title="diver&amp;#x27;s umbilical" label="diver&amp;#x27;s umbilical"/>
<link wikidata="Q519336" start="19924" end="19940" title="non-return valve" label="non-return valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698337" start="22555" end="22563" title="Air line" label="Air line"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="22891" end="22900" title="Diver&amp;#x27;s umbilical" label="Umbilical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23729" end="23741" title="Diver communication#Line signals" label="line signals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24188" end="24204" title="Louis Denayrouze" label="Louis Denayrouze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="26336" end="26343" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="26369" end="26376" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="26424" end="26430" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="26431" end="26437" title="diving helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="26668" end="26672" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="26814" end="26826" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26908" end="26929" title="Denayrouze-Rouquayrol" label="Denayrouze-Rouquayrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q605908" start="26970" end="26981" title="Draegerwerk" label="Draegerwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261779" start="27596" end="27600" title="Metal spinning" label="Spun"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="27612" end="27624" title="tobin bronze" label="tobin bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037959" start="30241" end="30264" title="carbon dioxide scrubber" label="carbon dioxide scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="30468" end="30480" title="Kirby Morgan" label="Kirby Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30482" end="30515" title="Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company" label="Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204856" start="30520" end="30525" title="DESCO" label="DESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q818130" start="30811" end="30828" title="Benoît Rouquayrol" label="Benoît Rouquayrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871151" start="31096" end="31114" title="Auguste Denayrouze" label="Auguste Denayrouze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31455" end="31504" title="USS Sailfish (SS-192)#Sinking of Squalus and recommissioning as Sailfish" label="rescue of the crew and salvage of the USS Squalus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32754" end="32779" title="Yokohama Diving Apparatus" label="Yokohama Diving Apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25141692" start="39727" end="39739" title="diving stage" label="diving stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q168639" start="39815" end="39826" title="rope ladder" label="rope ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284386" start="39892" end="39900" title="shotline" label="shotline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929396" start="40259" end="40271" title="ear clearing" label="ear clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="41906" end="41918" title="diving heavy" label="diving heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="44282" end="44297" title="Decompression sickness" label="Caisson disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="53810" end="53821" title="Dry suit blowup" label="Suit blowup"/>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="54255" end="54280" title="lung over-pressure injury" label="lung over-pressure injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="54309" end="54331" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848483" start="54837" end="54869" title="Emergency gas supply" label="alternative breathing gas supply"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55752" end="55781" title="Specialites Mecaniques Reunis" label="Specialites Mecaniques Reunis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55788" end="55809" title="Societe Charles Petit" label="Societe Charles Petit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55822" end="55831" title="Rene Piel" label="Rene Piel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102688" start="56051" end="56068" title="Clouth Gummiwerke" label="Clouth Gummiwerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q450574" start="56075" end="56086" title="Districts of Cologne" label="Cöln Nippes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605908" start="56202" end="56213" title="Dräger (company)" label="Draegerwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="56497" end="56506" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991347" start="56904" end="56910" title="Nemrod" label="Nemrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049441" start="57226" end="57238" title="Siebe Gorman" label="Siebe Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699800" start="57243" end="57249" title="Heinke (diving equipment makers)" label="Heinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204856" start="58071" end="58103" title="DESCO" label="Diving Equipment and Salvage Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q6914242" start="58173" end="58203" title="Morse Diving" label="Morse Diving Equipment Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58230" end="58252" title="Miller-Dunn Diving Co." label="Miller-Dunn Diving Co."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58275" end="58296" title="A Schräder&amp;#x27;s Son" label="A Schräder&amp;#x27;s Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662726" start="59365" end="59376" title="Lloyd Scott" label="Lloyd Scott"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488209" wikidata="Q6616003" url="?curid=488209" title="List of delegates to the Maryland Constitutional Convention (1776)">
<text>The final session of the revolutionary Annapolis Convention in 1776 served as Maryland&#x27;s first constitutional convention. They drafted a declaration of rights and a constitution for the state. This list of delegates reports the men who made up the convention, and the counties or towns they represented. Delegates were the following individuals.

== Notes ==
== References == </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2996239" start="39" end="59" title="Annapolis Convention (1774–1776)" label="Annapolis Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="78" end="86" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488210" wikidata="Q7093117" url="?curid=488210" title="One Perfect Day (2004 film)">
<text>One Perfect Day is an Australian film released in 2004.

==Plot==
The central character of the film is Tommy Matisse; his name combines the title of The Who&#x27;s 1969 rock opera &quot;Tommy&quot; and the last name of twentieth century French painter Henri Matisse.

Tommy is a Melbourne boy studying at the Royal Academy of Music in London. He is a violinist and composer who hears music in unusual sources such as the ambient noises of a train in the London Underground or the chirping of crickets. He is a rebel against the traditions of classical music and displays this by bringing a homeless woman living in the Underground on stage for a concert.

A sympathetic professor decides that he is the type of innovative artist needed to revive a dying opera artform. Having shocked opera&#x27;s establishment, he returns home to Melbourne on the death of his younger sister Emma, who suffers a fatal overdose after experimenting with drugs at a rave dance party. He discovers a CD of her own mixes and decides to enter the genre of electronic music to follow the path she was pursuing in the hopes of discovering more about his sister and how she became involved in this dance world.
Emma&#x27;s death acts as a catalyst that drives Tommy and his girlfriend Alysse apart. In despair, Alysse falls prey to a sleazy entrepreneur named Hector Lee who owns a club called Trance-Zen-Dance and who is also a drug dealer. Hector Lee has a young assistant called Trig who is a VJ, and is always getting new footage and talent.

==Cast==
*Dan Spielman ... Tommy Matisse
*Leeanna Walsman ... Alysse Green
*Kerry Armstrong ... Carolyn
*Abbie Cornish ... Emma
*Rory Williamson ... Noah
*Nathan Phillips ... Trig
*Syd Brisbane ... Hamish
*Frank Gallacher ... Malcolm
*Alex Menglet ... Bernard May
*Andrew Howard ... Hector Lee
*Nathan Wentworth ... Stevie
*Jay Smeaton ... Party Dancer 2

==Crew==
*Paul Currie ... director &amp; writer
*Chip Richards... writer
*David Hobson ... original music score composer
*Paul van Dyk... additional music score

==Soundtrack==
The soundtrack was released on 15 February 2004 by Universal Music, and debuted at number forty-six on the Australian album charts in the week beginning 23 February 2004 and manage to reach to number twenty-two. The title track, sung by Lydia Denker, debuted at number thirty-five on the Australian single charts. There are two versions of the soundtrack:

;One-disc version track listing
# &quot;Blow Wind Blow&quot; – Rairbirds 
# &quot;Break It&quot; (Down James Brown) – The Offcuts
# &quot;Krazy Krush&quot; – Ms. Dynamite
# &quot;Crazy Beat&quot; – Blur
# &quot;What Is the Problem&quot; – Graffiti
# &quot;Don&#x27;t Let the Man&quot; – Fatboy Slim
# &quot;Are You Ready for Love&quot; (Radioslave mix) – Elton John
# &quot;One Perfect Day&quot; – Lydia Denker
# &quot;No One Knows&quot; – Queens of the Stone Age
# &quot;Two Months Off&quot; – Underworld
# &quot;Late at Night&quot; – Futureshock
# &quot;All of Me&quot; – Groove Armada
# &quot;Schoolgirl&quot; – Sandrine
# &quot;Feathers and Down&quot; – The Cardigans
# &quot;Hector&#x27;s Demise&quot; – Dust Brothers
# &quot;Ordinary World&quot; (Josh G. Abrahams remix) – Mandy Kane
# &quot;Pictures of You&quot; (Old-z remix) – after The Cure&#x27;s 1989 album &quot;Disintegration&quot;
# &quot;One and the Same&quot; (One Perfect Day Remix) – after Rob Dougan&#x27;s 2002 album &quot;Furious Angels&quot;

===Two-disc version track listing===
;Disc 1:
# &quot;Blow Wind Blow&quot; – Rairbirds 
# &quot;Break It&quot; (Down James Brown) (Josh G. Abrahams Remix) – The Offcuts
# &quot;Krazy Krush&quot; – Ms. Dynamite
# &quot;What Is the Problem?&quot; – Graffiti
# &quot;Don&#x27;t Let the Man Get You Down&quot; – Fatboy Slim
# &quot;Are You Ready for Love&quot; (radio slave remix) – Elton John
# &quot;One Perfect Day&quot; – Lydia Denker
# &quot;Pictures of You&quot; (Paul Mac remix) – after The Cure&#x27;s 1989 album &quot;Disintegration&quot;
# &quot;Two Months Off&quot; – Underworld
# &quot;Late at Night&quot; – Futureshock
# &quot;All of Me&quot; – Groove Armada
# &quot;Schoolgirl&quot; – Old-z
# &quot;Feathers and Down&quot; – The Cardigans
# &quot;Hector&#x27;s Demise&quot; – The Dust Brothers
# &quot;No One Knows&quot; (Unkle Remix) – Queens of the Stone Age
# &quot;Ordinary World&quot; (Josh Abrahams remix) – Mandy Kane
# &quot;One and the Same&quot; (One Perfect Day remix) – after Rob Dougan&#x27;s 2002 album &quot;Furious Angels&quot;
# &quot;Design Music&quot; – Sven Väth

;Disc 2:
# &quot;The Man with the Red Face&quot; – Laurent Garnier
# &quot;Horsepower&quot; – C. J. Bolland
# &quot;Graffiti Part Two&quot; – Stereo MC&#x27;s
# &quot;No Transmission&quot; – Lhb
# &quot;To Know&quot; – NuBreed
# &quot;Gorecki&quot; – Lamb
# &quot;Just Show Me&quot; – Grandadbob
# &quot;Sleepwalking&quot; – Euroboy
# &quot;Sly-ed&quot; – Man With No Name
# &quot;Drop Some Drums&quot; – Old-z
# &quot;One Perfect Sunrise&quot; – Orbital Featuring Lisa Gerrard
# &quot;One Perfect Day&quot; (epic dance mix) – Ali Mcgregor
# &quot;Tv Screen Memories&quot; – David Hobson and Lisa Gerrard
# &quot;Final Moments&quot; – David Hobson
# &quot;One Perfect Day&quot; (orchestral mix) – David Hobson &amp; Orchestra
# Ride – Helmut

==Box office==
&quot;One Perfect Day&quot; grossed $1,152,011 at the box office in Australia.

==See also==
*Cinema of Australia

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="149" end="156" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="169" end="179" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q372055" start="186" end="191" title="Tommy (rock opera)" label="Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="252" end="265" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="279" end="288" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="309" end="331" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002801" start="421" end="428" title="Ambient noise level" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="454" end="472" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="542" end="557" title="european classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="590" end="598" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="1034" end="1050" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214425" start="1532" end="1544" title="Dan Spielman" label="Dan Spielman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275182" start="1564" end="1579" title="Leeanna Walsman" label="Leeanna Walsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q276498" start="1598" end="1613" title="Kerry Armstrong" label="Kerry Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q236097" start="1627" end="1640" title="Abbie Cornish" label="Abbie Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048404" start="1677" end="1692" title="Nathan Phillips (actor)" label="Nathan Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q47015396" start="1728" end="1743" title="Frank Gallacher" label="Frank Gallacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717487" start="1757" end="1769" title="Alex Menglet" label="Alex Menglet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499384" start="1787" end="1800" title="Andrew Howard" label="Andrew Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150070" start="1888" end="1899" title="Paul Currie (director)" label="Paul Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235059" start="1952" end="1964" title="David Hobson (tenor)" label="David Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="1969" end="1998" title="composer" label="original music score composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77034" start="2000" end="2012" title="Paul van Dyk" label="Paul van Dyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="2106" end="2121" title="Universal Music" label="Universal Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707608" start="2292" end="2304" title="Lydia Denker" label="Lydia Denker"/>
<link wikidata="Q440834" start="2570" end="2582" title="Ms. Dynamite" label="Ms. Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q84226" start="2591" end="2601" title="Crazy Beat" label="Crazy Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="2610" end="2614" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="2699" end="2710" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="2767" end="2777" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093119" start="2786" end="2801" title="One Perfect Day (Lydia Denker song)" label="One Perfect Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877506" start="2831" end="2843" title="No One Knows" label="No One Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243718" start="2852" end="2875" title="Queens of the Stone Age" label="Queens of the Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408455" start="2884" end="2898" title="Two Months Off" label="Two Months Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q849429" start="2907" end="2917" title="Underworld (band)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916554" start="2948" end="2959" title="Futureshock" label="Futureshock"/>
<link wikidata="Q117522" start="2986" end="2999" title="Groove Armada" label="Groove Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471970" start="3027" end="3035" title="Sandrine (singer)" label="Sandrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106379" start="3070" end="3083" title="The Cardigans" label="The Cardigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q765119" start="3121" end="3134" title="Dust Brothers" label="Dust Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047655" start="3165" end="3181" title="Josh G. Abrahams" label="Josh G. Abrahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748301" start="3191" end="3201" title="Mandy Kane" label="Mandy Kane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3233" end="3238" title="Old-z" label="Old-z"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="3254" end="3262" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q939505" start="3287" end="3301" title="Disintegration (The Cure album)" label="Disintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q963350" start="3371" end="3381" title="Rob Dougan" label="Rob Dougan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039068" start="3406" end="3420" title="Furious Angels" label="Furious Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611102" start="3894" end="3902" title="Paul Mac" label="Paul Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q117522" start="4082" end="4095" title="Groove Armada" label="Groove Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032426" start="4260" end="4265" title="Unkle" label="Unkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047655" start="4329" end="4342" title="Josh Abrahams" label="Josh Abrahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q963350" start="4426" end="4436" title="Rob Dougan" label="Rob Dougan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61011" start="4511" end="4520" title="Sven Väth" label="Sven Väth"/>
<link wikidata="Q919069" start="4573" end="4588" title="Laurent Garnier" label="Laurent Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q713763" start="4616" end="4629" title="C. J. Bolland" label="C. J. Bolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q942532" start="4664" end="4680" title="Stereo MC&amp;#x27;s" label="Stereo MC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067695" start="4741" end="4748" title="NuBreed" label="NuBreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259392" start="4773" end="4777" title="Lamb (electronic band)" label="Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239717" start="4807" end="4817" title="Grandadbob" label="Grandadbob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638939" start="4847" end="4854" title="Knut Schreiner" label="Euroboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q596978" start="4878" end="4894" title="Man With No Name" label="Man With No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q515942" start="4969" end="4976" title="Orbital (band)" label="Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580" start="4987" end="4999" title="Lisa Gerrard" label="Lisa Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725006" start="5049" end="5061" title="Ali Mcgregor" label="Ali Mcgregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235059" start="5097" end="5109" title="David Hobson (tenor)" label="David Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580" start="5114" end="5126" title="Lisa Gerrard" label="Lisa Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18191106" start="5257" end="5263" title="Helmut" label="Helmut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973146" start="5374" end="5393" title="Cinema of Australia" label="Cinema of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488211" wikidata="Q1137579" url="?curid=488211" title="Codd's 12 rules">
<text>Codd&#x27;s twelve rules are a set of thirteen rules (numbered zero to twelve) proposed by Edgar F. Codd, a pioneer of the relational model for databases, designed to define what is required from a database management system in order for it to be considered &quot;relational&quot;, i.e., a relational database management system (RDBMS). They are sometimes referred to as &quot;Codd&#x27;s Twelve Commandments&quot;.

== History ==
Codd originally set out the rules in 1970, and developed them further in a 1974 conference paper. His aim was to prevent the vision of the original relational database from being diluted, as database vendors scrambled in the early 1980s to repackage existing products with a relational veneer. Rule 12 was particularly designed to counter such a positioning.

While in 1999, a textbook stated &quot;Nowadays, most RDBMSs ... pass the test&quot;, another in 2007 suggested &quot;no database system complies with all twelve rules.&quot; Codd himself, in his book &quot;The Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2&quot;, acknowledged that while his original set of 12 rules can be used for coarse distinctions, the 333 features of his Relational Model Version 2 (RM/V2) are needed for distinctions of a finer grain.

== Rules ==
Rule 0: The &quot;foundation rule&quot;:
:For any system that is advertised as, or claimed to be, a relational data base management system, that system must be able to manage data bases entirely through its relational capabilities.

Rule 1: The &quot;information rule&quot;:
:All information in a relational data base is represented explicitly at the logical level and in exactly one way by values in tables.

Rule 2: The &quot;guaranteed access rule&quot;:
:Each and every datum (atomic value) in a relational data base is guaranteed to be logically accessible by resorting to a combination of table name, primary key value and column name.

Rule 3: &quot;Systematic treatment of null values&quot;:
:Null values (distinct from the empty character string or a string of blank characters and distinct from zero or any other number) are supported in fully relational DBMS for representing missing information and inapplicable information in a systematic way, independent of data type.

Rule 4: &quot;Dynamic online catalog based on the relational model&quot;:
:The data base description is represented at the logical level in the same way as ordinary data, so that authorized users can apply the same relational language to its interrogation as they apply to the regular data.

Rule 5: The &quot;comprehensive data sublanguage rule&quot;:
:A relational system may support several languages and various modes of terminal use (for example, the fill-in-the-blanks mode). However, there must be at least one language whose statements are expressible, per some well-defined syntax, as character strings and that is comprehensive in supporting all of the following items:
::#Data definition.
::#View definition.
::#Data manipulation (interactive and by program).
::#Integrity constraints.
::#Authorization.
::#Transaction boundaries (begin, commit and rollback).

Rule 6: The &quot;view updating rule&quot;:
:All views that are theoretically updatable are also updatable by the system.

Rule 7: Relational Operations Rule / &quot;Possible for high-level insert, update, and delete&quot;:
:The capability of handling a base relation or a derived relation as a single operand applies not only to the retrieval of data but also to the insertion, update and deletion of data.

Rule 8: &quot;Physical data independence&quot;:
:Application programs and terminal activities remain logically unimpaired whenever any changes are made in either storage representations or access methods.

Rule 9: &quot;Logical data independence&quot;:
:Application programs and terminal activities remain logically unimpaired when information-preserving changes of any kind that theoretically permit unimpairment are made to the base tables.

Rule 10: &quot;Integrity independence&quot;:
:Integrity constraints specific to a particular relational data base must be definable in the relational data sublanguage and storable in the catalog, not in the application programs.

Rule 11: &quot;Distribution independence&quot;:
:The end-user must not be able to see that the data is distributed over various locations. Users should always get the impression that the data is located at one site only.

Rule 12: The &quot;nonsubversion rule&quot;:
:If a relational system has a low-level (single-record-at-a-time) language, that low level cannot be used to subvert or bypass the integrity rules and constraints expressed in the higher level relational language (multiple-records-at-a-time).

== See also ==
* IBM System R

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1137579" start="0" end="24" title="Codd&amp;#x27;s 12 rules" label="Codd&amp;#x27;s twelve rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355278" start="54" end="77" title="Zero-based numbering" label="numbered zero to twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q92596" start="91" end="104" title="Edgar F. Codd" label="Edgar F. Codd"/>
<link wikidata="Q755662" start="123" end="139" title="relational model" label="relational model"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="144" end="152" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="198" end="224" title="database management system" label="database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="290" end="327" title="relational database management system" label="relational database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928179" start="2275" end="2281" title="online" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227399" start="2282" end="2289" title="Database catalog" label="catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329910" start="3143" end="3147" title="View (SQL)" label="view"/>
<link wikidata="Q973966" start="4736" end="4748" title="IBM System R" label="IBM System R"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488213" wikidata="Q111363586" url="?curid=488213" title="Surface-supplied diving">
<text>Surface-supplied diving is a mode of underwater diving using equipment supplied with breathing gas through a diver&#x27;s umbilical from the surface, either from the shore or from a diving support vessel, sometimes indirectly via a diving bell. This is different from scuba diving, where the diver&#x27;s breathing equipment is completely self-contained and there is no essential link to the surface. The primary advantages of conventional surface supplied diving are lower risk of drowning and considerably larger breathing gas supply than scuba, allowing longer working periods and safer decompression. Disadvantages are the absolute limitation on diver mobility imposed by the length of the umbilical, encumbrance by the umbilical, and high logistical and equipment costs compared with scuba. The disadvantages restrict use of this mode of diving to applications where the diver operates within a small area, which is common in commercial diving work.

The copper helmeted free-flow standard diving dress is the version which made commercial diving a viable occupation, and although still used in some regions, this heavy equipment has been superseded by lighter free-flow helmets, and to a large extent, lightweight demand helmets, band masks and full-face diving masks. Breathing gases used include air, heliox, nitrox and trimix.

Saturation diving is a mode of surface supplied diving in which the divers live under pressure in a saturation system or underwater habitat and are decompressed only at the end of a tour of duty.

Airline, or hookah diving, and &quot;compressor diving&quot; are lower technology variants also using a breathing air supply from the surface.

== Variations ==
There are two basic modes of surface-supplied diving, and several variations for supplying breathing gas to divers from the surface.

===Surface oriented diving===

Surface oriented diving, with or without a stage or open bell, is where the diver starts and ends the dive at surface pressure. The diver is decompressed during the ascent or by surface decompression in a decompression chamber.

In addition to the standard system of surface-supplied diving using a diver&#x27;s umbilical and diving helmet or full-face diving mask to provide the diver with compressed atmospheric air from a low-pressure diving compressor, there are other configurations in use for surface oriented diving:

====Scuba replacement====

Scuba replacement is a surface-supplied diving mode where both the primary and reserve breathing gas supplies are from high-pressure storage cylinders. The rest of the system is identical to the standard surface supply configuration, and the full umbilical system, bailout cylinder, communications and surface gas panel are used. This is more portable than most compressors and is used by commercial diving contractors as a substitute for scuba with most of the advantages and disadvantages of a regular compressor fed surface air supply. It is also used where the ambient air is contaminated and unsuitable for use as a breathing gas when compressed, such as some situations in hazmat diving.

====Standard diving dress====

Standard, or heavy gear is the historical copper helmet, waterproofed canvas suit, and weighted boots. The original system used a manually powered diver&#x27;s pump to supply air, and no reserve gas or bailout cylinder was provided. As the technology became available, voice communication was added, and mechanically driven compressors were used.

====Air-line diving====

Air-line diving uses an air line hose in place of a full diver&#x27;s umbilical to supply breathing air from the surface. If any of the required components of a diver&#x27;s umbilical are absent this term applies. There are subcatgories of air-line diving:
* Hookah diving – A basic form of surface-supplied diving in which the air supply is via a single hose is often referred to as air line or Hookah (occasionally Hooka) diving. This often uses a standard scuba second stage as the delivery unit, but is also used with light full-face masks. Bailout gas may be carried, but this is not always the case. Commercial diamond divers working in the shallow zone off the west coast of South Africa under the codes of practice of the Department of Minerals and Energy use half mask and demand valve hookah. Their safety record is relatively poor, as a bailout cylinder is seldom carried. When done using a diving compressor with suitable breathing air quality and an appropriate emergency gas supply, there is no obvious reason why hookah diving should be more dangerous than scuba diving in the same conditions. A concern is that if the diver is supplied from a compressor in a boat, the intake must be clear of any exhaust fumes, which is also the case for surface supplied diving using a full umbilical.
* Snuba and SASUBA – A system used to supply air from a cylinder mounted on a float to a recreational diver tethered by a short (approximately 6 m) hose through a scuba regulator.
* Compressor diving – An even more basic system is the &quot;Compressor diving&quot; arrangement used in the Philippines and Caribbean for fishing. This rudimentary and highly hazardous system uses a large number of small bore plastic tubes connected to a single compressor to supply a large number of divers simultaneously. The delivery end of the hose is unencumbered by any mechanism or mouthpiece, and is simply held by the diver&#x27;s teeth. Air supply is free flow and often unfiltered, and varies with depth and number of divers drawing off the system, with greater flow going to divers with a shorter hose and at shallower depth. A kink or restriction in a hose can cut off a diver&#x27;s air supply without warning.

====Bell bounce diving====
Bell bounce diving, also known as transfer under pressure diving, is where the divers are transported vertically through the water in a closed bell and transferred under pressure into a surface decompression chamber for decompression, or decompressed in the bell. This mode of diving is most likely to be used when the dive is relatively deep, and the decompression is likely to be long, but neither deep enough nor long enough to justify the costs of setting up for saturation diving. The mode was often used with mixed breathing gases. but is also used for long air dives shallower than 50 m.

A development of this system uses a set of decompression chambers mounted in a lifeboat for the routine surface decompression of the divers. The lifeboat is positioned between the transfer chamber and the side of the deck, and can be launched by the davits included in the package. This avoids the necessity for an additional hyperbaric evacuation system.

===Saturation diving===

In saturation diving, the diver is transferred under pressure from the pressurised accommodation to the underwater worksite, which is at a similar pressure, and back in a closed bell, only decompressing once at the end of the contract.

== Alternatives ==
* Scuba diving, which is commonly used for recreational diving, is the main alternative to surface-supplied diving. Scuba is available in open circuit and rebreather configurations.
* Atmospheric diving suits such as the JIM suit and the Newtsuit, and manned submersibles with manipulator arms, isolate the occupant from the ambient pressure, but are bulky, expensive, and allow limited dexterity and agility.
* Unmanned submersibles (ROVs and AUVs) which can operate deeper and avoid exposing a diver to underwater hazards, have their applications, but lack the dexterity of a diver at present (2011).
* Freediving, or breathhold diving, is extremely limited in duration and exposes the diver to relatively high risk.

== Application ==

Surface-supplied diving equipment and techniques are mainly used in professional diving due to the greater cost and complexity of owning and operating the equipment. This type of equipment is used in saturation diving, as the gas supply is relatively secure, and the diver can not bail out to the surface, and for diving in contaminated water, where the diver must be protected from the environment, and helmets are generally used for environmental isolation.

There has been development of low-cost airline systems for shallow recreational diving, where limited training is offset by physically limiting the depth accessible.

==History==

The first successful surface-supplied diving equipment was produced by the brothers Charles and John Deane in the 1820s. Inspired by a fire accident he witnessed in a stable in England, he designed and patented a &quot;Smoke Helmet&quot; to be used by firemen in smoke-filled areas in 1823. The apparatus comprised a copper helmet with an attached flexible collar and jacket. A long leather hose attached to the rear of the helmet was to be used to supply air - the original concept being that it would be pumped using a double bellows. A continuous airflow passed through the helmet, and the user breathed from it and exhaled back into it. A short pipe allowed excess air to escape. The garment was constructed from leather or airtight cloth, secured by straps.

The brothers had insufficient funds to build the equipment themselves, so they sold the patent to their employer, Edward Barnard. It was not until 1827 that the first smoke helmets were built, by German-born British engineer Augustus Siebe. In 1828 they decided to find another application for their device and converted it into a diving helmet. They marketed the helmet with a loosely attached &quot;diving suit&quot; so that a diver could perform salvage work but only in a vertical position, otherwise water entered the suit.
In 1829 the Deane brothers sailed from Whitstable for trials of their new underwater apparatus, establishing the diving industry in the town. In 1834 Charles used his diving helmet and suit in a successful attempt on the wreck of at Spithead, during which he recovered 28 of the ship&#x27;s cannon. In 1836, John Deane recovered timbers, guns, longbows, and other items from the rediscovered &quot;Mary Rose&quot; shipwreck.
By 1836 the Deane brothers had produced the world&#x27;s first diving manual, &quot;Method of Using Deane&#x27;s Patent Diving Apparatus&quot; which explained in detail the workings of the apparatus and pump, plus safety precautions.

In the 1830s the Deane brothers asked Siebe to apply his skill to improve their underwater helmet design. Expanding on improvements already made by another engineer, George Edwards, Siebe produced his own design; a helmet fitted to a full-length watertight canvas diving suit. The real success of the equipment was an exhaust non-return valve in the helmet, which prevented flooding through the exhaust port.

Siebe introduced various modifications on his diving dress design to accommodate the requirements of the salvage team on the wreck of HMS &quot;Royal George&quot;, including making the helmet be detachable from the corselet; his improved design gave rise to the typical standard diving dress which revolutionised underwater civil engineering, underwater salvage, commercial diving and naval diving.

==Equipment==

The essential aspect of surface-supplied diving is that breathing gas is supplied from the surface, either from a specialized diving compressor, high-pressure cylinders, or both. In commercial and military surface-supplied diving, a backup source of surface-supplied breathing gas should always be present in case the primary supply fails. The diver may also wear a bailout cylinder which can provide self-contained breathing gas in an emergency. Thus, the surface-supplied diver is less likely to have an &quot;out-of-air&quot; emergency than a scuba diver using a single gas supply, as there are normally two alternative breathing gas sources available. Surface-supplied diving equipment usually includes communication capability with the surface, which enhances the safety and efficiency of the working diver.

The equipment needed for surface supplied diving can be broadly grouped as diving and support equipment, but the distinction is not always clear. Diving support equipment is the equipment used to facilitate a diving operation. It is either not taken into the water during the dive, such as the gas panel and compressor, or is not integral to the actual diving, being there to make the dive easier or safer, such as a surface decompression chamber. Some equipment, like a diving stage, is not easily categorised as diving or support equipment, and may be considered as either.

Surface-supplied diving equipment is required for a large proportion of the commercial diving operations conducted in many countries, either by direct legislation, or by authorised codes of practice, as in the case of IMCA operations. Surface-supplied equipment is also required under the US Navy operational guidance for diving in harsh contaminated environments which was drawn up by the Navy Experimental Diving Unit.

===Breathing apparatus===
The definitive equipment for surface-supplied diving is the breathing apparatus which is supplied with primary breathing gas from the surface via a hose, which is usually part of a diver&#x27;s umbilical connecting the surface supply systems with the diver, sometimes directly, otherwise via a bell umbilical and bell panel.

====Helmets====
Lightweight demand helmets are rigid structures which fully enclose the head of the diver and supply breathing gas &quot;on demand&quot;. The flow of gas from the supply line is activated by inhalation reducing the pressure in the helmet to slightly below ambient, and a diaphragm in the demand valve uses this pressure difference to open the valve allowing breathing gas to flow into the helmet until the pressure inside the helmet again balances the ambient pressure and the lever returns to the shut position. This is exactly the same principle as used for scuba demand valves, and in some cases the same components are used. Sensitivity of the lever can often be adjusted by the diver by turning a knob on the side of the demand valve. 

Lightweight demand helmets are available in open circuit systems which exhaust to the surrounding water, used when breathing standard air or nitrox, and closed circuit (reclaim) systems used to reduce costs when breathing mixed gas with a large helium fraction. the exhaled gas is returned to the surface through a reclaim valve, a type of back-pressure regulator in the helmet, via the umbilical, scrubbed of carbon dioxide, filtered of odour and micro-organisms, re-oxygenated, and recompressed to storage.

The helmet shell may be of metal or reinforced plastic composite (GRP), and is either connected to a neck dam or clamped directly to a drysuit. The neck dam is on the lower part of the helmet, which seals around the neck of the diver in the same way as the neck seal of a dry suit. Attachment to the neck dam is critical to diver safety and a reliable locking mechanism is needed to ensure that it is not inadvertently released during a dive.

Demand breathing systems reduce the amount of gas required to adequately ventilate the diver, as gas is only supplied when the diver inhales, but the slightly increased work of breathing caused by this system is a disadvantage at extreme levels of exertion, where free-flow systems may be better. The demand system is also quieter than free-flow, particularly during the non-inhalation phase of breathing. This can make voice communication more effective. The breathing of the diver is also audible to the surface team over the communications system, and this helps to monitor the condition of the diver and is a valuable safety feature.
A free flow diving helmet supplies a continuous flow of air to the diver, who breathes it as it flows past. Mechanical work of breathing is minimal, but flow rate must be high if the diver works hard, and this is noisy, affecting communications and requiring hearing protection to avoid damage to the ears. This type of helmet is popular where divers have to work hard in relatively shallow water for long periods. It is also useful when diving in contaminated environments, where the helmet is sealed onto a dry suit, and the entire system is kept at a slight positive pressure by adjusting the back-pressure of the exhaust valve, to ensure that there is no leakage into the helmet. This type of helmet is often large in volume, and if it is attached to the suit, it does not move with the head. The diver must move their body to face anything they want to see. For this reason the faceplate is large and there is often an upper window or side windows to improve the field of vision.
The standard diving helmet (Copper hat) is made of two main parts: the bonnet, which covers the diver&#x27;s head, and the corselet which supports the weight of the helmet on the diver&#x27;s shoulders, and is clamped to the suit to create a watertight seal. The bonnet is attached and sealed to the corselet at the neck, either by bolts or an interrupted screw-thread, with some form of locking mechanism.
The bonnet is usually a copper shell with soldered brass fittings. It covers the diver&#x27;s head and provides sufficient space to turn the head to look out of the glazed faceplate and other viewports (windows). The front port can usually be opened for ventilation and communication when the diver is on deck, by being screwed out or swung to the side on a hinge. The other viewports are generally fixed.
The corselet, also known as a breastplate or gorget, is an oval or rectangular collar-piece resting on the shoulders, chest and back, to support the helmet and seal it to the suit. The helmet is usually connected to the suit by clamping the rubberised collar of the suit to the rim of the corselet to make a water-tight seal. Most six and twelve bolt bonnets are joined to the corselet by 1/8th turn interrupted thread with a safety lock.

An alternative method is to bolt the bonnet to the corselet over a rubber collar seal bonded to the neck opening of the suit.

====Band mask====

A band mask is a heavy duty full-face mask with many of the characteristics of a lightweight demand helmet. In structure it is the front section of a lightweight helmet from above the faceplate to below the demand valve and exhaust ports, including the bailout block and communications connections on the sides. This rigid frame is attached to a neoprene hood by a metal clamping band, hence the name. It is provided with a padded sealing surface around the frame edge which is held firmly against the diver&#x27;s face by a rubber &quot;spider&quot;, a multiple strap arrangement with a pad behind the diver&#x27;s head, and usually five straps which hook onto pins on the band. The straps have several holes so the tension can be adjusted to get a comfortable seal. A band mask is heavier than other full face masks, but lighter than a helmet, and can be donned more quickly than a helmet. They are often used by the standby diver for this reason.

====Full-face mask====

A full-face mask encloses both mouth and nose, which reduces the risk of the diver losing the air supply compared to a half mask and demand valve. Some models require a bailout block to provide alternative breathing gas supply from the umbilical and bailout cylinder, but are not suitable for accepting an alternative air supply from a rescue diver, while a few models accept a secondary demand valve which can be plugged into an accessory port (Draeger, Apeks and Ocean Reef). The unique Kirby Morgan 48 SuperMask has a removable DV pod which can be unclipped to allow the diver to breathe from a standard scuba demand valve with mouthpiece.

Despite the improvement in diver safety provided by the more secure attachment of the breathing apparatus to the diver&#x27;s face, some models of full face mask can fail catastrophically if the faceplate is broken or detached from the skirt, as there is then no way to breathe from the mask. This can be mitigated by carrying a standard secondary second stage, and preferably also a spare half mask.

A full face mask is lighter and more comfortable for swimming than a helmet or band mask, and usually provides an improved field of vision, but it is not as secure, and does not provide the same level of protection as the heavier and more sturdily constructed equipment. The two types of equipment have different ranges of application. Most full face masks are adaptable for use with scuba or surface supply. The full face mask does not usually have a bailout block fitted, and this is usually attached to the diver&#x27;s harness, with a single hose to supply the mask from main or bailout gas which is selected at the block. The strap arrangement for full face masks is usually quite secure, but not as secure as a bandmask or helmet, and it is possible for it to be dislodged in the water. However it is also quite practicable for a trained diver to replace and clear a full face mask under water without assistance, so this is more an inconvenience than a disaster unless the diver is rendered unconscious at the same time.

===Breathing gas supply===

====Diver&#x27;s umbilical====
The umbilical contains a hose to supply the breathing gas and usually several other components. These usually include a communications cable (comms wire), a pneumofathometer, and a strength member, which may be the breathing gas hose, communications cable, or a rope. When needed, a hot water supply line, helium reclaim line, video camera and lighting cables may be included. These components are neatly twisted into a multistrand cable, or taped together, and are deployed as a single unit. The diver&#x27;s end has underwater connectors for the electrical cables, and the hoses are usually connected to the helmet, band mask, or bailout block by JIC fittings. A screw-gate carabiner or similar connector is provided on the strength member for attachment to the diver&#x27;s harness, and may be used to lift the diver in an emergency. Similar connections are provided for attachment to the diving bell, if used, or to the surface gas panel and communications equipment. A diver&#x27;s umbilical supplied from a bell gas panel is called an excursion umbilical, and the supply from the surface to the bell panel is the bell umbilical.

====Air-line====


Hookah, and Snuba systems are categorised as &quot;air-line&quot; equipment, as they do not include the communication, lifeline and pneumofathometer hose characteristic of a full diver&#x27;s umbilical. Most hookah diving uses a demand system based on a standard scuba second stage, but there have been special purpose free-flow full-face masks specifically intended for hookah diving (see photos). A bailout system, or emergency gas supply (EGS) is not an inherent part of an air-line diving system, though it may be required in some applications.

Their field of application is very different from full surface-supplied diving. Hookah is generally used for shallow water work in low-hazard applications, such as archaeology, aquaculture, and aquarium maintenance work, but is also sometimes used for open water hunting and gathering of seafood, shallow water mining of gold and diamonds in rivers and streams, and bottom cleaning and other underwater maintenance of boats. Sasuba and Snuba are mainly a shallow water recreational application for low-hazard sites. Sasuba and hookah diving equipment is also used for yacht or boat maintenance and hull cleaning, swimming pool maintenance, shallow underwater inspections.

The systems used to supply air through the hose to a demand valve mouthpiece, are either 12-volt electrical air pumps, gasoline engine powered low-pressure compressors, or floating scuba cylinders with high pressure regulators. These hookah diving systems usually limit the hose length to allow less than 7 metres depth. The exception is the gasoline engine powered unit, which requires a much higher level of training and topside supervision for safe use.

A notable exception to this trend are the inshore diamond diving operations on the west coast of South Africa, where hookah is still the standard equipment for diamondiferous gravel extraction in the hostile conditions of the surf zone, where the water temperature is usually around 8 to 10 °C, visibility is usually low, and is often strong. Divers work shifts of about two hours with a crowbar and a suction hose, are heavily weighted to stay in place while working, and the standard method of ascent is to ditch the weighted harness and regulator and make a free swimming ascent. The next diver will free dive down the air line, fit the regulator and wriggle into the harness before continuing with the job. Until the South African abalone fishery was closed, hookah was the only mode of diving permitted for harvesting wild abalone, and several aspects of this practice were in direct contravention of the diving regulations at the time. Abalone divers were not allowed to have a standby diver on the boat.

====Gas panel====


A gas panel or gas manifold is the control equipment for supplying the breathing gas to the divers. Primary and reserve gas is supplied to the panel through shutoff valves from a low-pressure compressor or high-pressure storage cylinders (&quot;bombs&quot;, &quot;bundles&quot;, &quot;quads&quot;, or &quot;kellys&quot;). The gas pressure may be controlled at the panel by an industrial pressure regulator, or it may already be regulated closer to the source (at the compressor, or at the storage cylinder outlet). The supply gas pressure is monitored on a gauge at the panel, and an over-pressure valve is fitted in case the supply pressure is too high. The gas panel may be operated by the diving supervisor if the breathing gas is air or a fixed ratio premix, but if the composition must be controlled or monitored during the dive it is usual for a dedicated gas panel operator, or &quot;gas man&quot; to do this work.

There is a set of valves and gauges for each diver to be supplied from the panel. These include:
* A main supply valve with non-return valve, which supplies gas to the main gas supply hose of the umbilical. This is usually a quarter-turn valve, as it must be quick to operate and obvious whether it is open or closed.
* A pneumofathometer supply valve, which supplies gas to the pneumofathometer for the diver. This valve is usually near the main supply valve but with a different handle. It is usually a needle type valve as it must be finely adjustable, but it must also be large enough to allow a fairly high flow rate, as the air may be used as an alternative breathing air source, or to fill small lift bags.
* A pneumofathometer gauge is connected to the pneumo line. This is a high resolution pressure gauge calibrated in feet sea water (fsw) and/or metres sea water (msw). and is used to measure the depth of the diver by allowing air to flow through the pneumo hose and out the end attached to the diver. When the air supply is shut off, and the flow stops, the gauge indicates the pressure at the open end at the diver.
* Each pneumofathometer gauge has an overpressure valve to protect it against gas supply at higher pressure than it is designed to take. This is essential as the main supply pressure is significantly higher than the maximum depth pressure on the pneumo gauge. There is also often a snubbing valve or orifice between the pneumo line and the gauge to restrict flow into the gauge and ensure that the overpressure valve can adequately relieve the pressure.
* Some gas panels have a separate supply gauge for each diver downstream of the supply valve, but this is not standard practice.
The gas panel may be fairly large and mounted on a board for convenience of use, or may be compact and mounted inside a portable box, for ease of transport. Gas panels are usually for one, two or three divers. In some countries, or under some codes of practice, the surface standby diver must be supplied from a separate panel to the working diver/s.

A wet or closed bell will be fitted with a bell gas panel to supply gas to the divers&#x27; excursion umbilicals. The bell gas panel is supplied with primary gas from the surface via a bell umbilical, and on-board emergency gas from high-pressure storage cylinders mounted on the frame of the bell.

===== Pneumofathometer =====
A &quot;pneumofathometer&quot; is a device used to measure the depth of a diver by displaying the back-pressure on a gas supply hose with an open end at the diver, and a flow rate with negligible resistance in the hose. The pressure indicated is the hydrostic pressure at the depth of the open end, and is usually displayed in units of metres or feet of seawater, the same units used for decompression calculations.

The pneumo line is usually a bore hose in the diver&#x27;s umbilical, supplied with breathing gas from the gas panel via a supply valve. Downstream from the valve there is a branch to a high resolution pressure gauge, a restriction to flow to the gauge, and an overpressure relief valve to protect the gauge from full panel supply pressure in case the pneumo line is used for emergency breathing gas supply. Each diver has an independent pneumofathometer, and if there is a bell, it will also have an independent pneumofathometer.

====Low-pressure breathing air compressor====

A low-pressure compressor is often the air supply of choice for surface-supplied diving, as it is virtually unlimited in the amount of air it can supply, provided the delivery volume and pressure are adequate for the application. A low-pressure compressor can run for tens of hours, needing only refueling, periodical filter drainage and occasional running checks, and is therefore more convenient than high-pressure storage cylinders for primary air supply.

It is however, critical to diver safety that the compressor is suitable for breathing air delivery, uses a suitable oil, is adequately filtered, and takes in clean and uncontaminated air. Positioning of the intake opening is important, and may have to be changed if the relative wind direction changes, to ensure that no engine exhaust gas enters the intake. Various national standards for breathing air quality may apply.

Power for portable compressors is usually a 4-stroke petrol (gasoline) engine. Larger, trailer mounted compressors, may be diesel powered. Permanently installed compressors on dive support boats are likely to be powered by 3-phase electric motors.

The compressor should be provided with an accumulator and a relief valve. The accumulator functions as an additional water trap, but the main purpose is to provide a reserve volume of pressurised air. The relief valve allows any excess air to be released back to the atmosphere while retaining the appropriate supply pressure in the accumulator.

====High pressure main gas supply====

The main gas supply for surface-supplied diving can be from high pressure bulk storage cylinders. When the storage cylinders are relatively portable this is known as a &quot;scuba replacement&quot; system in the commercial diving industry. The application is versatile and can ensure high quality breathing gas in places where atmospheric air is too contaminated to use through a normal low pressure compressor filter system, and is easily adaptable to a mixed gas supply and oxygen decompression provided that the breathing apparatus and gas supply system are compatible with the mixtures to be used. Scuba replacement is often used from smaller diving support vessels, for emergency work, and for hazmat diving.

Mixed breathing gases are provided from high pressure bulk storage systems for saturation diving, but these are less portable, and generally involve manifolded racks of cylinders of approximately 50 litres water capacity arranged as &quot;quads&quot; and even larger racks of high pressure &quot;tubes&quot;. If gas reclaim systems are used, the reclaimed gas is scrubbed of carbon dioxide, filtered of other contaminants, and recompressed into high pressure cylinders for interim storage, ans is generally blended with oxygen or helium to make up the required mix for the next dive before re-use.

====Decompression gas====

Reducing the partial pressure of the inert gas component of the breathing mixture will accelerate decompression as the concentration gradient will be greater for a given depth. This is achieved by increasing the fraction of oxygen in the breathing gas used, whereas substitution of a different inert gas will not produce the desired effect. Any substitution may introduce counter-diffusion complications, owing to differing rates of diffusion of the inert gases, which can lead to a net gain in total dissolved gas tension in a tissue. This can lead to bubble formation and growth, with decompression sickness as a consequence. Partial pressure of oxygen is usually limited to 1.6 bar during in-water decompression for scuba divers, but can be up to 1.9 bar in-water and 2.2 bar in the chamber when using the US Navy tables for surface decompression,

====High-pressure reserve gas====

An alternative to a low-pressure compressor for gas supply is high-pressure storage cylinders feeding through a pressure regulator which will be set to the required supply pressure for the depth and equipment in use. In practice HP storage may be used for either reserve gas supply or both main and reserve gas supplies to a gas panel. High-pressure bulk cylinders are quiet in operation and provide gas of known quality (if it has been tested). This allows the relatively simple and reliable use of nitrox mixtures in surface-supplied diving. Bulk cylinders are also quiet in operation compared to a low-pressure compressor, but have the obvious limitation of amount of gas available.
The usual configurations for surface-supplied bulk gas storage are large single cylinders of around 50 litres water capacity, often referred to as &quot;J&quot;s or &quot;bombs&quot;, &quot;quads&quot;, which are a group (sometimes, but not necessarily four in number) of similar cylinders mounted on a frame and connected together to a common supply fitting, and &quot;kellys&quot; which are a group of &quot;tubes&quot; (long large volume pressure vessels) usually mounted in a container frame, and usually connected together to a common connection fitting.

====Bailout gas supply====

Bailout gas is usually carried by the diver in a scuba cylinder, mounted on the back of the harness in the same position as is used with recreational scuba. The size of the cylinder will depend on operational variables. There should be sufficient gas to enable the diver to reach a place of safety on the bailout gas in an emergency. For surface oriented dives, this may require gas for decompression, and bailout sets generally start at about 7 litres internal capacity and can be larger.

Bell diving bailout options: For bell dives there is no requirement for decompression gas, as the bell itself carries bailout gas. However at extreme depths the diver will use gas fast, and there have been cases where twin 10 litre 300 bar sets were required to supply sufficient gas. Another option which has been used for extreme depth is a rebreather bailout set. A limitation for this service is that the diver must be able to get in and out of the bell while wearing the bailout equipment.

Mounting options: The bailout cylinder may be mounted with the valve at the top or at the bottom, depending on local codes of practice. A generally used arrangement is to mount the cylinder with the valve up, as this is better protected while kitting up, and the cylinder valve is left fully open while the diver is in the water. This means that the regulator and supply hose to the bailout block will be pressurised during the dive, and ready for immediate use by opening the bailout valve on the harness or helmet.

The bailout block is a small manifold fitted either to the harness where it is in a convenient but protected position, commonly on the right side on the waist strap, or on the helmet, also usually on the right side of the temple, with the valve knob to the side to distinguish it from the free-flow or defogging valve which is commonly to the front. The bailout block has a connection for the main gas supply from the umbilical through a non-return valve. This route can not be closed and supplies the helmet demand valve and free flow valve under normal circumstances. The bailout gas from the back mounted cylinder passes through a conventional scuba first stage at the cylinder valve, to the bailout block, where it is normally isolated by the bailout valve. When the diver needs to switch over to bailout gas he simply opens the bailout valve and the gas is supplied to the helmet or mask. As the valve is normally closed, a leak in the first stage regulator seat will cause the interstage pressure to rise, and unless an overpressure relief valve is fitted to the first stage the hose may burst. Aftermarket overpressure valves are available which can be fitted into a standard low-pressure port of most first stages.

Bailout supply pressure options: If the interstage pressure for the bailout regulator is lower than the main supply pressure, the main supply will override the bailout gas, and continue to flow. This can be a problem if the diver switches to bailout because main supply is contaminated. If on the other hand, bailout pressure is higher than main supply pressure, the bailout gas will override the main gas supply if the valve is opened. This will result in the bailout gas being used up if the valve leaks. The diver should periodically check that bailout pressure is still sufficient for the rest of the dive, and abort the dive if it is not. For this reason the bailout regulator must be fitted with a submersible pressure gauge to which the diver can refer to check the pressure. This is usually clipped off or tucked into the harness on the left side, where it can be easily reached to read, but is unlikely to snag on anything.

===Diver&#x27;s harness===
The diver&#x27;s harness is an item of strong webbing, and sometimes cloth, which is fastened around a diver over the exposure suit, and allows the diver to be lifted without risk of falling out of the harness. Several types are in use.

====Jacket harness====

The jacket harness is a waistcoat (vest) style garment with strong adjustable webbing straps which are adjustable and securely buckled over the shoulders, across the chest and waist, and through the crotch or around each thigh, so that the diver can not slide out under any predictable circumstance. The harness is fitted with several heavy duty D-rings, fixed to the webbing in such a way that the full weight of the diver and all his equipment can be safely supported. A minimum strength of 500kgf is recommended or required by some codes of practice. A jacket harness is usually provided with webbing straps or a cloth pocket on the back to support the bailout cylinder, and may have a variety of pockets to carry tools, and may also carry ditchable or fixed main weights. There are usually several strong D-rings to secure the umbilical and other equipment.

====Bell harness====
A bell harness has the same function as a jacket harness, but lacks the cloth jacket component, and is made entirely of webbing, with a similar configuration of straps.
It too may have a means of carrying a bailout cylinder, or the bailout cylinder may be carried on a separate backpack.

====Harness with buoyancy compensation====

The AP Valves Mk4 Jump Jacket is a harness with integral buoyancy jacket specifically designed for commercial diving work with helmets and bells. There is a direct feed to the jacket from the main air supply, from the pneumo line and from bailout, and a system which allows the diver&#x27;s pneumo to be directly connected to another diver&#x27;s helmet as an emergency air supply.

====Buoyancy control====
Surface-supplied divers may be required to work in mid-water or on the bottom. They must be able to stay down without effort, and this usually requires weighting. When working in mid-water the diver may wish to be neutrally buoyant or negative, and when working on the bottom he will usually want to be several kilos negative.
The only time the diver may want to be positively buoyant is when on the surface or during a limited range of emergencies where uncontrolled ascent is less life-threatening than remaining under water. Surface-supplied divers generally have a secure supply of breathing gas, and there are very few occasions where weights should be jettisoned, so in most cases the surface-supplied diver weighting arrangement does not provide for quick release.

On those occasions when surface supplied divers need variable buoyancy, it may be provided by inflation of the dry suit, if used, or by a buoyancy control device similar in principle to those used by scuba divers, or both.

===Weight systems===

The diver needs to stay on the bottom to work some of the time, and may need to have neutral buoyancy some of the time. The diving suit is usually buoyant, so added weight is usually necessary. This can be provided in several ways. Unwanted positive buoyancy is dangerous to a diver who may need to spend significant time decompressing during the ascent, so the weights are usually attached securely to prevent accidental loss.

==== Weight belts ====
Weight belts for surface supplied diving are usually provided with buckles which can not accidentally be released, and the weight belt is often worn under the jacket harness.

==== Weight harnesses ====
When large amounts of weight are needed, a harness may be used to carry the load on the diver&#x27;s shoulders, rather than around the waist, where it may tend to slip down into an uncomfortable position if the diver is working in a vertical posture, which is often the case. Sometimes this is a separate harness, worn under the safety harness, with pockets at the sides to carry the weights, and sometimes it is an integrated system, which carries the weight in pockets built into or externally attached to the safety harness.

==== Trim weights ====
If the diver needs to adjust trim for greater comfort and efficiency while working, trim weights of various types may be added to the harness.

==== Weighted boots ====
Weighted boots of several styles may be used if the diver will be working heavy. Some are in the form of clogs which strap on over the boots, and others use lead inner soles. Ankle weights are also an option, but less comfortable. These weights give the diver better stability when working upright on the bottom, which can significantly improve productivity for some kinds of work.

===Environmental protection===

Wetsuits are economical and used where the water temperature is not too low - more than about , the diver will not be spending too long in the water, and the water is reasonably clean.

Dry suits are better thermal protection than most wetsuits, and isolate the diver from the environment more effectively than other exposure suits. When diving in contaminated water, a drysuit with integral boots, sealed dry gloves and a helmet sealed directly to the suit provides the best environmental isolation. The suit material must be selected to be compatible with the expected contaminants. Thermal undersuits can be matched to the expected water temperature.

Hot water suits provide active warming which is particularly suitable for use with helium based breathing gases. Heated water is provided from the surface through a hose in the umbilical, and water flow can be adjusted to suit the diver&#x27;s needs. Heated water continuously flows into the suit and is distributed by perforated internal tubes down the front and back of the torso and along the limbs.
The hot water supply hose of the umbilical is commonly bore, and is connected to a supply manifold at the right hip of the suit with a set of valves which allow the diver to control flow to the front and back of the torso, and to the arms and legs, and to dump the supply to the environment if the water is too hot or too cold. The manifold distributes the water through the suit through perforated tubes. The hot-water suit is normally a one-piece neoprene wetsuit, fairly loose fitting, to fit over a neoprene undersuit, which can protect the diver from scalding if the temperature control system fails, with a zipper on the front of the torso and on the lower part of each leg. Gloves and boots are worn which receive hot water from the ends of the arm and leg hoses. If a full-face mask is worn, the hood may be supplied by a tube at the neck of the suit. Helmets do not require heating. The heating water flows out at the neck and cuffs of the suit through the overlap with gloves, boots, or hood.

===Communications system===


Both hard-wired (cable) and through-water electronic voice communications systems may be used with surface-supplied diving. Wired systems are more popular as there is a physical connection to the diver for gas supply in any case, and adding a cable does not change the handling characteristics of the system. Wired communications systems are still more reliable and simpler to maintain than through-water systems.

====Diver&#x27;s telephone====

The communications equipment is relatively straightforward and may be of the two-wire or four-wire type. Two wire systems use the same wires for surface to diver and diver to surface messages, whereas four wire systems allow the diver&#x27;s messages and the surface operator&#x27;s messages to use separate wire pairs.

In a two wire system the standard arrangement for diver communications is to have the diver&#x27;s side normally on, so that the surface team can hear anything from the diver at all times except when the surface is sending a message. In a four-wire system the diver&#x27;s side is always on, even when the surface operator is talking. This is considered an important safety feature, as the surface team can monitor the diver&#x27;s breathing sounds, which can give early warning of problems developing, and confirms that the diver is alive.

Helium divers may need a decoder system (unscrambler) which reduces the frequency of the sound to make it more intelligible.

====Video====
Closed circuit video has also become popular, as this allows the surface personnel to see what the diver is doing, which is particularly useful for inspection work, as a non-diving specialist can see the underwater equipment in real time and direct the diver to look at particular features of interest.

====Wireless systems====
Dry bells may have a through-water (wireless) communication system fitted as a backup. This is intended to provide communications in the event that the cable is damaged, or even if the bell is completely severed from the umbilical and deployment cables.

==Equipment maintenance and testing==
All components of a surface supplied diving system are required to be maintained in good working condition for diver safety, and may be required to be tested or calibrated at specified intervals.

==Diving spread==
The diving spread is a commercial diving term for the topside dive site infrastructure supporting the diving operations for a diving project. The diving contractor provides the diving and support equipment and sets it up on site, usually at a place provided for the purpose by the client, or on a diving support vessel. Two types of diving spread are in common use: Air spreads for surface oriented diving operations, where the divers are deployed from normal atmospheric pressure, and decompressed back to atmospheric pressure at the end of the dive, either in-water, or in a chamber for surface decompression, using compressed air as the primary breathing gas, and saturation spreads, where divers are deployed under pressure from the saturation accommodation via a closed diving bell to the underwater worksite, and returned under pressure in the bell to the saturation accommodation system, usually breathing a helium based gas mixture. At the end of their contract the divers are decompressed to surface pressure. The process of selecting, transporting, setting up and testing the equipment is the mobilisation stage of the project, and the demobilisation involves dismantling, transportation and return to storage of the spread components.

Surface oriented mixed gas diving spreads may also be used, but are less common, and are likely to be associated with projects which are too deep for air but require only a short working time at depth.

===Air spread===
An air spread will include the breathing air supply equipment, and often a deck decompression chamber. Where a chamber is present, facilities for hyperbaric oxygen treatment are usually required. If the planned decompression is to be long, a diving stage or bell and the associated handling equipment is likely to be included to allow better control of ascent rate and decompression depth. Equipment for in-water or surface decompression on oxygen (SurDO2) may be available.

Equipment may be necessary to facilitate safe entry to and exit from the water, and may include extrication equipment in case the diver is injured. A basic offshore air diving spread will typically include a dive control unit with compressor and high pressure storage banks, a launch and recovery system with a wet bell, a deck decompression chamber and a hot water unit.

===Saturation spread===

A saturation spread will include the closed bell and launch and recovery system, saturation habitat, breathing gas supplies and services, all the life support and control equipment, dive equipment stores and workshops, and may also include power supplies and other equipment not directly involved in the diving. It does not include the diving platform as such, for example a DP vessel, or offshore drilling rig, on which the spread is established, or other services such as catering and accommodation for the topside personnel, which would usually be provided to the dive team.

==Diving procedures==

There are a large number of standard procedures associated with surface-supplied diving. Some of these have their equivalents in scuba, and others are very different. Many procedures are common to all surface-supplied diving, others are specific to stage and bell operations or to saturation diving. Details will vary depending on the equipment used, as manufacturers will specify some checks and procedures in detail, and the order may vary to some extent.

===The working diver===
Preparation of the working diver for the dive is very much a routine, but details depend on the diving equipment and the task, and to some extent on the site, particularly aspects of accessibility.

==== Preparation for diving ====

Before a diving operation it is usually necessary to set up the surface supply equipment. There are a number of components which must be connected in the correct order, with checks at various stages to ensure that there are no leaks and everything functions correctly. Most diving contractors will have comprehensive checklists that are used to ensure that the equipment is connected in the appropriate sequence and all checks are done. Some checks are critical to the safety of the diver. The compressor must be set up so that it gets uncontaminated air to the intake. Filters should be checked in case they need to be changed. Air supply hoses will be connected to the air panel and checked for leaks, umbilicals connected to the panels and helmets, and the communications equipment connected and tested. Before the umbilical is connected to the helmet or full face mask, the umbilical should be blown through to ensure there is no dirt inside, and the non return valve on the bailout block must be given a function test. This is important, as it is there to prevent backflow of air up the umbilical if the line is cut, and if it fails the diver may suffer a helmet squeeze, or a neck dam flood.

Compared to scuba diving, dressing the diver in is a relatively laborious process, as the equipment is bulky and fairly heavy, and several components are connected together by hoses. This is more so with helmets, and less so with light full-face masks. It is not usual for the diver to do all the dressing in without the assistance of a diver&#x27;s tender, who will also manage the umbilical during the dive.
* Exposure suit – The diver will wear an exposure suit appropriate for the planned dive time, breathing gas and water temperature, and also influenced by the level of exertion expected during the dive.
* Harness – After putting on the exposure suit and checking any seals and zips, the diver will put on the harness. The topside crew will usually help as the bailout cylinder will be already mounted, and usually also attached to the helmet, making this a cumbersome procedure, easiest if the diver is seated.
* Weights – The weights will be put onto the diver at some time during the dressing procedure, but the stage where this is done depends on what weighting system is used.
* Bailout – The bailout cylinder is usually strapped to the harness and connected to the helmet before the diver is dressed in.
* Helmet – The helmet is usually put on last, as it is heavy and uncomfortable out of the water. Some divers can put on their own helmet, but it is usual for the topside crew to do most of the locking on to the neck dam, and check that there are no obvious faults with the seal.

There are a series of pre-dive checks which are done after the diver is locked into the helmet, and before he is committed to the water. These should be done every time a diver is prepared for a dive.
* Comms check – The diver and comms operator check that the voice communications system is working both ways and they can hear each other clearly. This also ensures that the operator is sure which comms channel connects to the specific diver.
* Breathing checks – The diver breathes on main air supply to ensure that the demand valve is delivering gas at low work of breathing, without free flow, and that the umbilical is connected to the correct valve on the panel.
* Bailout checks – The diver operates the bailout system to ensure that he can reach and operate the valve and it turns smoothly, the pressure in the cylinder is adequate for the planned dive profile and is ready for immediate use, and reports bailout readiness to the supervisor by &quot;On at the tap, off at the hat, Pressure...bar&quot; or equivalent.

Surface checks are done after the diver enters the water, but before he is allowed to descend. They are checks which can not be done as effectively, or at all, in air.
* Wet comms check – Once in the water, the comms should be checked again to make sure it is still working adequately. It is possible that water will cause the comms to fail or deteriorate when the contacts get wet.
* Helmet seal – The helmet seals and neckdam should not allow water to enter the helmet. This can only be checked when in the water.
* Pneumo bubbles – The diver calls for the air panel operator to open the pneumofathometer valve to check that the line is not blocked, and that it is connected to the correct place on the panel.

====Diving heavy====
The traditional buoyancy condition of the working surface-supplied diver is &quot;heavy&quot;, or negatively buoyant, with sufficient apparent weight to move around on the bottom by walking. This was more important with the standard diving dress, where inadvertent positive buoyancy could have fatal consequences if poorly managed and degraded to an uncontrolled buoyant ascent. Diving heavy has advantages for working when there is good footing, as the diver has more natural resistance to the reaction forces on tools used and to light currents, due to friction and ground reaction, so the technique remains popular for many tasks.

The technique virtually eliminates the risk of uncontrolled buoyant ascent, and reduces task loading, but makes the diver dependent on umbilical management or a jackstay for depth control in midwater and introduces a risk of accidental descent to unplanned depths by falling off the substrate and sinking until the slack in the umbilical is taken up, but with an adequate gas supply the risk of serious squeeze injury is low.
====Emergency procedures====

The diver must be able to deal with the following emergencies. Some are life-threatening, whereas others are more inconveniences.
* Bailout to back gas, in the case of a failure of gas supply from the umbilical, or if the main air supply is contaminated.
* Pneumo breathing, if the main air supply is cut, but the pneumo hose is intact. Pneumo gas can also be supplied by the standby diver
* Voice communications failure is not usually an emergency, but can adversely affect work effectiveness and expose the diver to higher risk if anything else goes wrong. Ability to communicate with line signals can help here, particularly to assist in the decision whether the dive should be aborted, and if there are other more urgent problems.
* Helmet flood. Depending on the severity of the flood, this can range from an annoyance to an emergency. A slow leak can be controlled by opening the free flow valve, which will drive a moderate flow of water out of the exhaust valve. A neck dam failure usually has this effect.
* Broken faceplate. This is a real emergency, but very unlikely as the faceplate is usually a highly impact-resistant polymer and should not shatter. It can be mitigated by opening the free flow valve and holding the opening level, facing down, and breathing very carefully. a small hole or crack can be covered with a hand to slow the leak.
* Demand valve failure. This is a minor problem if there is a free flow valve, but the dive will normally be terminated, as the bailout will not last long if needed.
* Exhaust valve failure, like demand valve failure, can be dealt with by opening the free flow valve and ensuring a constant outflow of air.
* Vomiting in the helmet. This can be a real emergency and life-threatening in a demand helmet with an orinasal mask if not handled effectively, as the diver can aspirate the vomit and asphyxiate. Once again, the action is to open the free flow valve, preferably before vomiting, and to inhale as carefully as possible. If there is no free flow valve, as on a full face mask, the purge button should clear the demand valve and orinasal mask, and the mask can be rinsed by lifting the bottom edge away from the face to let in some water, before purging again. With a free-flow helmet it is more a nuisance than an emergency.
* Hot water supply failure. This can be life-threatening for deep heliox diving, and there is not much the diver can do but head back to the bell immediately.

====Wet bell and stage emergency procedures====

Emergency procedures for wet bell and diving stages include:
* Loss of main gas supply to the bell
* Recovery of a distressed diver to the bell
* Abandonment of the bell or stage
* Deployment of a surface standby diver
* Loss of heated water supply for hot water suits
* Voice communications failures
* Dynamic positioning alarm and runout response for bell divers: Yellow and Red alerts.

===Standby diver===
The standby diver will be prepared in the same way as the working diver, but will not enter the water until needed. He will usually be prepared to the stage of readiness to enter the water, and then will remove his mask, or have his helmet removed and will then sit in as comfortable a place as can be found, so that in case of an emergency he can be readied for action in as short a time as possible. This often means setting up some form of shelter from the weather, and heat and sunshine are usually more of a problem than cold and wet. It is frequently necessary to cool the standby diver to avoid overheating, and dehydration can also be a problem. When the working diver is using a helmet, the stand-by diver may use a full face mask or bandmask, as this makes it quicker to get into the water in an emergency. The stand-by diver&#x27;s job is to wait until something goes wrong, and then be sent in to sort it out. For this reason a stand by diver should be one of the best divers on the team regarding diving skills and strength, but does not have to be expert at the work skills for the specific job. When deployed, the standby diver will normally follow the umbilical of the diver who is in trouble, as unless it has been severed, it will reliably lead to the correct diver. The standby diver must maintain communications with the supervisor throughout the dive and is expected to give a running commentary of progress so that the supervisor and surface crew know as much as possible what is happening and can plan accordingly, and must take the necessary steps to resolve incidents, which may involve supply of emergency air or locating and rescuing an injured or unconscious diver. In bell diving, the bellman is the primary standby diver, and may have to recover a distressed diver to the bell and give first aid if necessary and possible. There will generally also be a surface standby diver in a bell operation, as some types of assistance are provided from the surface.

A rescue tether or rescue strop is a short length of rope or webbing with a clip at one or both ends, which the stand-by diver uses to clip the unresponsive diver to his harness to free up both hands during a recovery. This can be useful if he needs to climb a structure, shotline or topographical feature, and the umbilicals can not be safely used to lift the divers due to snags or sharp edges.

=== Bellman ===

A bellman is a stand-by diver who tends the working diver&#x27;s umbilical from a wet or closed bell, and is ready to go to the diver&#x27;s assistance at all times. The bellman must be in effective voice communication with the supervisor.

===Underwater tending point===
For some operations it is necessary to control the umbilical at a point underwater. This is known as an underwater tending point, and it may be done by another diver or by the diver passing through a closed fairlead placed in the required position. This is usually done to prevent inadvertent access to a known hazard by making the length of the umbilical extending beyond the tending point too short to let the diver get to the hazard. The fairlead must constrain the umbilical laterally and vertically, while allowing free passage away from and back to the bell or stage, and should not interfere with the bellman&#x27;s ability to pay out or take up slack when the diver travels to the workplace and back. It may be held in position by suspending a weighted hoop from a crane, resting a frame on the bottom, or other methods as may suit the job. Underwater tending may also be used for penetrations of enclosed spaces, such as wrecks, caves, penstocks, sewers, culverts and the like. A diving stage or basket is a by default an underwater tending point, as the umbilical passes through it from the surface to the diver, which also serves as a guide line for the diver to get back to the stage. A diving bell is also an underwater tending point, as the excursion umbilical is tended from the bell by the bellman.

==Occupational health and safety issues==
Divers face specific physical and health risks when they go underwater with diving equipment, or use high pressure breathing gas.

A hazard is any agent or situation that poses a level of threat to life, health, property, or environment. Most hazards remain dormant or potential, with only a theoretical risk of harm, and when a hazard becomes active, and produces undesirable consequences, it is called an incident and may culminate in an emergency or accident. Hazard and vulnerability interact with likelihood of occurrence to create risk, which can be the probability of a specific undesirable consequence of a specific hazard, or the combined probability of undesirable consequences of all the hazards of a specific activity. A hazard that is understood and acknowledged may present a lower risk if appropriate precautions are taken, and the consequences may be less severe if mitigation procedures are planned and in place.

The presence of a combination of several hazards simultaneously is common in diving, and the effect is generally increased risk to the diver, particularly where the occurrence of an incident due to one hazard triggers other hazards with a resulting cascade of incidents. Many diving fatalities are the result of a cascade of incidents overwhelming the diver, who should be able to manage any single reasonably foreseeable incident. The use of surface supplied breathing gas reduces one of the most significant hazards in diving, that of loss of breathing gas supply, and mitigates that risk by the use of a suitable emergency gas supply, usually in the form of a scuba bailout set, which is intended to provide the diver with sufficient breathing gas to reach a place of relative safety with more breathing gas available.

The risk of the diver getting lost or being unable to call for assistance is also drastically reduced in comparison with most scuba, as the diver is physically connected to the surface control point by the umbilical, making it relatively simple for the standby diver to get to a diver in distress, and the standard application of hard-wired voice communications allows the surface team to constantly monitor the diver&#x27;s breathing sounds.

The assessed risk of a dive would generally be considered unacceptable if the diver is not expected to cope with any single reasonably foreseeable incident with a significant probability of occurrence during that dive. Precisely where the line is drawn depends on circumstances. Professional diving operations tend to be less tolerant of risk than recreational, particularly technical divers, who are less constrained by occupational health and safety legislation and codes of practice. This is one of the factors driving the use of surface supplied equipment where reasonably practicable for professional work.

Diving disorders are medical conditions specifically arising from underwater diving. The signs and symptoms of these may present during a dive, on surfacing, or up to several hours after a dive. Surface supplied divers have to breathe a gas which is at the same pressure as their surroundings (ambient pressure), which can be much greater than on the surface. The ambient pressure underwater increases by for every of depth.

The principal disorders are: decompression illness (which covers decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism); nitrogen narcosis; high pressure nervous syndrome; oxygen toxicity; and pulmonary barotrauma (burst lung). Although some of these may occur in other settings, they are of particular concern during diving activities. Long term diving disorders include dysbaric osteonecrosis, which is associated with decompression sickness. These disorders are caused by breathing gas at the high pressures encountered at depth, and divers may breathe a gas mixture different from air to mitigate these effects. Nitrox, which contains more oxygen and less nitrogen, is commonly used as a breathing gas to reduce the risk of decompression sickness at depths to about . Helium may be added to reduce the amount of nitrogen and oxygen in the gas mixture when diving deeper, to reduce the effects of narcosis and to avoid the risk of oxygen toxicity. This is complicated at depths beyond about , because a helium–oxygen mixture (heliox) then causes high pressure nervous syndrome. More exotic mixtures such as hydreliox, a hydrogen–helium–oxygen mixture, are used at extreme depths to counteract this.

==Compressor diving==

&quot;Compressor diving&quot; is a method of surface-supplied diving used in some tropical sea areas including the Philippines and the Caribbean. The divers swim with a half mask covering the eyes and nose and (often home-made) fins and are supplied air from the boat by plastic hoses from an industrial low-pressure air compressor of the type commonly used to supply jackhammers. There is no reduction valve; the diver holds the hose end in his mouth with no demand valve or mouthpiece. Excess air spills out through the nose or lips.
If several people are compressor diving from the same boat, several line tenders are needed in the boat to stop the airlines from getting tangled and blocked by kinks.

Compressor diving is the most common method used to fish for Caribbean spiny lobster (&quot;Panulirus argus&quot;) in the Caribbean. However, it is illegal because it contributes to overfishing, is environmentally destructive, and is harmful to the health of the fishers. When fishing with compressors, fishers either use gaffs or harpoons to spear lobsters immediately upon sight, killing or injuring the lobsters before they can be checked for eggs or assessed as legally sized. Compressors allow fishers to fish in deeper waters for longer periods of time, facilitating reef damage as fishers search for lobsters hidden underneath corals and other living refuges. The misuse of compressors has also resulted in health problems for many fishers, such as respiratory problems, limb paralysis, and death due to decompression illness.

This method of diving is commonly used in Philippines waters for &quot;&quot; fishing, which is fishing with big nets on coral reef areas where a surface-dragged net would snag on coral; the compressor air hoses are also used to make a curtain of bubbles to corral and herd the fish into the nets, since &quot;muro-ami&quot; fishing was stopped in the area. At least one &quot;pa-aling&quot; fishing fleet has been found and arrested in a protected fishery area. Compressor diving was shown, and so called, used for &quot;pa-aling&quot; fishing, in episode 1 (Oceans: Into the Blue) of the BBC television series &quot;Human Planet&quot;. The cameramen used ordinary scuba gear, but one of them had a trial-dive with the crew&#x27;s compressor-diving gear.

==Training and registration==
Almost all surface-supplied diving is done by professional divers, and consequently the training is done by schools which specialise in the training of professional divers. Registration of professional divers is generally subject to national or state legislation, though international recognition is available for some qualifications.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
Hookah:
* Introduction to hooka diving
Compressor diving
* Photographs of Pa-aling compressor diving in the Philippines
* BBC documentary features ‘dangerous’ fishing method in the Philippines
* BBC One - Human Planet, Oceans - Into the blue. Pa-aling divers (with link to video)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="0" end="23" title="Surface-supplied diving" label="Surface-supplied diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="29" end="33" title="Mode of diving" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="37" end="54" title="underwater diving" label="underwater diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="85" end="98" title="breathing gas" label="breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109" end="131" title="Umbilical cable#Diver" label="diver&amp;#x27;s umbilical"/>
<link wikidata="Q776704" start="182" end="203" title="diving support vessel" label="diving support vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q937854" start="232" end="243" title="diving bell" label="diving bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="268" end="280" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="986" end="1007" title="standard diving dress" label="standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753570" start="1034" end="1051" title="commercial diving" label="commercial diving"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1166" end="1183" title="Diving helmet#Free-flow helmets" label="free-flow helmets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1208" end="1234" title="Diving helmet#Lightweight demand helmets" label="lightweight demand helmets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1236" end="1246" title="Full face diving mask#Band masks" label="band masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972089" start="1251" end="1272" title="full-face diving mask" label="full-face diving mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="1275" end="1288" title="Breathing gas" label="Breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1304" end="1307" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q905892" start="1309" end="1315" title="heliox" label="heliox"/>
<link wikidata="Q898391" start="1317" end="1323" title="nitrox" label="nitrox"/>
<link wikidata="Q901979" start="1328" end="1334" title="Trimix (breathing gas)" label="trimix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119938" start="1337" end="1354" title="Saturation diving" label="Saturation diving"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1437" end="1454" title="Saturation diving#Architecture of a surface saturation facility" label="saturation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970932" start="1458" end="1476" title="underwater habitat" label="underwater habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183684" start="1485" end="1497" title="Decompression (diving)" label="decompressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="1571" end="1588" title="compressor diving" label="compressor diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183689" start="2038" end="2059" title="surface decompression" label="surface decompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325149" start="3091" end="3104" title="hazmat diving" label="hazmat diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114092" start="3285" end="3302" title="diver&amp;#x27;s pump" label="diver&amp;#x27;s pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698337" start="3535" end="3543" title="air line" label="air line"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="3568" end="3590" title="diver&amp;#x27;s umbilical" label="diver&amp;#x27;s umbilical"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="3770" end="3783" title="Hookah diving" label="Hookah diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956246" start="4241" end="4274" title="Department of Minerals and Energy" label="Department of Minerals and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848483" start="4359" end="4375" title="bailout cylinder" label="bailout cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548813" start="4816" end="4821" title="Snuba" label="Snuba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4826" end="4832" title="SASUBA" label="SASUBA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4996" end="5013" title="#Compressor diving" label="Compressor diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q937854" start="5884" end="5895" title="closed bell" label="closed bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672699" start="5900" end="5926" title="Transfer under pressure" label="transferred under pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q549046" start="5942" end="5963" title="Deck decompression chamber" label="decompression chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q120629891" start="6670" end="6698" title="hyperbaric evacuation system" label="hyperbaric evacuation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="6984" end="6996" title="Scuba diving" label="Scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719546" start="7025" end="7044" title="recreational diving" label="recreational diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428339" start="7137" end="7147" title="rebreather" label="rebreather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761969" start="7166" end="7189" title="Atmospheric diving suit" label="Atmospheric diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132868" start="7203" end="7211" title="JIM suit" label="JIM suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339176" start="7220" end="7228" title="Newtsuit" label="Newtsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570255" start="7403" end="7414" title="submersible" label="submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q618465" start="7417" end="7421" title="remotely operated underwater vehicle" label="ROVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q257406" start="7426" end="7430" title="Autonomous underwater vehicle" label="AUVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="7587" end="7597" title="Freediving" label="Freediving"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="7789" end="7808" title="professional diving" label="professional diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119938" start="7921" end="7938" title="saturation diving" label="saturation diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161752" start="8446" end="8453" title="Charles Anthony Deane" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161750" start="8458" end="8468" title="John Deane (inventor)" label="John Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q76692" start="9351" end="9365" title="Augustus Siebe" label="Augustus Siebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="9457" end="9470" title="diving helmet" label="diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q964785" start="9694" end="9704" title="Whitstable" label="Whitstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783560" start="9888" end="9896" title="Spithead" label="Spithead"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="10053" end="10062" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="10530" end="10536" title="diving helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259259" start="10572" end="10578" title="canvas" label="canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="10579" end="10590" title="diving suit" label="diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q519336" start="10641" end="10657" title="non-return valve" label="non-return valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q493205" start="10940" end="10948" title="corselet" label="corselet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="10995" end="11016" title="standard diving dress" label="standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="11038" end="11048" title="underwater" label="underwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="11049" end="11066" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="11079" end="11086" title="Marine salvage" label="salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753570" start="11088" end="11105" title="commercial diving" label="commercial diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="11110" end="11122" title="naval diving" label="naval diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q754383" start="11266" end="11283" title="diving compressor" label="diving compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848483" start="11506" end="11522" title="bailout cylinder" label="bailout cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q25141692" start="12425" end="12437" title="diving stage" label="diving stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="12820" end="12827" title="United States Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="12869" end="12894" title="Water pollution" label="contaminated environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890817" start="12921" end="12950" title="United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit" label="Navy Experimental Diving Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="13321" end="13346" title="Lightweight demand helmet" label="Lightweight demand helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260990" start="14403" end="14426" title="back-pressure regulator" label="back-pressure regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="14473" end="14487" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15657" end="15680" title="free flow diving helmet" label="free flow diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="16644" end="16666" title="standard diving helmet" label="standard diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="17098" end="17103" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539356" start="17498" end="17504" title="gorget" label="gorget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501807" start="21305" end="21321" title="pneumofathometer" label="pneumofathometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156905" start="21797" end="21808" title="JIC fitting" label="JIC fitting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21813" end="21833" title="Carabiner#Locking" label="screw-gate carabiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548813" start="22315" end="22320" title="Snuba" label="Snuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848483" start="22704" end="22718" title="Bailout cylinder" label="bailout system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260990" start="25403" end="25421" title="pressure regulator" label="pressure regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501807" start="28341" end="28357" title="pneumofathometer" label="pneumofathometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232349" start="28669" end="28695" title="Metre sea water" label="metres or feet of seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325149" start="31547" end="31560" title="hazmat diving" label="hazmat diving"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31875" end="31894" title="Saturation diving#Gas reclaim systems" label="gas reclaim systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037959" start="31926" end="31952" title="Carbon dioxide scrubber" label="scrubbed of carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q774332" start="33952" end="33957" title="Gas storage quad" label="quads"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="34242" end="34257" title="Intermodal container" label="container frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="40812" end="40820" title="dry suit" label="dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455572" start="40839" end="40862" title="buoyancy control device" label="buoyancy control device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="40901" end="40913" title="Scuba diving" label="scuba divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="42738" end="42745" title="Wetsuit" label="Wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="42924" end="42932" title="Dry suit" label="Dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="43393" end="43407" title="Hot water suit" label="Hot water suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q424098" start="46630" end="46643" title="wireless diver communications" label="through-water"/>
<link wikidata="Q85770469" start="56029" end="56037" title="Jackstay (diving)" label="jackstay"/>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="56271" end="56278" title="Squeeze (diving)" label="squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58884" end="58907" title="Surface-supplied diving skills#Surface gas supply failure" label="Loss of main gas supply"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58922" end="58952" title="Surface-supplied diving skills#Rescue of the working diver" label="Recovery of a distressed diver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58967" end="58999" title="Surface-supplied diving skills#Bell abandonment" label="Abandonment of the bell or stage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59042" end="59069" title="Surface-supplied diving skills#Hot water supply failure" label="Loss of heated water supply"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59074" end="59089" title="Diving suit#Hot water suits" label="hot water suits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59092" end="59112" title="Diver communications#Voice communications" label="Voice communications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59124" end="59185" title="Dynamic positioning#Dynamic positioning alarm and runout response for bell divers" label="Dynamic positioning alarm and runout response for bell divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q609847" start="62112" end="62120" title="fairlead" label="fairlead"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="63263" end="63269" title="Underwater diving" label="Divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="63297" end="63303" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="63323" end="63333" title="underwater" label="underwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q852784" start="63339" end="63355" title="diving equipment" label="diving equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="63378" end="63391" title="breathing gas" label="breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="63396" end="63402" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822725" start="66074" end="66090" title="Diving disorders" label="Diving disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="66095" end="66113" title="medical conditions" label="medical conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="66140" end="66157" title="underwater diving" label="underwater diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="66163" end="66168" title="Medical sign" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="66173" end="66181" title="symptoms" label="symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q789775" start="66368" end="66384" title="ambient pressure" label="ambient pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153171" start="66529" end="66550" title="decompression illness" label="decompression illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="66565" end="66587" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367304" start="66592" end="66613" title="arterial gas embolism" label="arterial gas embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q581152" start="66616" end="66633" title="nitrogen narcosis" label="nitrogen narcosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q955638" start="66635" end="66665" title="high pressure nervous syndrome" label="high pressure nervous syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q125223" start="66667" end="66682" title="oxygen toxicity" label="oxygen toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="66688" end="66708" title="pulmonary barotrauma" label="pulmonary barotrauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319350" start="66867" end="66889" title="dysbaric osteonecrosis" label="dysbaric osteonecrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="66970" end="66983" title="breathing gas" label="breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q898391" start="67111" end="67117" title="Nitrox" label="Nitrox"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="67139" end="67145" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="67155" end="67163" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="67267" end="67273" title="Helium" label="Helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q905892" start="67524" end="67530" title="heliox" label="heliox"/>
<link wikidata="Q904352" start="67605" end="67614" title="hydreliox" label="hydreliox"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="67836" end="67847" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="67856" end="67865" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q116441" start="67890" end="67899" title="diving mask" label="half mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q978234" start="68038" end="68052" title="air compressor" label="air compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766" start="68089" end="68099" title="jackhammer" label="jackhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q754360" start="68197" end="68207" title="Mouthpiece (scuba)" label="mouthpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q166343" start="68518" end="68533" title="Panulirus argus" label="Panulirus argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153171" start="69237" end="69258" title="decompression illness" label="decompression illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="69303" end="69314" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265417" start="69571" end="69579" title="muro-ami" label="muro-ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="69851" end="69865" title="BBC television" label="BBC television"/>
<link wikidata="Q512582" start="69879" end="69891" title="Human Planet" label="Human Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="69927" end="69937" title="scuba gear" label="scuba gear"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488215" wikidata="Q7626776" url="?curid=488215" title="Stuart Lyon Smith">
<text>Stuart Lyon Smith (May 7, 1938 – June 10, 2020) was a politician, psychiatrist, academic and public servant in Ontario, Canada. He served in the Legislative Assembly of Ontario from 1975 to 1982, and led the Ontario Liberal Party for most of this period.

==Background and early career==
Smith was born in Montreal, Quebec, the son of Nettie (Krainer) and Moe Samuel Smith, who ran a grocery store in the east-end of Montreal after his earlier garment-making business failed. His grandparents had been Jewish immigrants from Russia, Poland and Austria.

He attended McGill University where he was elected president of the Students&#x27; Society of McGill University and earned the top award for debating. In 1957, he organized a student strike against the Maurice Duplessis government, which led to the provincial government launching a student loan programme to meet the students&#x27; demands. He graduated in medicine from McGill University Medical School. In 1962, he was one of five university students chosen from across Canada to participate in the first exchange with students from the Soviet Union.

Smith joined the Liberal Party and went to work as an executive assistant for MP Alan Macnaughton. When Macnaughton announced his retirement as MP for Mount Royal, Smith stepped forward to seek the Liberal Party&#x27;s nomination to succeed him. He withdrew his name as a candidate to allow Pierre Trudeau to run without strong opposition for the 1965 federal Liberal nomination. Trudeau won the next election and went on to become the Leader of the Liberal Party of Canada and Prime Minister of Canada.

In 1967, Smith left Montreal for Hamilton, Ontario to become associate professor of psychiatry at McMaster University Medical School and run the in-patient unit at St. Joseph’s Hospital.

==Media==
While in medical school, he co-hosted the CBC Television program &quot;Youth Special&quot; with Paddy Springate, who would later become his wife, for four years, followed by a year of hosting CBC&#x27;s &quot;The New Generation&quot;. As a practising psychiatrist at McMaster University, he wrote and presented a weekly television program on CHCH-TV called &quot;This is Psychiatry&quot;.

==Ontario politics==
Smith was first elected to the Legislative Assembly of Ontario for the Ontario Liberal Party in the 1975 provincial election, defeating Progressive Conservative candidate Bob Morrow, a city councillor and future mayor, by 542 votes in Hamilton West. Liberal leader Robert Nixon announced his retirement after the election, and Smith entered the leadership contest to succeed him. He built a support base on the left wing of the party, and was sometimes compared to Pierre Trudeau in his appearance and mannerisms. He finished in first place on the first ballot, and defeated the more right-wing David Peterson by forty-five votes on the second ballot to become the party&#x27;s new leader.

==Leader of the Opposition==
The Liberals lost one seat in the legislature in the 1977 election, but nonetheless displaced the New Democratic Party as the Official Opposition to William Davis&#x27;s Progressive Conservatives. Smith became Leader of the Opposition in the legislative sitting that followed.

As a politician, Smith had a reputation as an intelligent but dry and somewhat aloof personality, in a province that had grown accustomed to avuncular leaders. His criticism of government spending by the government of Premier Davis, and his pessimism about their election promises, prompted the Conservatives to nickname him &quot;Dr. No&quot; - a label which also referred to his background as a psychiatrist. He also had difficulty managing members of his caucus, many of whom supported right-wing positions on policy issues.

The Liberals made little progress in the 1981 election, returning again with 34 seats while the Tories regained a majority government. One of Smith&#x27;s few successes was in the city of Toronto, where popular support for the Liberal Party increased under his leadership and the party won a handful of seats after having been shut out in 1975. He resigned as leader after the election, and left the legislature in January 1982, a month before the leadership convention that chose David Peterson as his successor.

Smith is credited by Peterson and party strategists with having transformed the Ontario Liberal Party from a rurally-based conservative party to a more urban, modern political force, broadening the party as well by helping it appeal to an increasingly multicultural electorate, laying the groundwork for its breakthrough in the 1985 election, which resulted in the end of the Progressive Conservative dynasty after 42 years. Peterson said of Smith that: &quot;History will record that he played a major role in the modern success of the Ontario Liberal Party by dragging us into the 20th century and establishing roots in the urban areas.”

==Post-political career==
In January 1982, he began a term as chairman of the Science Council of Canada, a federal government body, which he led until 1987. From 1995 to 2002, he was the chair of the National Roundtable on the Environment and the Economy. In 1991, he headed up the Smith Commission, an inquiry into the state of post-secondary education across Canada. His inquiry&#x27;s final report emphasized the need to ensure that the value of teaching was not overshadowed by research.

==Private sector==
A year after leaving the Council, he founded RockCliffe Research and Technology Inc., a firm which introduced public-private partnerships into government laboratories. From 1995 to 2002, he was chair of the National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy.

In 1994, Smith proposed the creation of a private-sector water company in the City of Hamilton. His stated goal was to develop an industry in the city which would be able to develop contracts on a global level. The city managers agreed to his plan, but insisted that Philip Services oversee the project. Smith consented, and was named as the founding president of the Philip Utilities Management Corporation (PUMC). The company eventually was able to reduce by half the workforce from the city&#x27;s former public utility, and was once blamed by the union for a sewage overflow.

The company successfully broke into the American market in Seattle in 1996. Smith left soon afterwards. PUMC itself was then sold on the basis of an evaluation of approximately $150 million, while the parent company collapsed when it acknowledged that it had significantly overstated earnings from its copper-trading business. Philip Services stock options became worthless; as these were a significant portion of Smith&#x27;s remuneration, he failed to receive much benefit from the financial success of his company, PUMC. &quot;If anybody is bitter about the Philip experience, I am&quot;, he was later quoted as saying.

Subsequently, Smith served as chairman of the board of Esna Tech in Richmond Hill, and as chair of the board for Humber College in Toronto.

A lifelong baseball fan, in 2012 Smith was appointed commissioner of the Intercounty Baseball League, a semi-pro baseball league in Ontario. He resigned following the 2013 season.

==Illness and death==
Smith died on June 10, 2020, after being ill with Lewy body dementia for two years.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7626776" start="0" end="17" title="Stuart Lyon Smith" label="Stuart Lyon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="54" end="64" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="66" end="78" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="80" end="88" title="academic" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="111" end="118" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="145" end="176" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="208" end="229" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="306" end="314" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="316" end="322" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="502" end="508" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="525" end="531" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="533" end="539" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="544" end="551" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="566" end="583" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="622" end="665" title="Students&amp;#x27; Society of McGill University" label="Students&amp;#x27; Society of McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q113941" start="756" end="773" title="Maurice Duplessis" label="Maurice Duplessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q462058" start="837" end="849" title="student loan" label="student loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801306" start="926" end="958" title="McGill University Medical School" label="McGill University Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1094" end="1106" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830544" start="1190" end="1206" title="Alan Macnaughton" label="Alan Macnaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321616" start="1260" end="1271" title="Mount Royal (electoral district)" label="Mount Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="1400" end="1414" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1461" end="1476" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="federal Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="1647" end="1664" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830454" start="1712" end="1746" title="McMaster University Medical School" label="McMaster University Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589172" start="1778" end="1799" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s Healthcare Hamilton" label="St. Joseph’s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="1854" end="1868" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407543" start="2154" end="2161" title="CHCH-TV" label="CHCH-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="2254" end="2285" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="2294" end="2315" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586382" start="2323" end="2347" title="1975 Ontario general election" label="1975 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="2359" end="2383" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933448" start="2394" end="2404" title="Bob Morrow" label="Bob Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="2435" end="2440" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q115882455" start="2458" end="2471" title="Hamilton West (provincial electoral district)" label="Hamilton West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348049" start="2488" end="2500" title="Robert Nixon (politician)" label="Robert Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188651" start="2568" end="2601" title="1976 Ontario Liberal Party leadership election" label="leadership contest to succeed him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176105" start="2818" end="2832" title="David Peterson" label="David Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094973" start="2996" end="3009" title="1977 Ontario general election" label="1977 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q827589" start="3041" end="3061" title="Ontario New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="3069" end="3088" title="Official Opposition" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q862052" start="3092" end="3105" title="Bill Davis" label="William Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962021" start="3153" end="3177" title="Leader of the Opposition (Ontario)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094974" start="3791" end="3804" title="1981 Ontario general election" label="1981 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="3864" end="3883" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="3938" end="3945" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176105" start="4231" end="4245" title="David Peterson" label="David Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586383" start="4593" end="4606" title="Ontario general election, 1985" label="1985 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433505" start="4984" end="5009" title="Science Council of Canada" label="Science Council of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5950" end="5965" title="Philip Services" label="Philip Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6304" end="6312" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939790" start="7001" end="7015" title="Humber College" label="Humber College"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="7019" end="7026" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045957" start="7102" end="7129" title="Intercounty Baseball League" label="Intercounty Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331905" start="7282" end="7300" title="Lewy body dementia" label="Lewy body dementia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488226" wikidata="Q210548" url="?curid=488226" title="Robert Langdon">
<text>Robert Langdon is a fictional character created by author Dan Brown for his &quot;Robert Langdon&quot; book series: &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot; (2000), &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; (2003), &quot;The Lost Symbol&quot; (2009), &quot;Inferno&quot; (2013) and &quot;Origin&quot; (2017). He is a Harvard University professor of Religious Iconology and Symbology (a fictional field related to the study of historic symbols, which is not methodologically connected to the actual discipline of semiotics).

Tom Hanks portrays Langdon in the &quot;Robert Langdon&quot; film series, starting with the 2006 film adaptation of &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;, reprising the role in the 2009 film adaptation of &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;, and again in the 2016 film adaptation of &quot;Inferno&quot;, while Ashley Zukerman plays a younger version of the character in the TV series, &quot;The Lost Symbol&quot;.

==Character development==
Dan Brown created the character as a fictional alter ego of himself or &quot;the man he wishes he could be&quot;. Brown himself was born June 22, 1964, in Exeter, New Hampshire, and the fictional Langdon is described as having been born on June 22, also in Exeter, and attending the same school as Brown did, Phillips Exeter Academy. Initially it is established that Langdon is a successful scholar who Brown named after John Langdon, a professor of typography at Drexel University who is known for his creation of ambigrams. An example of Langdon&#x27;s ambigrams appeared on the cover of the first edition of Brown&#x27;s novel &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;, and other ambigrams featured throughout that novel were also designed by Langdon. On the acknowledgments page, Brown calls Langdon &quot;one of the most ingenious and gifted artists alive … who rose brilliantly to my impossible challenge and created the ambigrams for this novel&quot;. John Langdon also created the logo for the fictitious Depository Bank of Zurich, which appears in &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; film. In an interview, Brown said that Joseph Campbell was an inspiration for the character of Langdon:

==Storyline==

Robert Langdon, born in Exeter, New Hampshire, United States, is described as looking like &quot;Harrison Ford in Harris tweed&quot;, with his standard attire being a turtleneck, Harris Tweed jacket, khakis, and collegiate cordovan loafers, which he wears in all instances, from lectures to social events. A frequently referred to accessory is his Mickey Mouse watch, a gift from his parents on his tenth birthday. He drives an automatic Saab 900S. Langdon was a diver at Phillips Exeter Academy in prep school and played water polo at Princeton University where he went for college. He suffers from claustrophobia, as he fell into a well when he was 7 years old. His father died when he was 12, and his new mentor father-figure became Peter Solomon, Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.

Known for a brilliant problem-solving mind and his genius, Langdon has an eidetic memory. As professor at Harvard University, he teaches religious iconology and the fictional field of symbology. As a hobby, it is specifically mentioned that Langdon is a great swimmer and swam laps (50) daily, a &quot;morning ritual&quot;, at Harvard&#x27;s athletic facilities (hence the lap swimming scene in &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;). Langdon also mentions he was raised a Catholic, but that he will never understand God; in &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;, he mentions to the Camerlengo that faith is a gift he has yet to receive. In the books, the events of &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; follow those of &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;; this was reversed in the movies, where the latter&#x27;s adaptation is written to be the sequel to the former.

===&quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;===
In &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;, Robert Langdon is called to CERN headquarters in Switzerland to find about the religious symbological implications of the death of CERN&#x27;s finest and best-known physicist, Leonardo Vetra, a Catholic priest who has been branded with the Illuminati symbol. When he starts to investigate the murder, his obsession with history comes into play. Langdon is later joined in the investigation by Vittoria Vetra (Leonardo&#x27;s adopted daughter) and they start their journey to the Vatican to unlock the mystery behind the Illuminati, an anti-Catholic secret society which, according to the plot, has deeply infiltrated many global institutions, political, economical and religious. Langdon and Vetra solve the mystery of the Illuminati by following the &quot;Path of Illumination&quot;, and in so doing explain the disappearances of four Cardinals during a papal conclave, the murder of Leonardo Vetra, and the theft of antimatter (a substance that can be used for mass destruction). At the end of the novel, Langdon ends up having a relationship with Vittoria Vetra. In the last few sentences of &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot;, Vittoria Vetra asks him if he has ever had a divine experience. When he replies in the negative, Vittoria slips off her terrycloth robe, saying, &quot;You&#x27;ve never been to bed with a yoga master, have you?&quot; Their relationship, however, is only referred to in &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;, mentioning the fact that Langdon had last seen Vittoria a year previously.

===&quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;===
In the beginning of 2003&#x27;s &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;, Robert Langdon is in Paris to give a lecture on his work. Having made an appointment to meet with Jacques Saunière, the curator of the Louvre, he is startled to find the French police at his hotel room door. They inform him that Saunière has been murdered and they would like his immediate assistance at the Louvre to help them solve the crime. Unknown to Langdon, he is in fact the prime suspect in the murder and has been summoned to the scene of the crime so that the police may extract a confession from him. While he is in the Louvre, he meets Sophie Neveu, a young cryptologist from the DCPJ. When Langdon and Sophie get the chance to talk in private, he finds out that Jacques Saunière is her grandfather. Saunière instructs Sophie to &#x27;find Robert Langdon&#x27;, according to the message he left for her in the floor. Hence, Sophie believes he is innocent of her grandfather&#x27;s murder.

Langdon spends the rest of the novel dodging the police and trying to solve the mystery of an ancient secret society, the Priory of Sion, which was once headed by Leonardo da Vinci. At the end of the novel, Langdon uncovers the mystery behind Mary Magdalene and the Holy Grail also called Sangreal, derived from either the Spanish &quot;San Greal&quot; (the Holy Grail), or the French &quot;Sang real&quot; (royal blood). Slightly before the moment he discovers the final resting place of the Holy Grail, he is seen in a romantic light by Sophie Neveu, and two agree to meet again in Florence, where Langdon will be for a lecture. The two share a kiss after which, in the epilogue, Langdon unearths the mystery of the Sangreal.

===&quot;The Lost Symbol&quot;===
In &quot;The Lost Symbol&quot;, Langdon has an adventure with the concepts of Freemasonry in Washington, D.C. Tricked into visiting the nation&#x27;s Capitol, Robert Langdon spends twelve hours racing through the monuments and buildings of the USA&#x27;s forefathers, searching for the truth about the secret society of the Masons. Behind new doors lie secrets that promise to change the way people view science and politics, now threatened by Zachary Solomon, the renegade, estranged son of Robert Langdon&#x27;s friend, Peter Solomon, who has himself been kidnapped by Zachary, now going by the name &quot;Mal&#x27;akh&quot;. Robert Langdon is the last line of defense. With help from Katherine Solomon (Peter&#x27;s sister), Warren Bellamy (the Architect of the Capitol) and Inoue Sato (the director of the Office of Security).

===&quot;Inferno&quot;===
In &quot;Inferno&quot;, Langdon wakes up in an Italian hospital with no memory of the events that led him to be in Italy. Soon he realizes that someone is trying to kill him. Langdon travels from Florence to Venice, and Istanbul with Doctor Sienna Brooks to prevent a biological attack by looking for a deadly virus that was planted by a client of a shadowy consulting group called The Consortium. In the course of this, Langdon must decipher clues employing allusions to the works of Sandro Botticelli, Giorgio Vasari and Dante Alighieri, the writer of &quot;Inferno&quot;, the first chapter of the epic poem &quot;The Divine Comedy&quot;, around which much of the plot revolves.

===&quot;Origin&quot;===
The fifth book in the series, &quot;Origin&quot; was released on October 3, 2017. Langdon arrives at the ultramodern Guggenheim Museum Bilbao to attend a major announcement—the unveiling of a discovery that &quot;will change the face of science forever.&quot; The evening&#x27;s host is Edmond Kirsch, a forty-year-old billionaire and futurist whose dazzling high-tech inventions and audacious predictions have made him a renowned global figure. Kirsch, who was one of Langdon&#x27;s first students at Harvard two decades earlier, is about to reveal an astonishing breakthrough, one that will answer two of the fundamental questions of human existence. As the event begins, Langdon and several hundred guests find themselves captivated by an utterly original presentation, which Langdon realizes will be far more controversial than he ever imagined. But the meticulously orchestrated evening suddenly erupts into chaos, and Kirsch&#x27;s precious discovery teeters on the brink of being lost forever. Reeling and facing an imminent threat, Langdon is forced into a desperate bid to escape Bilbao. With him is Ambra Vidal, the elegant museum director who worked with Kirsch to stage the provocative event. Together they flee to Barcelona on a perilous quest to locate a cryptic password that will unlock Kirsch&#x27;s secret. Navigating the corridors of hidden history and extreme religion, Langdon and Vidal must evade an enemy whose power seems to emanate from Spain&#x27;s Royal Palace itself, and who will stop at nothing to silence Edmond Kirsch. On a trail marked by modern art and enigmatic symbols, Langdon and Vidal uncover clues that ultimately bring them face-to-face with Kirsch&#x27;s shocking discovery.

==Bibliography==

Between &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;, &quot;The Lost Symbol&quot;, and &quot;Inferno&quot;, Langdon is said to have written seven books:

*&quot;The Symbology of Secret Sects&quot;
*&quot;The Art of the Illuminati: Part 1&quot;
*&quot;The Lost Language of Ideograms&quot;
*&quot;Religious Iconology&quot;
*&quot;Symbols of the Lost Sacred Feminine&quot;
*&quot;Christian Symbols in the Muslim World&quot;
*&quot;Christianity and the Sacred Feminine&quot;

At that same point in the trilogy, Langdon is preparing the manuscript for his fifth book, to be titled &quot;Symbols of the Lost Sacred Feminine.&quot; It is later revealed in &quot;The Lost Symbol&quot; that &quot;Symbols of the Lost Sacred Feminine&quot; was published and created &quot;quite a scandal&quot;. The book &quot;Christianity and the Sacred Feminine&quot;, mentioned in &quot;Origin&quot; had reportedly been denounced by the Vatican, &quot;which, in the aftermath, promptly became a bestseller&quot;, as quoted by the AI assistant Winston.

==References==
==External links==

*Official Robert Langdon website
*Bos, Carole (May 1, 2009). &quot;Angels &amp; Demons - ROBERT LANGDON and HIS AMBIGRAMS&quot;. AwesomeStories.com. Page 2 of 8.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210548" start="0" end="14" title="Robert Langdon" label="Robert Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345" start="58" end="67" title="Dan Brown" label="Dan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q83561430" start="76" end="114" title="Robert Langdon (book series)" label="&amp;quot;Robert Langdon&amp;quot; book series"/>
<link wikidata="Q182502" start="122" end="141" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons" label="Angels &amp;amp; Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="162" end="179" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q211006" start="200" end="215" title="The Lost Symbol" label="The Lost Symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845793" start="236" end="243" title="Inferno (Brown novel)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610044" start="267" end="273" title="Origin (Dan Brown novel)" label="Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="296" end="314" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="414" end="420" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="491" end="500" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="504" end="513" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962582" start="538" end="576" title="Robert Langdon (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Robert Langdon&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="601" end="616" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192934" start="682" end="697" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192306" start="756" end="771" title="Inferno (2016 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805651" start="802" end="817" title="Ashley Zukerman" label="Ashley Zukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q97577197" start="883" end="898" title="The Lost Symbol (TV series)" label="The Lost Symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825923" start="970" end="1000" title="author surrogate" label="fictional alter ego of himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q990504" start="1088" end="1094" title="Exeter, New Hampshire" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="1096" end="1109" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426464" start="1242" end="1265" title="Phillips Exeter Academy" label="Phillips Exeter Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779452" start="1354" end="1366" title="John Langdon (typographer)" label="John Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q603034" start="1397" end="1414" title="Drexel University" label="Drexel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q221552" start="1448" end="1457" title="ambigrams" label="ambigrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="1986" end="2003" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q295516" start="2049" end="2064" title="Joseph Campbell" label="Joseph Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q990504" start="2154" end="2175" title="Exeter, New Hampshire" label="Exeter, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="2227" end="2240" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306943" start="2244" end="2256" title="Harris tweed" label="Harris tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544262" start="2297" end="2307" title="turtleneck" label="turtleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q650770" start="2330" end="2336" title="khakis" label="khakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888786" start="2353" end="2368" title="loafers" label="cordovan loafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q603773" start="2409" end="2417" title="lectures" label="lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="2478" end="2490" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="2558" end="2567" title="Automatic transmission" label="automatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2568" end="2577" title="Saab 900#900EP .28900 S.29" label="Saab 900S"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="2593" end="2598" title="Diving (sport)" label="diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426464" start="2602" end="2625" title="Phillips Exeter Academy" label="Phillips Exeter Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="2652" end="2662" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2666" end="2686" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q186892" start="2730" end="2744" title="claustrophobia" label="claustrophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="2764" end="2768" title="well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="2898" end="2921" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185030" start="2975" end="2981" title="genius" label="genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q386001" start="2998" end="3012" title="eidetic memory" label="eidetic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3030" end="3048" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047900" start="3071" end="3080" title="iconology" label="iconology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="3184" end="3191" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3391" end="3399" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265455" start="3495" end="3505" title="Camerlengo" label="Camerlengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192934" start="3700" end="3724" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons (film)" label="latter&amp;#x27;s adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="3756" end="3766" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="the former"/>
<link wikidata="Q182502" start="3816" end="3835" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons" label="Angels &amp;amp; Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="3871" end="3875" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="3932" end="3938" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="4008" end="4017" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4019" end="4033" title="List of Angels &amp;amp; Demons characters#Leonardo Vetra" label="Leonardo Vetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="4083" end="4093" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4236" end="4250" title="List of Angels &amp;amp; Demons characters#Vittoria Vetra" label="Vittoria Vetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="4322" end="4329" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="4378" end="4391" title="Anti-Catholicism" label="anti-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="4392" end="4406" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q182502" start="4600" end="4620" title="Path of Illumination" label="Path of Illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="4679" end="4687" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="4698" end="4712" title="papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="4761" end="4771" title="antimatter" label="antimatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470617" start="5091" end="5101" title="terrycloth" label="terrycloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091595" start="5159" end="5163" title="Yoga as exercise" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q81689" start="5421" end="5438" title="The Da Vinci Code" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5544" end="5560" title="List of The Da Vinci Code characters#Jacques Saunière" label="Jacques Saunière"/>
<link wikidata="Q674426" start="5566" end="5573" title="curator" label="curator"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="5581" end="5587" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776019" start="5616" end="5629" title="French police" label="French police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243381" start="5829" end="5842" title="prime suspect" label="prime suspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q847337" start="5938" end="5948" title="confession" label="confession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5995" end="6007" title="List of The Da Vinci Code characters Sophie Neveu Saint-Clair" label="Sophie Neveu"/>
<link wikidata="Q779391" start="6017" end="6029" title="cryptologist" label="cryptologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029457" start="6039" end="6043" title="DCPJ" label="DCPJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q212201" start="6471" end="6485" title="Priory of Sion" label="Priory of Sion"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="6512" end="6529" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="6592" end="6606" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="6615" end="6625" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q211006" start="7121" end="7136" title="The Lost Symbol" label="The Lost Symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="7190" end="7201" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305815" start="7262" end="7269" title="Capitol Hill" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="7356" end="7378" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="USA&amp;#x27;s forefathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q690175" start="7720" end="7732" title="Mal&amp;#x27;akh" label="Mal&amp;#x27;akh"/>
<link wikidata="Q635012" start="7860" end="7884" title="Architect of the Capitol" label="Architect of the Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845793" start="7979" end="7986" title="Inferno (Brown novel)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739390" start="8017" end="8033" title="Italian healthcare" label="Italian hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="8039" end="8048" title="Amnesia" label="no memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8085" end="8090" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="8166" end="8174" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="8178" end="8184" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="8190" end="8198" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="8238" end="8255" title="biological attack" label="biological attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="8280" end="8285" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089936" start="8328" end="8344" title="Consulting firm" label="consulting group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="8455" end="8472" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Sandro Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="8474" end="8488" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="8493" end="8508" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509219" start="8530" end="8537" title="Inferno (Dante)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="8580" end="8609" title="Divine Comedy" label="&amp;quot;The Divine Comedy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610044" start="8713" end="8719" title="Origin (Brown novel)" label="Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179199" start="8794" end="8818" title="Guggenheim Museum Bilbao" label="Guggenheim Museum Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772819" start="8869" end="8878" title="Scientific discovery" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q846430" start="9012" end="9020" title="futurist" label="futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="9766" end="9772" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q674426" start="9811" end="9826" title="museum director" label="museum director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="9904" end="9913" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q161157" start="9954" end="9962" title="password" label="password"/>
<link wikidata="Q171517" start="10139" end="10164" title="Royal Palace of Madrid" label="Spain&amp;#x27;s Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="10249" end="10259" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="10670" end="10678" title="Ideogram" label="Ideogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="10746" end="10761" title="Sacred feminine" label="Sacred Feminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="10930" end="10940" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q192909" start="11168" end="11175" title="scandal" label="scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467906" start="11404" end="11416" title="AI assistant" label="AI assistant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488227" wikidata="Q1753803" url="?curid=488227" title="Mor lam">
<text>Mor lam (Lao: ໝໍລຳ; Isan: หมอลำ ; , , ) is a traditional Lao form of song in Laos and Isan. &quot;Mor lam&quot; means &#x27;expert song&#x27;, or &#x27;expert singer&#x27;, referring to the music or artist respectively. Other romanisations used include mor lum, maw lam, maw lum, moh lam, mhor lum, and molum. In Laos, the music is known simply as lam (ລຳ); mor lam (ໝໍລຳ) refers to the singer.

The characteristic feature of &quot;lam&quot; singing is the use of a flexible melody tailored to the tones of the words in the text. Traditionally, the tune was developed by the singer as an interpretation of a &quot;klon&quot; poem and accompanied primarily by the &quot;khene&quot; (a free reed mouth organ). The modern form is frequently composed and uses electrified instruments. Traditional forms (and some Lao genres) use a slower tempo than the quicker tempo and faster deliveries of more modern lam music. Strong rhythmic accompaniments, vocal leaps, and a conversational style of singing distinguish &quot;lam&quot; from American rap.

Typically featuring a theme of unrequited love, &quot;mor lam&quot; often reflects the difficulties of life in rural Isan and Laos, leavened with wry humor. In its heartland, performances are an essential part of festivals and ceremonies. &quot;Lam&quot; has gained a profile outside its native regions from the spread of migrant workers, for whom it remains an important cultural link with home.

==Appellation==
In Laos, the traditional folk music is referred to as ລຳ, &quot;lam&quot; , which refers to both the verb and noun &#x27;dance&#x27;, and is in general use in the central and southern areas of the country. In northern Laos, the regional folk music styles are referred to as ຂັບ, &quot;khap&quot; , and signifies &#x27;to sing&#x27; or a &#x27;song&#x27;. The Lao-speaking people across the river in Isan call the music หมอลำ, &quot;mo lam&quot;, , which refers to both the singer and the musical style, while in Laos, the equivalent term ໝໍລຳ, &quot;molam&quot; , only refers to the singer. Lao ໝໍ and Isan หมอ, both &quot;mo&quot; , (as well as Thai หมอ, &quot;mo&quot; ) refers specifically to an &#x27;expert&#x27;, &#x27;shaman&#x27;, or &#x27;doctor&#x27;. The northern Lao terms ขับ, &quot;khap&quot; and &quot;mokhap&quot; , are not used in Isan, but are likely still used in some Lao-speaking parts of Loei, Uttaradit, and Phitsanulok that were settled by people originally from northern Laos, however, &quot;khap&quot; is understood as a rarer word for &#x27;to sing&#x27; or &#x27;song&#x27; and in reference to specifically northern styles of &quot;lam&quot;. Northern Lao areas refer to the &quot;khène&quot;/&quot;khaen&quot; player as the &quot;mokhène&quot;/&quot;mokhaen&quot; just as in the rest of Laos and Isan.

In standard Thai, the music and the singer, as adopted from Isan usage, is also known as หมอลำ, &quot;molam&quot;, but because of the tone differences is generally pronounced . It is also common to &quot;correct&quot; or &quot;translate&quot; the Isan term into standard Thai as หมอรำ, &quot;mo ram&quot; , as Thai รำ, &quot;ram&quot; , is cognate to Lao ລຳ and Isan ลำ and shares the same meaning. Although Thai ขับ &quot;khap&quot; is cognate to Lao ຂັບ and Isan ขับ, it only refers to the verb &#x27;to sing&#x27; in Thai and is a rather archaic, poetic word and would generally be confused with the homonym ขับ which means &#x27;to drive&#x27; (a vehicle), &#x27;to drive away&#x27; or &#x27;to expel&#x27;. Thus, the northern Lao forms are almost unknown in standard Thai media references to Lao and Isan folk music.

==Instrumentation==
As the lowland areas of Laos and Isan are essentially one shared cultural region of Lao people, few differences, especially at its most traditional level, are present to distinguish traditional forms on either side. Throughout the Lao-speaking heartlands, the only accompaniment to performances of &quot;khap&quot; and &quot;lam&quot; was the local free reed mouth-organ, the &quot;khène&quot; (BGN/PCGN)/&quot;khaen&quot; (RTGS). Similar in many ways to the function of the bagpipe in the Scottish Highlands, the &quot;khène/khaen&quot; provides not only the melody but can also be used to provide a drone as it is played with circular breathing. So important is the &quot;khène/khaen&quot; in Lao music, the instrument even came to be used in the Lao classical music ensemble known as &quot;sép noy&quot; (BGN/PCGN)/&quot;sep noi&quot; (RTGS), where most of the instruments are influenced by the veneer of Indian musical traditions as well as classical musical traditions of neighboring Thailand, Cambodia, and Java. 

In &quot;lam&quot; styles of central and southern Laos and most of Isan, traditional performances often included ensembles. Most northern &quot;khap&quot; styles relied solely on the &quot;khène/khaen&quot;, except for a few styles, such as those from Luang Phrabang, many of which were adaptations of the local classical music traditions as the city was the seat of the Lao monarchy until its forced abdication in 1975. The southern &quot;lam&quot; styles, heavily influenced by the ancient musical traditions of the Mon-Khmer peoples, such as the Mon, Khmer, Kuy and Bru that either were the former inhabitants or continue to live amongst the Tai peoples that now make up the majority in the Lao-speaking region.

Most modern styles, including the northern &quot;khap&quot; varieties, are generally heard with ensembles consisting of a mixture of Western instruments and traditional ones. Contemporary ensembles often feature electric guitars, drum sets, bass guitars, accordions, saxophones, violins, and keyboards set to sound like the 1960s Farsifa organs or set to provide equivalents of native instruments.

==History==
Morlam had its birth in the Lao heartlands of Laos, where it remains a popular art form. Although its precursors probably lie in the musical traditions of the historical Tai tribes that migrated south from China and northern Vietnam, much cross-pollination with indigenous music of the region as well as importation of Chinese, Mon-Khmer, Indian, and Malay influences, has also had a pronounced effect on the dances, instrumentation, and melodies of &quot;mor lam&quot;.

In his &quot;Traditional Music of the Lao&quot;, Terry Miller identifies five factors which helped to produce the various genres of lam in Isan: animism, Buddhism, story telling, ritual courtship and male-female competitive folksongs; these are exemplified by &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27; and &#x27; (for the last two factors) respectively. Of these, &#x27; and &#x27; are probably the oldest, while it was &#x27; which was the principal ancestor of the commercial &#x27; performed today.

In the late 18th and 19th centuries, the music of Laos began to spread into the Thai heartland, extending Lao influence to Siam. Forced population transfers from Laos into the newly acquired region of Isan and what is now Central Thailand accelerated the rapid adoption of &quot;mor lam&quot;. Even King Mongkut&#x27;s vice-king Pinklao became enamoured of it. But in 1857, following the vice-king&#x27;s death, Mongkut banned public performances, citing the threat it posed to Thai culture and its alleged role in causing a drought. Performance of &quot;mor lam&quot; thereafter was a largely local affair, confined to events such as festivals in Isan and Laos. However, as Isan people began to migrate throughout the rest of the country, the music came with them. The first major &quot;mor lam&quot; performance of the 20th century in Bangkok took place at the Rajadamnern Stadium in 1946. Even then, the number of migrant workers from Isan was fairly small, and &quot;mor lam&quot; was paid little attention by the outside world.

In the 1950s and 1960s, there were attempts in both Thailand and Laos to appropriate &quot;lam&quot; for political purposes. The USIS in Thailand and both sides in the Laotian Civil War (the &quot;Secret War&quot;) recruited &quot;mor lam&quot; singers to insert propaganda into their performances, in hopes persuading the rural population to support their cause. The Thai attempt was unsuccessful, taking insufficient account of performers&#x27; practices and the audiences&#x27; demands, but it was more successful in Laos. The victorious Communists continued to maintain a propaganda troupe even after seizing power in 1975.

&quot;Mor lam&quot; started to spread in Thailand in the late-1970s and early-1980s, when more and more people left rural Isan to seek work. &quot;Mor lam&quot; performers began to appear on television, led by Banyen Rakgaen, and the music soon gained a national profile. It remains an important link to home for Isan migrants in the capital city, where &quot;mor lam&quot; clubs and karaoke bars are meeting places for those newly arrived.

Contemporary &quot;mor lam&quot; is very different from that of previous generations. None of the traditional Isan genres is commonly performed today; instead singers perform three-minute songs combining &quot;lam&quot; segments with &quot;luk thung&quot; or pop style sections, while comedians perform skits between blocks of songs. &quot;Mor lam sing&quot; performances typically consist of medleys of &quot;luk thung&quot; and &quot;lam&quot; songs, with electric instruments dominant and bawdy repartee. &quot;Sing&quot; comes from the English word &#x27;racing&#x27; (a reference to the music&#x27;s origin among Isan&#x27;s biker fraternity; &quot;pai sing&quot; means &#x27;to go racing about on motorbikes&#x27;).

&quot;Lam&quot; in Laos has remained more conservative, and traditional styles are maintained, but massive exposure to Thai media and culture has led to increasing influence and the adoption of the more modern and popular Isan styles.

==Criticism==
Thai academic Prayut Wannaudom has argued that modern &quot;mor lam&quot; is increasingly sexualised and lacking in the moral teachings which it traditionally conveyed, and that commercial pressures encourage rapid production and imitation rather than quality and originality. On the other hand, these adaptations have allowed &quot;mor lam&quot; not only to survive, but itself spread into the rest of Thailand and internationally, validating Isan and Lao culture and providing role-models for the young.

Professor Charles F. Keyes argues for the value of the ancient forms as geomythology: &quot;The Thai-Lao people of northeastern Thailand have a well-developed tradition of &#x27;legends&#x27; (&quot;nithān&quot;) which has been perpetuated in past through the media of folk opera ... known as &quot;mō lam mū&quot; ... no small number record[ing] events which happened &#x27;long ago&#x27; on the Khorat Plateau... [N]ot historical accounts, they are not totally lacking in historical value. A number ... make reference to places which can be identified as being the sites of the ancient towns... [T]he literature of the region has yet to be fully inventoried, much less analyzed&quot;, and adds in a footnote: &quot;Unfortunately, most of these publications have had little circulation outside of the folk opera troupes for which they were intended.&quot; He next comments on five toponyms mentioned in the myth of Phadaeng and Nang Ai, and compares these with those in the &quot;Accounts of Fā Dāēet-Song Yāng&quot;.

==Forms==
There are many forms of &quot;mor lam&quot;. There can be no definitive list as they are not mutually exclusive, while some forms are confined to particular localities or have different names in different regions. Typically the categorisation is by region in Laos and by genre in Isan, although both styles are popular in the other region. The traditional forms of Isan are historically important, but are now rarely heard:

* &quot;lam phi fa&quot; (ລຳຜີຟ້າ, ลำผีฟ้า, ) — a ritual to propitiate spirits in cases of possession. Musically it derived from &quot;lam tang yao&quot;; however, it was performed not by trained musicians but by those (most commonly old women) who thought themselves to have been cured by the ritual.
* &quot;mor lam kon&quot; (ໝໍລຳກອນ, หมอลำกลอน, ) — a vocal &quot;battle&quot; between the sexes. In Laos it is known as &quot;lam tat&quot;. Performances traditionally lasted all night, and consisted of first two, then three parts:
** &quot;lam tang san&quot; (ລຳທາງສ້ັນ, ลำทางสั้น, ) — (&quot;short form&quot;) took up the bulk of the time, with the singers delivering &quot;gon&quot; poems a few minutes in length, performing alternately for about half an hour each from evening until about an hour before dawn. They would pretend gradually to fall in love, sometimes with rather explicit sexual banter.
** &quot;lam tang nyao&quot; (ລຳທາງຍາວ, ลำทางยาว, ) — (&quot;long form&quot;), a representation of the lovers&#x27; parting performed slowly and in a speech rhythm for about a quarter of an hour.
** &quot;lam toei&quot; (ລຳເຕີ້ຍ, ลำเต้ย, ) — was introduced in the mid-20th century. Similar in length to the &quot;lam tang nyao&quot;, it is fast and light-hearted, with metrical texts falling into three categories: &quot;toei thammada&quot; (&quot;normal toei&quot;), using &quot;gon&quot; texts in Isan; &quot;toei Phama&quot; (&quot;Burmese toei&quot;), using central or northern Thai texts and forms; and &quot;toei Khong&quot; (&quot;Mekong toei&quot;), again central or northern Thai in origin. It uses the same scale as &quot;lam yao&quot;.
* &#x27; or &#x27; (ລຳໂຈດແກ້, ลำโจทย์แก้, IPA: or ລຳໂຈທຍ໌, ลำโจทย์, ) is a variant of &quot;lam kon&quot; formerly popular in the Khon Kaen area, in which the singers (often both male) asked one another questions on general knowledge topics — religion, geography, history etc. — trying to catch out their opponent.
* &quot;mor lam mu&quot; (ໝໍລຳໝູ່, หมอลำหมู่, ) — folk opera, developed in the mid-20th century. &quot;Lam mu&quot; is visually similar to central Thai &quot;likay&quot;, but the subject matter (mainly Jataka stories) derived from &quot;lam rueang&quot; (the subgenre of &quot;&quot;) and the music from &quot;lam tang nyao&quot;. It was originally more serious than &quot;lam plern&quot; and required more skilled performers, but in the late-20th century the two converged to a style strongly influenced by central Thai and Western popular music and dance. Both have now declined in popularity and are now rare.
* &quot;mor lam phoen&quot; (ໝໍລຳເພີນ, หมอลำเพลิน, ) — a celebratory narrative, performed by a group. It originated around the same time as &quot;lam mu&quot;, but used a more populist blend of song and dance. The material consisted of metrical verses sung in the &quot;yao&quot; scale, often with a speech-rhythm introduction.
* &quot;&quot; (ລຳພື້ນ, ลำพื้น, ) — recital of local legends or Jataka stories, usually by a male singer, with khene accompaniment. In the sub-genre of &quot;lam rueang&quot; (ລຳເຣື່ອງ, ลำเรื่อง, ), sometimes performed by women, the singer acts out the various characters in costume. Performance of one complete story can last for one or two whole nights. This genre is now extremely rare, and may be extinct.

==Regional styles==
Isan has regional styles, but these are styles of performance rather than separate genres. The most important of the styles were Khon Kaen and Ubon, each taking their cue from the dominant form of &quot;lam gon&quot; in their area: the &quot;&quot; of Khon Kaen, with its role of displaying and passing on knowledge in various fields, led to a choppy, recitative-style delivery, while the love stories of Ubon promoted a slower and more fluent style. In the latter half of the 20th century the Ubon style came to dominate; the adaptation of Khon Kaen material to imitate the Ubon style was sometimes called the Chaiyaphum style.

The Lao regional styles are divided into the southern and central styles (&quot;lam&quot;) and the northern styles (&quot;khap&quot;). The northern styles are more distinct as the terrain of northern Laos has made communications there particularly difficult, while in southern and central Laos cross-fertilisation has been much easier. Northern Lao singers typically perform only one style, but those in the south can often perform several regional styles as well as some genres imported from Isan.

The main Lao styles are:

* &quot;Lam Sithandone&quot; (ລຳສີທັນດອນ, ลำสีทันดร) (also called &quot;Lam Si Pan Don&quot; [ລຳສີພັນດອນ, ลำสีพันดอน]), from Champassak is similar in style to the &quot;lam gon&quot; of Ubon. It is accompanied by a solo khene, playing in a &quot;san&quot; mode, while the vocal line shifts between &quot;san&quot; and &quot;yao&quot; scales. The rhythm of the vocal line is also indeterminate, beginning in speech rhythm and shifting to a metrical rhythm.
* &quot;Lam Som&quot; (, ) is rarely performed and may now be extinct. From Champassak, the style is hexatonic, using the &quot;yao&quot; scale plus a supertonic C, making a scale of A-B-C-D-E-G. It uses speech rhythm in the vocal line, with a slow solo khene accompaniment in meter. It is similar to Isan&#x27;s &quot;&quot;. Both &quot;Lam Som&quot; and &quot;Lam Sithandone&quot; lack the descending shape of the vocal line used in the other southern Lao styles.
* &quot;Lam Khon Savane&quot; (ລຳຄອນສະຫວັນ, ลำคอนสะหวัน, ) from Savannakhet is one of the most widespread genres. It uses the &quot;san&quot; scale, with a descending vocal line over a more rigidly metrical ensemble accompaniment. &quot;Lam Ban Xoc&quot; (ລຳບ້ານຊອກ, ลำบ้านซอก, ) and &quot;Lam Mahaxay&quot; (ລຳມະຫາໄຊ, มหาไซ, ) are musically very similar, but &quot;Ban Xoc&quot; is usually performed only on ceremonial occasions while &quot;Mahaxay&quot; is distinguished by a long high note preceding each descent of the vocal line.
* &quot;Lam Phu Thai&quot; (ລຳຜູ້ໄທ, ลำผู้ไท, ) uses the &quot;yao&quot; scale, with a descending vocal line and ensemble accompaniment in meter.
* &quot;Lam Tang Vay&quot; (ລຳຕັງຫວາຍ, ลำตังหวาย, ) is a Lao version of Mon-Khmer music, with a descending ensemble accompaniment.
* &quot;Lam Saravane&quot; (ລຳສາລະວັນ, ลำสาละวัน [ลำสุวรรณ], ) is also of Mon-Khmer origin. It uses the &quot;yao&quot; scale. The descending vocal line is in speech rhythm, while the khene and drum accompaniment is in meter.
* &quot;Khap Thum Luang Phrabang&quot; (ຂັບທຸ້ມຫລວງພະບາງ, ขับทุ้มหลวงพระบาง, ) is related to the court music of Luang Phrabang, but transformed into a folk-song style. The singer and audience alternately sing lines to a set melody, accompanied by an ensemble.
* &quot;Khap Xieng Khouang&quot; (ຂັບຊຽງຂວາງ, ขับเซียงขวาง, ) also called &quot;Khap Phuan&quot; (ຂັບພວນ, ขับพวน) uses the &quot;yao&quot; scale and is typically sung metrically by male singers and non-metrically by women.
* &quot;Khap Ngeum&quot; (ຂັບງຶມ, ขับงึม, ) uses the &quot;yao&quot; scale. It alternates declaimed line from the singer and non-metrical khene passages, at a pace slow enough to allow improvisation.
* &quot;Khap Xam Neua&quot; (ຂັບຊຳເໜຶອ, ขับซำเหนือ, ) uses the &quot;yao&quot; scale. Singers are accompanied by a solo khene, declaiming lines each ending in a cadence.
* &quot;Khap Tai Dam&quot; (ຂັບໄທດຳ, ขับไทดำ, ) used for Tai dam people.

Below is a comparative table of regional &quot;mor lam&quot; styles, sourced from Compton (1979).

==Performers==
Traditionally, young &quot;mor lam&quot; were taught by established artists, paying them for their teaching with money or in kind. The education focused on memorising the texts of the verses to be sung; these texts could be passed on orally or in writing, but they always came from a written source. Since only men had access to education, it was only men who wrote the texts. The musical education was solely by imitation. Khaen-players typically had no formal training, learning the basics of playing from friends or relatives and thereafter again relying on imitation. With the decline of the traditional genres, this system has fallen into disuse; the emphasis on singing ability (or looks) is greater, while the lyrics of a brief modern song present no particular challenge of memorisation.

The social status of &quot;mor lam&quot; is ambiguous. Even in the Isan heartland, Miller notes a clear division between the attitudes of rural and urban people: the former see &quot;mor lam&quot; as &quot;teacher, entertainer, moral force, and preserver of tradition&quot;, while the latter, &quot;hold mawlum singers in low esteem, calling them country bumpkins, reactionaries, and relegating them to among the lower classes since they make their money by singing and dancing&quot;.

==Performance==
In Laos, &quot;lam&quot; may be performed standing (&quot;lam yuen&quot;) or sitting (&quot;lam nang&quot;). Northern &quot;lam&quot; is typically &quot;lam yuen&quot; and southern &quot;lam&quot; is typically &quot;lam nang.&quot; In Isan &quot;lam&quot; was traditionally performed seated, with a small audience surrounding the singer, but over the latter half of the 20th century the introduction of stages and amplification allowed a shift to standing performances in front of a larger audience.

Live performances are now often large-scale events, involving several singers, a dance troupe and comedians. The dancers (or &quot;hang khreuang&quot;) in particular often wear spectacular costumes, while the singers may go through several costume changes in the course of a performance. Additionally, smaller-scale, informal performances are common at festivals, temple fairs and ceremonies such as funerals and weddings. These performances often include improvised material between songs and passages of teasing dialogue (Isan สอย, &quot;soi&quot;) between the singer and members of the audience.

==Characteristics==
===Music===
&quot;Lam&quot; singing is characterised by the adaptation of the vocal line to fit the tones of the words used. It also features staccato articulation and rapid shifting between the limited number of notes in the scale being used, commonly delivering around four syllables per second. There are two pentatonic scales, each of which roughly corresponds to intervals of a western diatonic major scale as follows:

The actual pitches used vary according to the particular khene accompanying the singer. The khene itself is played in one of six modes based on the scale being used.

Because Thai and Lao do not include phonemic stress, the rhythm used in their poetry is demarcative, i.e., based on the number of syllables rather than on the number of stresses. In &quot;gon&quot; verse (the most common form of traditional &quot;lam&quot; text) there are seven basic syllables in each line, divided into three and four syllable hemistiches. When combined with the musical beat, this produces a natural rhythm of four on-beat syllables, three off-beat syllables, and a final one beat rest:

In actual practice this pattern is complicated by the subdivision of beats into even or dotted two-syllable pairs and the addition of prefix syllables which occupy the rest at the end of the previous line; each line may therefore include eleven or twelve actual syllables. In the modern form, there are sudden tempo changes from the slow introduction to the faster main section of the song. Almost every contemporary &quot;mor lam&quot; song features the following bassline rhythm, which is often ornamented melodically or rhythmically, such as by dividing the crotchets into quavers:

The &quot;ching&quot; normally play a syncopated rhythm on the off-beat, giving the music a characteristically quick rhythm and tinny sound.

===Content===
&quot;Mor lam&quot; is traditionally sung in Lao. The subject matter varied according to the genre: love in the &quot;lam gon&quot; of Ubon; general knowledge in the &quot;lam jot&quot; of Khon Kaen; or Jataka stories in &quot;lam phun&quot;. The most common verse form was the four-line &quot;gon&quot; stanza with seven main syllables per line, although in Khon Kaen the technical subject matter led to the use of a free-form series of individual lines, called &quot;gon gap&quot;. In Laos, it is the regional styles which determine the form of the text. Each style may use a metrical or a speech-rhythm form, or both; where the lines are metrical, the &quot;lam&quot; styles typically use seven syllables, as in Isan, while the &quot;khap&quot; styles use four or five syllables per line. The slower pace of some Lao styles allows the singer to improvise the verse, but otherwise the text is memorised.

In recent decades, the Ubon style has come to dominate &quot;lam&quot; in Isan, while the central Thai influence has led to most songs being written in a mix of Isan and Thai. Unrequited love is a prominent theme, although this is laced with a considerable amount of humour. Many songs feature a loyal boy or girl who stays at home in Isan, while his or her partner goes to work as a migrant labourer in Bangkok and finds a new, richer lover.

The &quot;gon&quot; verses in &quot;lam tang san&quot; were typically preceded by a slower, speech-rhythm introduction, which included the words &quot;o la no&quot; (&quot;oh my dear&quot;, an exhortation to the listeners to pay attention) and often a summary of the content of the poem. From this derives the &quot;groen&quot; (Thai เกริ่น) used in many modern songs: a slow, sung introduction, generally accompanied by the khene, introducing the subject of the song, and often including the &quot;o la naw&quot;. (sample) The &quot;pleng&quot; (Thai เพลง) is a sung verse, often in central Thai. (sample), while the actual &quot;lam&quot; (Thai ลำ) appears as a chorus between &quot;pleng&quot; sections. (sample)

==Recordings==
As few &quot;mor lam&quot; artists write all their own material, many of them are extremely prolific, producing several albums each year. Major singers release their recordings on audio tape, CD and VCD formats. The album may take its name from a title track, but others are simply given a series number.

&quot;Mor lam&quot; VCDs can also often be used for karaoke. A typical VCD song video consists of a performance, a narrative film, or both intercut. The narrative depicts the subject matter of the song; in some cases, the lead role in the film is played by the singer. In the performance, the singer performs the song in front of a static group of dancers, typically female. There may be a number of these recordings in different costumes, and costumes may be modern or traditional dress; the singer often wears the same costume in different videos on the same album. The performance may be outdoors or in a studio; studio performances are often given a psychedelic animated backdrop. Videos from Laos tend to be much more basic, with lower production values.

Some of the most popular current artists are Banyen Rakgan, Chalermphol Malaikham, Somjit Borthong, Pornsak Songsaeng, Jintara Poonlarp, Siriporn Ampaipong and Vieng Narumon. In 2001, the first album by Dutch singer Christy Gibson was released.

In 2000, British musician Jah Wobble released the album &quot;Molam Dub&quot; (30 Hertz Records), a fusion of his reggae-influenced bass guitar with guest appearances by Laotian singers and performers. In 2007, singer Jonny Olsen released the first ever &quot;mor lam&quot; album by a Westerner, or &quot;farang&quot; in Laos.)

==Live venues==
There are several popular venues where &quot;mor lam&quot; and &quot;luk thung&quot; music are performed. These venues usually carry the word &quot;Isan&quot; in their names. such as &quot;Tawan Daeng Isan&quot; and &quot;Isan Isan&quot; in Bangkok.

== &quot;Mor Lam&quot; artists ==
# Dao Bandon
# Pornsak Songsaeng
# Sommainoi Duangcharoen
# Siriporn Ampaipong
# Somjit Borthong
# Noknoi Uraiporn
# Sathit Thongjan
# Ki Daophet Niuhuang
# Jintara Poonlarp
# Honey Sri-Isan
# Man Maneewan
# Monkhaen Kaenkoon
# Maithai Huajaisilp
# Dueanphen Amnuaiporn
# Saeng-arun Bunyu
# Banyen Rakgan
# Chalermpol Malakham
# Poyfai Malaiporn
# Christy Gibson
# Tai Orathai
# Phai Phongsathon
# Mike Phiromphon
# Yinglee Srijumpol
# Ble Patumrach R-Siam
# Lamyai Haithongkham
# Moukdavanyh Santiphone
# Vieng Narumon

==See also==
* Lao music

==References==
==Sources==
* Alexander, Geoff. Introduction from The Academic Film Archive of North America. Accessed 13 May 2005.
* Broughton, Simon (ed). &quot;World Music Volume 2&quot;. Rough Guides (2000).
* Chawiwan Damnoen. &quot;Mo Lam Singing of Northeast Thailand&quot; (CD). World Music Library (1991).
* Compton, Carol. 1979. &quot;Courting poetry in Laos: a textual and linguistic analysis&quot;. Northern Illinois Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
* Miller, Terry E. Performing Isan-Style Lam in Laos: an Expression of Pan-Laoism or Thai Hegemony Accessed 13 May 2005.
* Miller, Terry E. (1985). &quot;Traditional Music of the Lao: Kaen Playing and Mawlam Singing in North-east Thailand&quot;. Greenwood Press. .
* Mosel, James N. (1959). &quot;Sound and Rhythm in Thai and English Verse, Pasa lae Nangsue&quot;.
* Prayut Wannaudom The Collision between Local Performing Arts and Global Communication, in case Mawlum. Accessed 13 May 2005.

==External links==
* Archive of Lao music
* Laos Cultural Profile (Ministry of Information and Culture/Visiting Arts)
* The Soul of Molam (2)—Inside the molam bus project: The Sound of Isaan&#x27;s political molam
* The Soul of Molam (3)—The dying capital of Molam: Maha Sarakham&#x27;s molam agencies face their last days
* The Soul of Molam (4)—Meet Mod the Electric Phin Maker
* The Soul of Molam (6)—Turning the music scene upside down, new Isaan singers find their voice</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="0" end="7" title="Mor lam" label="Mor lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="9" end="12" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="20" end="24" title="Isan language" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623557" start="57" end="60" title="Culture of Laos" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366" start="69" end="73" title="song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="77" end="81" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="86" end="90" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="226" end="238" title="romanization" label="romanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="253" end="260" title="Mor lam" label="mor lum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="262" end="269" title="Mor lam" label="maw lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="271" end="278" title="Mor lam" label="maw lum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="280" end="287" title="Mor lam" label="moh lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="289" end="297" title="Mor lam" label="mhor lum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="303" end="308" title="Mor lam" label="molum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="348" end="351" title="Mor lam" label="lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="358" end="365" title="Mor lam" label="mor lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="498" end="503" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567326" start="614" end="618" title="klon (poetry)" label="klon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740479" start="669" end="674" title="khene" label="khene"/>
<link wikidata="Q399597" start="684" end="693" title="free reed aerophone" label="free reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="738" end="746" title="musical composition" label="composed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="768" end="778" title="musical instrument" label="instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="809" end="812" title="Laos" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="857" end="862" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="1036" end="1039" title="hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003212" start="1073" end="1088" title="unrequited love" label="unrequited love"/>
<link wikidata="Q275388" start="2366" end="2370" title="Loei Province" label="Loei"/>
<link wikidata="Q273794" start="2372" end="2381" title="Uttaradit Province" label="Uttaradit"/>
<link wikidata="Q275781" start="2387" end="2398" title="Phitsanulok Province" label="Phitsanulok"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2791" end="2804" title="Thai language#Varieties and related languages" label="standard Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="3715" end="3725" title="Lao people" label="Lao people"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="4121" end="4139" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190165" start="4904" end="4918" title="Luang Phrabang" label="Luang Phrabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="5201" end="5204" title="Mon people" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="5206" end="5211" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444914" start="5213" end="5216" title="Kuy people" label="Kuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q991396" start="5221" end="5224" title="Bru people" label="Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="5623" end="5632" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="5635" end="5644" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396593" start="5698" end="5705" title="Farsifa" label="Farsifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q703353" start="5949" end="5952" title="Tai peoples" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="6396" end="6403" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="6405" end="6413" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="6415" end="6428" title="storytelling" label="story telling"/>
<link wikidata="Q376596" start="6437" end="6446" title="courtship" label="courtship"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="6475" end="6483" title="folksong" label="folksong"/>
<link wikidata="Q761163" start="6776" end="6789" title="music of Laos" label="music of Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="6957" end="6973" title="Central Thailand" label="Central Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="7039" end="7046" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064875" start="7054" end="7063" title="Ouparat" label="vice-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095882" start="7064" end="7071" title="Pinklao" label="Pinklao"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="7260" end="7267" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="7370" end="7378" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078806" start="7410" end="7421" title="Isan people" label="Isan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631915" start="7598" end="7617" title="Rajadamnern Stadium" label="Rajadamnern Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754777" start="7898" end="7902" title="United States Information Agency" label="USIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="7937" end="7954" title="Laotian Civil War" label="Laotian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="8032" end="8042" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857366" start="8608" end="8622" title="Banyen Rakgaen" label="Banyen Rakgaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="8772" end="8776" title="nightclub" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="8782" end="8789" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="8790" end="8793" title="bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q665286" start="9080" end="9089" title="luk thung" label="luk thung"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="9099" end="9102" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908884" start="9180" end="9192" title="Mor lam sing" label="Mor lam sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535546" start="10392" end="10404" title="geomythology" label="geomythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="10717" end="10731" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="11202" end="11209" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692651" start="11236" end="11256" title="Phadaeng and Nang Ai" label="Phadaeng and Nang Ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="11609" end="11613" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="11630" end="11634" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="13245" end="13252" title="Central Thailand" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q750014" start="13256" end="13264" title="Northern Thailand" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547039" start="13903" end="13908" title="likay" label="likay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="14739" end="14745" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="14750" end="14756" title="Jataka" label="Jataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q876526" start="15246" end="15255" title="Khon Kaen" label="Khon Kaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132179" start="15260" end="15264" title="Ubon" label="Ubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="15469" end="15479" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q997062" start="15728" end="15738" title="Chaiyaphum" label="Chaiyaphum"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="15751" end="15754" title="Laos" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="17948" end="17957" title="Mon-Khmer" label="Mon-Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190165" start="18345" end="18359" title="Luang Phrabang" label="Luang Phrabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141602" start="19143" end="19150" title="Tai Dam people" label="Tai dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="19458" end="19464" title="poetry" label="verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740479" start="19698" end="19703" title="Khaen" label="Khaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="20576" end="20580" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="20808" end="20812" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="21144" end="21150" title="singing" label="singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="21155" end="21167" title="dance" label="dance troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="21172" end="21180" title="comedy" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053464" start="21263" end="21270" title="costume" label="costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="21438" end="21444" title="wat" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="21474" end="21481" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="21487" end="21494" title="wedding" label="wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="21530" end="21540" title="improvisation" label="improvised"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="21772" end="21782" title="Singing" label="vocal line"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="21794" end="21799" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="21836" end="21844" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="21907" end="21911" title="Musical note" label="note"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="22006" end="22022" title="pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702413" start="22085" end="22105" title="diatonic major scale" label="diatonic major scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="22130" end="22135" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="22248" end="22252" title="Musical mode" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="22322" end="22330" title="phoneme" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="22331" end="22337" title="stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="22484" end="22489" title="poetry" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355579" start="22632" end="22641" title="hemistich" label="hemistich"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="22676" end="22680" title="beat (music)" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q879844" start="22787" end="22791" title="rest (music)" label="rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109325" start="22882" end="22885" title="Dotted note" label="dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="23104" end="23109" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="23259" end="23267" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="23268" end="23274" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="23302" end="23313" title="melody" label="melodically"/>
<link wikidata="Q339616" start="23355" end="23363" title="crotchet" label="crotchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q339575" start="23370" end="23376" title="quaver" label="quaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="23418" end="23428" title="syncopation" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="23443" end="23451" title="beat (music)" label="off-beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="23581" end="23584" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="23739" end="23745" title="Jataka" label="Jataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="24613" end="24617" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="25455" end="25460" title="poetry" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="25739" end="25744" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="25799" end="25809" title="compact audio cassette" label="audio tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="25811" end="25813" title="compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="25818" end="25821" title="Video CD" label="VCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="25977" end="25984" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="26000" end="26010" title="Music video" label="song video"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="26050" end="26054" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q585697" start="26064" end="26072" title="cross-cutting" label="intercut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497985" start="26533" end="26539" title="sound stage" label="studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q696160" start="26579" end="26590" title="psychedelic art" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q262155" start="26600" end="26608" title="Chroma key" label="backdrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857366" start="26731" end="26744" title="Banyen Rakgan" label="Banyen Rakgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068710" start="26746" end="26767" title="Chalermphol Malaikham" label="Chalermphol Malaikham"/>
<link wikidata="Q66721073" start="26769" end="26784" title="Somjit Borthong" label="Somjit Borthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017264" start="26786" end="26803" title="Pornsak Songsaeng" label="Pornsak Songsaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q383197" start="26805" end="26821" title="Jintara Poonlarp" label="Jintara Poonlarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924109" start="26823" end="26841" title="Siriporn Ampaipong" label="Siriporn Ampaipong"/>
<link wikidata="Q108662076" start="26846" end="26859" title="Vieng Narumon" label="Vieng Narumon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="26889" end="26894" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113643" start="26902" end="26916" title="Christy Gibson" label="Christy Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q287933" start="26958" end="26968" title="Jah Wobble" label="Jah Wobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="27064" end="27075" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27150" end="27161" title="Jonny Olsen" label="Jonny Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16139357" start="27564" end="27574" title="Dao Bandon" label="Dao Bandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017264" start="27577" end="27594" title="Pornsak Songsaeng" label="Pornsak Songsaeng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27597" end="27619" title="Sommainoi Duangcharoen" label="Sommainoi Duangcharoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924109" start="27622" end="27640" title="Siriporn Ampaipong" label="Siriporn Ampaipong"/>
<link wikidata="Q66721073" start="27643" end="27658" title="Somjit Borthong" label="Somjit Borthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13015875" start="27661" end="27676" title="Noknoi Uraiporn" label="Noknoi Uraiporn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27679" end="27694" title="Sathit Thongjan" label="Sathit Thongjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93068690" start="27697" end="27716" title="Ki Daophet Niuhuang" label="Ki Daophet Niuhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q383197" start="27719" end="27735" title="Jintara Poonlarp" label="Jintara Poonlarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18050973" start="27738" end="27752" title="Honey Sri-Isan" label="Honey Sri-Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20562800" start="27755" end="27767" title="Man Maneewan" label="Man Maneewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141371" start="27770" end="27787" title="Monkhaen Kaenkoon" label="Monkhaen Kaenkoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16138942" start="27790" end="27808" title="Maithai Huajaisilp" label="Maithai Huajaisilp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27811" end="27831" title="Dueanphen Amnuaiporn" label="Dueanphen Amnuaiporn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305931" start="27834" end="27850" title="Saeng-arun Bunyu" label="Saeng-arun Bunyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857366" start="27853" end="27866" title="Banyen Rakgan" label="Banyen Rakgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068710" start="27869" end="27888" title="Chalermpol Malakham" label="Chalermpol Malakham"/>
<link wikidata="Q69844304" start="27891" end="27907" title="Poyfai Malaiporn" label="Poyfai Malaiporn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113643" start="27910" end="27924" title="Christy Gibson" label="Christy Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467624" start="27927" end="27938" title="Tai Orathai" label="Tai Orathai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16140055" start="27941" end="27957" title="Phai Phongsathon" label="Phai Phongsathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13027773" start="27960" end="27975" title="Mike Phiromphon" label="Mike Phiromphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023055" start="27978" end="27995" title="Yinglee Srijumpol" label="Yinglee Srijumpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q39487067" start="27998" end="28018" title="Ble Patumrach R-Siam" label="Ble Patumrach R-Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q31353568" start="28021" end="28040" title="Lamyai Haithongkham" label="Lamyai Haithongkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697234" start="28043" end="28065" title="Moukdavanyh Santiphone" label="Moukdavanyh Santiphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q108662076" start="28068" end="28081" title="Vieng Narumon" label="Vieng Narumon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328702" start="28098" end="28107" title="Lao music" label="Lao music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488230" wikidata="Q447592" url="?curid=488230" title="Nazanin Afshin-Jam">
<text>Nazanin Afshin-Jam (, &quot;Nāzanin Afŝin Jam&quot;, born April 11, 1979) is an Iranian-Canadian human rights activist, author, public speaker and beauty pageant titleholder who was crowned Miss World Canada 2003. She is also president and co-founder of Stop Child Executions, as well as the founder of The Nazanin Foundation. She emigrated to Canada with her family in 1981 and is married to Peter MacKay, former Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada.

==Early life==
Nazanin Afshin-Jam was born on April 11, 1979, in Tehran, Iran. Her father was the head of the Sheraton Hotel in Tehran (now the Tehran Homa Hotel), frequented by westerners. Her mother converted to Christianity prior to the Iranian Revolution and both Afshin-Jam and her older sister were raised in her mother&#x27;s faith. During the Iranian revolution, her father was jailed by the Revolutionary Guard. After he was freed from prison, he fled Iran with his family to Spain and, after a year, they emigrated to Canada, settling in Vancouver.

==Education and Red Cross work==
Afshin-Jam graduated with international relations and political science degrees from the University of British Columbia. In 2011, she earned her Master of Arts in Diplomacy from Norwich University and she has an honorary doctorate of law from the University of Western Ontario.

Following her graduation, Afshin-Jam served as a Global Youth Educator with the Red Cross, becoming involved in such matters as land mines, children, and war, the poverty-disease cycle, and natural disasters.

==Miss World 2003==
Afshin-Jam was crowned Miss World Canada 2003 and represented Canada at Miss World 2003 in Sanya, China on December 6, 2003 where she placed 1st runner-up.

==Activism and awards==
Afshin-Jam was opposed to the death penalty being applied to an 18-year-old Iranian woman, Nazanin Mahabad Fatehi, who was sentenced to hang for stabbing one of three men who tried to rape her and her niece in Karaj in March 2005. Afshin-Jam started a campaign, including a petition, which attracted more than 350,000 signatures worldwide. She has also dedicated her song, &quot;Someday&quot;, one of the 12 songs on her similarly titled album, &quot;Someday&quot;, to Nazanin Fatehi. Eventually, with pressure from the international community, Fatehi was granted a new trial by the head of the judiciary in June, 2006. In January of the following year, Fatehi was exonerated of murder charges and was released after Afshin-Jam raised $43,000 online for bail, while her lawyers worked on her case. For her efforts in helping save Fatehi, Afshin-Jam was awarded the Hero for Human Rights Award from Youth For Human Rights Internationaland Artists for Human Rights. 

&quot;The Tale of Two Nazanins&quot;, by Afshin-Jam and Susan McClelland, chronicling the divergent lives of the two Iranian Nazanins whose lives intersected during Fatehi&#x27;s trial, was published by HarperCollins in 2012.

Afshin-Jam initiated the Stop Child Executions Campaign and petitioned to help children on death row; the campaign was registered as a non-profit organization with 501-C 3 status in 2008. She is co-founder and President of the organization, whose aim is to put a permanent end to executions of minors in Iran and abroad.

On September 23, 2008, Afshin-Jam organized the Ahmadinejad&#x27;s Wall of Shame rally at Dag Hammarskjöld park, across from the United Nations headquarters in New York, as Ahmadinejad was addressing the General Assembly. Afshin-Jam received the Global Citizenship Award from the University of British Columbia&#x27;s Alumni Association in November and, In April of the next year, the Human Rights Hero Award from UN Watch in Geneva, Switzerland. Afshin-Jam was also given the Emerging Leader Peacemaker Award by the YMCA&#x27;s Power of Peace Awards.

That same year, Afshin-Jam signed an open letter of apology, posted to Iranian.com, along with 266 other Iranian academics, writers, artists, and journalists, about the persecution of Baháʼís. She also chaired the first annual Geneva Summit for Human Rights and Democracy.

Afshin-Jam advocated in 2012 for the closure of the Canadian embassy in Tehran. Afshin-Jam received the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal. In 2016, she was conferred an honorary Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, from the University of Western Ontario.

==Film work==
Afshin-Jam participated, together with eight other women&#x27;s rights activists, in the documentary film Honor Diaries which explores the issues of gender-based violence and inequality in Muslim-majority societies. Her personal story was featured alongside those of the other activists, all of whom are working to combat gender prejudice that is embedded in honor-based societies.

She also took on the role of &#x27;Shaggy Chick&#x27; in &quot;Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed&quot;, where Matthew Lillard&#x27;s face was attached to her body using CGI during a gag involving magic potions.

==Music==
Afshin-Jam&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Someday&quot; was released in April 2007 by Bodog Music. It spans many different music genres, including world music influenced by Alabina.

Several of Afshin-Jam&#x27;s songs have made the Top 30 and Top 40 charts. Her debut single, &quot;I Dance 4 U&quot; was charted at #20 in the Music Week - Commercial Pop Top 30 Club Chart (a music video for the song has been released). Afshim-Jam&#x27;s single &quot;Someday&quot; has been climbing the FMQB Top 40 chart in the U.S. and is currently at #7. Her new single &quot;I Do&quot; reached #39 on the Billboard Chart in adult contemporary music. A Christmas single &quot;On Christmas Day&quot; has also made the charts, ranking #59 on the ACQB chart. The proceeds from the song are contributed to the Stop Child Executions Campaign.

==Personal life==
A licensed pilot, Afshin-Jam flies both powered aircraft and gliders and achieved the highest rank in the Royal Canadian Air Cadets—Warrant Officer First Class. She was raised a Catholic and remains a practising one.

In 2011, she earned her Master of Arts in Diplomacy from Norwich University. On January 4, 2012, Afshin-Jam married Peter MacKay, then the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada, at a private ceremony in Mexico. The couple have two sons, one named Kian, born in 2013 and another named Caledon, born in 2018 and one daughter named Valentia, born in 2015.

==Bibliography==

==References==
==External links==
*
*Afshin-Jam&#x27;s mini-doc from Honor Diaries film </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q447592" start="0" end="18" title="Nazanin Afshin-Jam" label="Nazanin Afshin-Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859771" start="80" end="96" title="Iranian-Canadian" label="Iranian-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004461" start="190" end="212" title="Miss World Canada" label="Miss World Canada 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q716246" start="393" end="405" title="Peter MacKay" label="Peter MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315120" start="414" end="464" title="Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada" label="Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q634831" start="577" end="591" title="Sheraton Hotel" label="Sheraton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="681" end="693" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="707" end="725" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1015" end="1024" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="1149" end="1179" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681928" start="1238" end="1256" title="Norwich University" label="Norwich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="1307" end="1336" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="1467" end="1477" title="land mines" label="land mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004461" start="1592" end="1614" title="Miss World Canada" label="Miss World Canada 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708384" start="1641" end="1656" title="Miss World 2003" label="Miss World 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q319804" start="1660" end="1665" title="Sanya" label="Sanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1667" end="1672" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1780" end="1793" title="Capital punishment" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354975" start="1841" end="1863" title="Nazanin Fatehi" label="Nazanin Mahabad Fatehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="1886" end="1890" title="hanging" label="hang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="1934" end="1938" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q36529" start="1960" end="1965" title="Karaj" label="Karaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q697279" start="2024" end="2032" title="petition" label="petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499754" start="2968" end="2998" title="Stop Child Executions Campaign" label="Stop Child Executions Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267" start="3355" end="3371" title="Dag Hammarskjöld" label="Dag Hammarskjöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q114223" start="3679" end="3687" title="UN Watch" label="UN Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067181" start="3889" end="3900" title="Iranian.com" label="Iranian.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475662" start="3987" end="4009" title="persecution of Baháʼís" label="persecution of Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520557" start="4045" end="4089" title="Geneva Summit for Human Rights and Democracy" label="Geneva Summit for Human Rights and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194540" start="4196" end="4236" title="Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="4317" end="4346" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251496" start="4469" end="4482" title="Honor Diaries" label="Honor Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q848673" start="4781" end="4793" title="Shaggy Rogers" label="Shaggy Chick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4809" end="4841" title="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed" label="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q29086" start="4855" end="4870" title="Matthew Lillard" label="Matthew Lillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="4914" end="4917" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="5109" end="5120" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734607" start="5135" end="5142" title="Alabina" label="Alabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932687" start="5911" end="5936" title="Royal Canadian Air Cadets" label="Royal Canadian Air Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5983" end="5991" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681928" start="6080" end="6098" title="Norwich University" label="Norwich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q716246" start="6139" end="6151" title="Peter MacKay" label="Peter MacKay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488234" wikidata="Q7095718" url="?curid=488234" title="Open-source journalism">
<text>Open-source journalism, a close cousin to citizen journalism or participatory journalism, is a term coined in the title of a 1999 article by Andrew Leonard of Salon.com. Although the term was not actually used in the body text of Leonard&#x27;s article, the headline encapsulated a collaboration between users of the internet technology blog &quot;Slashdot&quot; and a writer for &quot;Jane&#x27;s Intelligence Review&quot;. The writer, Johan J. Ingles-le Nobel, had solicited feedback on a story about cyberterrorism from &quot;Slashdot&quot; readers, and then re-wrote his story based on that feedback and compensated the &quot;Slashdot&quot; writers whose information and words he used.

This early usage of the phrase clearly implied the paid use, by a mainstream journalist, of copyright-protected posts made in a public online forum. It thus referred to the standard journalistic techniques of news gathering and fact checking, and reflected a similar term—&quot;open-source intelligence&quot;—that was in use from 1992 in military intelligence circles.

The meaning of the term has since changed and broadened, and it is now commonly used to describe forms of innovative publishing of online journalism, rather than the sourcing of news stories by a professional journalist.

The term &quot;open-source journalism&quot; is often used to describe a spectrum on online publications: from various forms of semi-participatory online community journalism (as exemplified by projects such as the copyright newspaper NorthWest Voice), through to genuine open-source news publications (such as the Spanish &quot;20 minutos&quot;, and Wikinews).

A relatively new development is the use of convergent polls, allowing editorials and opinions to be submitted and voted on. Over time, the poll converges on the most broadly accepted editorials and opinions. Examples of this are Opinionrepublic.com and Digg. Scholars are also experimenting with the process of journalism itself, such as open-sourcing the story skeletons that journalists build.

== Usage ==
At first sight, it would appear to many that blogs fit within the current meaning of open-source journalism. Yet the term&#x27;s use of &quot;open source&quot; clearly currently implies the meaning as given to it by the open-source software movement; where the source code of programs is published openly to allow anyone to locate and fix mistakes or add new functions. Anyone may also freely take and re-use that source code to create new works, within set license parameters.

Given certain legal traditions of copyright, blogs may not be open source in the sense that one is prohibited from taking the blogger&#x27;s words or visitor comments and re-using them in another form without breaching the author&#x27;s copyright or making payment. However, many blogs draw on such material through quotations (often with links to the original material), and follow guidelines more comparable to research than media production.

Creative Commons is a licensing arrangement that is useful as a legal workaround for such an inherent structural dilemma intrinsic to blogging, and its fruition is manifest in the common practices of referencing another published article, image or piece of information via a hyperlink. Insofar as blog works can explicitly inform readers and other participants of the &quot;openness&quot; of their text via Creative Commons, they not only publish openly, but allow anyone to locate, critique, summarize etc. their works.

==Wiki journalism==
Wiki journalism is a form of participatory journalism or crowdsourcing, which uses wiki technology to facilitate collaboration between users. It is a kind of collaborative journalism. The largest example of wiki journalism is Wikinews. According to Paul Bradshaw, there are five broad types of wiki journalism: second draft wiki journalism, a &#x27;second stage&#x27; piece of journalism, during which readers can edit an article produced in-house; crowdsourcing wiki journalism, a means of covering material which could not have been produced in-house (probably for logistical reasons), but which becomes possible through wiki technology; supplementary wiki journalism, creating a supplement to a piece of original journalism, e.g. a tab to a story that says &quot;Create a wiki for related stories&quot;; open wiki journalism, in which a wiki is created as an open space, whose subject matter is decided by the user, and where material may be produced that would not otherwise have been commissioned; and logistical wiki journalism, involving a wiki limited to in-house contributors which enables multiple authorship, and may also facilitate transparency, and/or an
ongoing nature.

=== Examples ===
Wikinews was launched in 2004 as an attempt to build an entire news operation on wiki technology. Where Wikinews – and indeed Wikipedia – has been most successful, however, is in covering large news events involving large numbers of people, such as Hurricane Katrina and the Virginia Tech shooting, where first-hand experience, or the availability of first-hand accounts, forms a larger part of the entry, and where the wealth of reportage makes a central &quot;clearing house&quot; valuable. Thelwall &amp; Stuart identify Wikinews and Wikipedia as becoming particularly important during crises such as Hurricane Katrina, which &quot;precipitate discussions or mentions of new technology in blogspace.&quot;

Mike Yamamoto notes that &quot;In times of emergency, wikis are quickly being recognized as important gathering spots not only for news accounts but also for the exchange of resources, safety bulletins, missing-person reports and other vital information, as well as a meeting place for virtual support groups.&quot; He sees the need for community as the driving force behind this.

In June 2005, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; decided to experiment with a &quot;wikitorial&quot; on the Iraq War, publishing their own editorial online but inviting readers to &quot;rewrite&quot; it using wiki technology. The experiment received broad coverage both before and after launch in both the mainstream media and the blogosphere. In editorial terms, the experiment was generally recognised as a failure.

In September 2005, &quot;Esquire&quot; used Wikipedia itself to &quot;wiki&quot; an article about Wikipedia by AJ Jacobs. The draft called on users to help Jacobs improve the article, with the intention of printing &quot;before&quot; and &quot;after&quot; versions of the piece in the printed magazine. He included some intentional mistakes to make the experiment &quot;a little more interesting&quot;. The article received 224 edits in the first 24 hours, rising to 373 by 48 hours, and over 500 before further editing was suspended so the article could be printed.

In 2006, &quot;Wired&quot; also experimented with an article about wikis. When writer Ryan Singel submitted the 1,000-word draft to his editor, &quot;instead of paring the story down to a readable 800 words, we posted it as-is to a SocialText-hosted wiki on 29 August, and announced it was open to editing by anyone willing to register.&quot; When the experiment closed, Singel noted that &quot;there were 348 edits of the main story, 21 suggested headlines and 39 edits of the discussion pages. Thirty hyperlinks were added to the 20 in the original story.&quot; He continued that &quot;one user didn&#x27;t like the quotes I used from Ward Cunningham, the father of wiki software, so I instead posted a large portion of my notes from my interview on the site, so the community could choose a better one.&quot; Singel felt that the final story was &quot;more accurate and more representative of how wikis are used&quot; but not a better story than would have otherwise been produced:
&quot;The edits over the week lack some of the narrative flow that a Wired News piece usually contains. The transitions seem a bit choppy, there are too many mentions of companies, and too much dry explication of how wikis work.

&quot;It feels more like a primer than a story to me.&quot;
However, continued Singel, that didn&#x27;t make the experiment a failure, and he felt the story &quot;clearly tapped into a community that wants to make news stories better ... Hopefully, we&#x27;ll continue to experiment to find ways to involve that community more.&quot;

In April 2010, the Wahoo Newspaper partnered with WikiCity Guides to extend its audience and local reach. &quot;With this partnership, the Wahoo Newspaper provides a useful tool to connect with our readers, and for our readers to connect with one another to promote and spotlight everything Wahoo has to offer,&quot; said Wahoo Newspaper Publisher Shon Barenklau. Despite relatively little traffic as compared to its large scale, WikiCity Guides is recognized as the largest wiki in the world with over 13 million active pages.

=== Literature on wiki journalism ===
Andrew Lih places wikis within the larger category of participatory journalism, which also includes blogs, citizen journalism models such as OhMyNews and peer-to-peer publishing models such as Slashdot, and which, he argues &quot;uniquely addresses an historic &#x27;knowledge gap&#x27; – the general lack of content sources for the period between when the news is published and the history books are written.&quot;

Participatory journalism, he argues, &quot;has recast online journalism not as simply reporting or publishing, but as a lifecycle, where software is crafted, users are empowered, journalistic content is created and the process repeats improves upon itself.&quot;

Francisco identifies wikis as a &#x27;next step&#x27; in participatory journalism: &quot;Blogs helped individuals publish and express themselves. Social networks allowed those disparate bloggers to be found and connected. Wikis are the platforms to help those who found one another be able to collaborate and build together.&quot;

=== Advantages ===
A Wiki can serve as the collective truth of the event, portraying the hundreds of viewpoints and without taxing any one journalist with uncovering whatever represents the objective truth in the circumstance.

Wikis allow news operations to effectively cover issues on which there is a range of opinion so broad that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to summarise effectively in one article alone. Examples might include local transport problems, experiences of a large event such as a music festival or protest march, guides to local restaurants or shops, or advice. The Wikivoyage site is one such example, &quot;A worldwide travel guide written entirely by contributors who either live in the place they&#x27;re covering or have spent enough time there to post relevant information.&quot;

Organisations willing to open up wikis to their audience completely may also find a way of identifying their communities&#x27; concerns: Wikipedia, for instance, notes Eva Dominguez &quot;reflects which knowledge is most shared, given that both the content and the proposals for entries are made by the users themselves.&quot;

Internally, wikis also allow news operations to coordinate and manage a complex story which involves a number of reporters: journalists are able to collaborate by editing a single webpage that all have access to. News organisations interested in transparency might also publish the wiki &#x27;live&#x27; as it develops, while the discussion space which accompanies each entry also has the potential to create a productive dialogue with users.

There are also clear economic and competitive advantages to allowing users to create articles. With the growth of low-cost micropublishing facilitated by the internet and blogging software in particular, and the convergence-fuelled entry into the online news market by both broadcasters and publishers, news organisations face increased competition from all sides. At the same time, print and broadcast advertising revenue is falling while competition for online advertising revenue is fierce and concentrated on a few major players: in the US, for instance, according to Jeffrey Rayport 99 percent of gross advertising money 2006 went to the top 10 websites.

Wikis offer a way for news websites to increase their reach, while also increasing the time that users spend on their website, a key factor in attracting advertisers. And, according to Dan Gillmor, &quot;When [a wiki] works right, it engenders a community – and a community that has the right tools can take care of itself&quot;. A useful side-effect of community for a news organisation is reader loyalty.

Andrew Lih notes the importance of the &quot;spirit of the open source movement&quot; (2004b p6) in its development, and the way that wikis function primarily as &quot;social software – acting to foster communication and collaboration with other users.&quot; Specifically, Lih attributes the success of the wiki model to four basic features: user friendly formatting; structure by convention, not enforced by software; &quot;soft&quot; security and ubiquitous access; and wikis transparency and edit history feature.

Student-run wikis provide opportunities to integrate learning by doing into a journalism education program.

=== Disadvantages ===
Shane Richmond identifies two obstacles that could slow down the adoption of news wikis – inaccuracy and vandalism:
* &quot;vandalism remains the biggest obstacle I can see to mainstream media&#x27;s adoption of wikis, particularly in the UK, where one libellous remark could lead to the publisher of the wiki being sued, rather than the author of the libel.&quot;
* &quot;Meanwhile, the question of authority is the biggest obstacle to acceptance by a mainstream audience.&quot;

Writing in 2004, Lih also identified authority as an issue for Wikipedia: &quot;While Wikipedia has recorded impressive accomplishments in three years, its articles have a mixed degree of quality because they are, by design, always in flux, and always editable. That reason alone makes people wary of its content.&quot;

Dan Gillmor puts it another way: &quot;When vandals learn than someone will repair their damage within minutes, and therefore prevent the damage from being visible to the world, the bad guys tend to give up and move along to more vulnerable places.&quot; (2004, p. 149)

Attempts to address the security issue vary. Wikipedia&#x27;s own entry on wikis again explains:
&quot;For instance, some wikis allow unregistered users known as &quot;IP addresses&quot; to edit content, whilst others limit this function to just registered users. What most wikis do is allow IP editing, but privilege registered users with some extra functions to lend them a hand in editing; on most wikis, becoming a registered user is very simple and can be done in seconds, but detains the user from using the new editing functions until either some time passes, as in the English Wikipedia, where registered users must wait for three days after creating an account in order to gain access to the new tool, or until several constructive edits have been made in order to prove the user&#x27;s trustworthiness and usefulness on the system, as in the Portuguese Wikipedia, where users require at least 15 constructive edits before authorization to use the added tools. Basically, &quot;closed up&quot; wikis are more secure and reliable but grow slowly, whilst more open wikis grow at a steady rate but result in being an easy target for vandalism.&quot;
Walsh (2007) quotes online media consultant Nico Macdonald on the importance of asking people to identify themselves:
&quot;The key is the user&#x27;s identity within the space – a picture of a person next to their post, their full name, a short bio and a link to their space online.&quot;

&quot;A real community has, as New Labour would say, rights and responsibilities. You have to be accountable for yourself. Online, you only have the &#x27;right&#x27; to express yourself. Online communities are not communities in a real sense – they&#x27;re slightly delinquent. They allow or encourage delinquency.&quot;
Walsh (2007) argues that &quot;Even if you don&#x27;t plan on moderating a community, it&#x27;s a good idea to have an editorial presence, to pop in and respond to users&#x27; questions and complaints. Apart from giving users the sense that they matter – and they really should – it also means that if you do have to take drastic measures and curtail (or even remove) a discussion or thread, it won&#x27;t seem quite so much like the egregious action of some deus ex machina.&quot;

Ryan Singel of &quot;Wired&quot; also feels there is a need for an editorial presence, but for narrative reasons: &quot;in storytelling, there&#x27;s still a place for a mediator who knows when to subsume a detail for the sake of the story, and is accustomed to balancing the competing claims and interests of companies and people represented in a story.&quot;

&#x27;Edit wars&#x27; are another problem in wikis, where contributors continually overwrite each other&#x27;s contributions due to a difference of opinion. The worst cases, notes Lih, &quot;may require intervention by other community members to help mediate and arbitrate&quot;.

Eva Dominguez recognises the potential of wikis, but also the legal responsibilities that publishers must answer to: &quot;The greater potential of the Internet to carry out better journalism stems from this collaboration, in which the users share and correct data, sources and facts that the journalist may not have easy access to or knowledge of. But the media, which have the ultimate responsibility for what is published, must always be able to verify everything. For example, in the case of third-party quotes included by collaborating users, the journalist must also check that they are true.&quot;

One of the biggest disadvantages may be readers&#x27; lack of awareness of what a wiki even is: only 2% of Internet users even know what a wiki is, according to a Harris Interactive poll (Francisco, 2006).

American columnist Bambi Francisco argues that it is only a matter of time before more professional publishers and producers begin to experiment with using &quot;wiki-styled ways of creating content&quot; in the same way as they have picked up on blogs.

The Telegraph&#x27;s Web News Editor, Shane Richmond, wrote: &quot;Unusually, it may be business people who bring wikis into the mainstream. That will prepare the ground for media experiments with wikis [and] I think it&#x27;s a safe bet that a British media company will try a wiki before the end of the year.&quot;

Richmond added that &quot;The Telegraph&quot; was planning an internal wiki as a precursor to public experiments with the technology. &quot;Once we have a feel for the technology, we will look into a public wiki, perhaps towards the end of the year [2007].&quot;

== See also ==

* Civic journalism
* Citizen journalism
* Collaborative writing
* Indymedia
* Kuro5hin, a blog with an open peer review process
* History Commons
* Open publishing
* Peer review

== References ==
==Bibliography==
*Gillmor, Dan (2004) &quot;We The Media&quot;, O&#x27;Reilly Media
*Lih, Andrew. &quot;The Foundations of Participatory Journalism and the Wikipedia Project&quot;. Conference paper for the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communications Communication Technology and Policy Division, Toronto, Canada, 7 August 2004.
*Thelwall, Mike and Stuart, David. &quot;RUOK? Blogging Communication Technologies During Crises&quot;. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 2007, p523–548
*Walsh, Jason. &quot;Build the perfect web community&quot;. .net Magazine, p39–43, no.165, August 2007

== External links ==
* Open Source Journalism: Journalism as a network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7095718" start="0" end="22" title="Open-source journalism" label="Open-source journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="42" end="60" title="citizen journalism" label="citizen journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="64" end="88" title="participatory journalism" label="participatory journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430336" start="141" end="155" title="Andrew Leonard" label="Andrew Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="159" end="168" title="Salon.com" label="Salon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q59083" start="348" end="356" title="Slashdot" label="Slashdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682694" start="386" end="417" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Intelligence Review" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Intelligence Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137004" start="503" end="517" title="cyberterrorism" label="cyberterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59555084" start="919" end="932" title="fact checking" label="fact checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059178" start="969" end="993" title="open-source intelligence" label="open-source intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1029" end="1050" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055825" start="1192" end="1209" title="online journalism" label="online journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="1554" end="1565" title="open-source model" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077548" start="1611" end="1621" title="20 minutos" label="20 minutos"/>
<link wikidata="Q964" start="1633" end="1641" title="Wikinews" label="Wikinews"/>
<link wikidata="Q270478" start="1898" end="1902" title="Digg" label="Digg"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="2315" end="2326" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="2770" end="2779" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="2979" end="2995" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q102014" start="3254" end="3263" title="hyperlink" label="hyperlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="3550" end="3574" title="participatory journalism" label="participatory journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="3578" end="3591" title="crowdsourcing" label="crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="3604" end="3608" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145841" start="3679" end="3703" title="collaborative journalism" label="collaborative journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q964" start="3747" end="3755" title="Wikinews" label="Wikinews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149487" start="3770" end="3783" title="Paul Bradshaw (journalist)" label="Paul Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q964" start="4723" end="4731" title="Wikinews" label="Wikinews"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="4849" end="4858" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="4972" end="4989" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188799" start="4998" end="5020" title="Virginia Tech shooting" label="Virginia Tech shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="5839" end="5856" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999883" start="5898" end="5908" title="wikitorial" label="wikitorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="5922" end="5930" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="6258" end="6265" title="Esquire magazine" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="6816" end="6821" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637" start="7438" end="7453" title="Ward Cunningham" label="Ward Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8401" end="8416" title="WikiCity Guides" label="WikiCity Guides"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8818" end="8843" title=":m:List of largest wikis" label="largest wiki in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="8972" end="8996" title="participatory journalism" label="participatory journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="9018" end="9023" title="blogs" label="blogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="9025" end="9043" title="citizen journalism" label="citizen journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q176542" start="9059" end="9067" title="OhMyNews" label="OhMyNews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9072" end="9095" title="peer-to-peer publishing" label="peer-to-peer publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q59083" start="9111" end="9119" title="Slashdot" label="Slashdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q373" start="10529" end="10539" title="Wikivoyage" label="Wikivoyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="11693" end="11710" title="blogging software" label="blogging software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142340" start="11734" end="11745" title="Convergence (telecommunications)" label="convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176226" start="12094" end="12109" title="Jeffrey Rayport" label="Jeffrey Rayport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536764" start="12368" end="12379" title="Dan Gillmor" label="Dan Gillmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510090" start="13162" end="13179" title="learning by doing" label="learning by doing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853372" start="18040" end="18055" title="Bambi Francisco" label="Bambi Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="18620" end="18633" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308519" start="18876" end="18892" title="Civic journalism" label="Civic journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="18895" end="18913" title="Citizen journalism" label="Citizen journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762292" start="18916" end="18937" title="Collaborative writing" label="Collaborative writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137514" start="18940" end="18949" title="Indymedia" label="Indymedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446245" start="18952" end="18960" title="Kuro5hin" label="Kuro5hin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="18982" end="18993" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774683" start="19004" end="19019" title="History Commons" label="History Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q636968" start="19022" end="19037" title="Open publishing" label="Open publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="19040" end="19051" title="Peer review" label="Peer review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488235" wikidata="Q7937140" url="?curid=488235" title="Vito &amp; the Salutations">
<text>Vito &amp; the Salutations is an Italian/Irish/Jewish-American New York City doo-wop group from the 1960s. They began performing their four-part harmonies while still in high school, getting practice by singing in subways and at railroad stations. But they never expected anything to come of it, until one of the band members was introduced to someone at a local record company, and the band was asked to make some recordings. Their first popular record, &quot;Gloria,&quot; was a regional hit. But Vito &amp; the Salutations became best known for a surprise million-selling hit a year later, in the summer of 1963: they took &quot;Unchained Melody,&quot; a 1955 hit ballad by Al Hibbler that they heard on the car radio, as they drove to perform at a concert, and transformed it into an up-tempo, doo-wop song. &quot;Unchained Melody&quot; reached number 66 on the &quot;Cash Box&quot; hit parade, and it made the top ten in many cities: for example, in New York City, the song reached #3 on top-40 powerhouse WABC. The record was originally released on Herald (H-583). The original group consisted of: Barry Solomon, Bob DiPaolo, Bobby Mitchel and Vito Balsamo (a friend of Bob DiPaolo&#x27;s younger brother John.) That group broke up after their success with their song Gloria. Another group was formed by their manager Dave Rick. That second group consisted of: Frankie Fox (bass baritone), Sheldon Buchansky (second tenor), Raymond JP Russell (first tenor) and Vito Balsamo (lead, baritone, and falsetto). Balsamo came from an immigrant family: his parents were from Palermo, Italy and he grew up in Brooklyn, listening to opera. But he fell in love with rock and roll, much to the dismay of his parents. Vito joined a group and recorded his first song when he was only fifteen. The B side of &quot;Unchained Melody&quot; was &quot;Hey, Hey, Baby,&quot; a tune composed by Murray Kanner, Frankie Fox and Dave Rick. Vito &amp; the Salutations also performed their version of &quot;Unchained Melody&quot; on &quot;American Bandstand&quot;.

The group existed from 1961–1967, with a reunion concert performed at Hunter College in 1971, only Frankie and Sheldon Buchansky were the original members of this group in this performance. Featured lead singer was Vito Balsamo, who also performed with the DelVons and The Kelloggs. In the early 1990s, Balsamo participated in a doo-wop nostalgia tour, performing as Vito Balsamo and the Cavaliers: this band included some former members of J. Frank Wilson and the Cavaliers (whose big hit was &quot;Last Kiss&quot; in 1964). From (1990-1991)-(1996-1999) Balsamo recorded and toured continuously with The Doo Wop All Stars whose members included Eugene Pitt (Jive Five), Artie Loria (Belmonts/Earls), Randy Silver (Impalas) and Lenny Welch. Vito still performs on occasional nostalgia tours, such as in The Golden Group Memories, which was seen on PBS in 1999 and 2000. Other lead singers were bass baritone Frankie Fox and falsettos Ray Russell and Randy Siver, who joined the group after Ray Russell moved on to become a producer, writer and director with James Duffy of Britton records; later, Frank Hidalgo and Eddie Parducci shared the lead with Vito in the group or on leave from the group. Over the years there have been many substitutes and replacements: Jack Mercury, Alan Messinger, Madie Seigal, Vinny Cognato, Johnny Monforte and Randy Silverman along with Frank and Vito recorded a single in 1967, &quot;Bring Back Yesterday&quot; b/w &quot;I Want You to Be My Baby&quot;, on Boom Records. In the early &#x27;70s Sheldon Buchansky returned to form a new Salutations with Vito Eddie Parducci, Jimmy Spinelli, Frankie Graziano and others. Meanwhile, Vito Balsamo lost the right to use the name &quot;Vito &amp; the Salutations&quot; in a court case in 1984, as a new band that included several former members took over the name. By 1986, after several appeals, Vito began using &quot;Vito Balsamo and his Group,&quot; when he performed. And sometimes, when he toured, he was listed in newspapers as or &quot;Vito Balsamo, formerly of the Salutations.&quot;

The group&#x27;s unique version of &quot;Unchained Melody&quot; has been included in several movies, most notably the 1990 film &quot;Goodfellas&quot;. It also can be heard in the Sci-Fi Dine-In restaurant at Disney&#x27;s Hollywood Studios at Walt Disney World.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7937140" start="0" end="26" title="Vito &amp;amp; the Salutations" label="Vito &amp;amp; the Salutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="33" end="40" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="41" end="46" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="47" end="62" title="American Jews" label="Jewish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="63" end="76" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="77" end="84" title="doo-wop" label="doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382711" start="677" end="687" title="Al Hibbler" label="Al Hibbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q949416" start="818" end="834" title="Unchained Melody" label="Unchained Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="872" end="880" title="Cash Box magazine" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q810480" start="1380" end="1393" title="bass baritone" label="bass baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="1422" end="1427" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q463447" start="2018" end="2036" title="American Bandstand" label="American Bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805107" start="2486" end="2519" title="J. Frank Wilson and the Cavaliers" label="J. Frank Wilson and the Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135259" start="2545" end="2554" title="Last Kiss" label="Last Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730659" start="2646" end="2667" title="The Doo Wop All Stars" label="The Doo Wop All Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737046" start="2848" end="2873" title="The Golden Group Memories" label="The Golden Group Memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2893" end="2896" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="4248" end="4258" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="4323" end="4354" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="4358" end="4375" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488236" wikidata="Q109676" url="?curid=488236" title="Saskia van Uylenburgh">
<text>Saskia van Uylenburgh (; 2 August 1612 – 14 June 1642) was the wife of painter Rembrandt van Rijn. In the course of her life, she was his model for some of his paintings, drawings, and etchings. She was the daughter of Rombertus Uylenburg, the mayor as well as the justice of the Court of Friesland.

==Life==
Saskia was born in Leeuwarden, Friesland, the youngest of the eight children of Sjoukje Ozinga and Rombertus van Uylenburgh, a top lawyer, a town burgomaster, and one of the founders of the University of Franeker. Saskia (called Saske in Friesland) was orphaned by age 12, as her mother died in 1619 and her father five years later. Supposedly she met Rembrandt at the home of her first cousin, Hendrick van Uylenburgh, a painter and art dealer who had emigrated from Friesland to Kraków in Poland with his parents but decided in 1625 to move to the Dutch Republic, where there was growing tolerance after the death of Maurice of Orange.

Saskia was raised by her sister Hiskje and her husband, Gerard van Loo, a lawyer and secretary in the grietenij Het Bildt. For a while she lived in Franeker when her sister Antje was ill. After Antje&#x27;s burial, Saskia assisted her brother-in-law, the Polish theology professor Johannes Maccovius, until she married Rembrandt in 1634.

In 1631 and in the company of the Mennonite painters Govert Flinck and Jacob Backer, Saskia travelled to Amsterdam. There she met Rembrandt, who produced paintings and portraits for Uylenburgh&#x27;s Amsterdam clients. In turn Rembrandt travelled to Leeuwarden, where he was received by the painter Wybrand de Geest, who had married Saskia&#x27;s niece.

Saskia and Rembrandt were engaged on 5 June 1633, and a year later Rembrandt asked permission to marry in Sint Annaparochie. He showed his mother&#x27;s written consent to the schepen. On 2 July 1634 the couple married. The preacher was Saskia&#x27;s cousin, but evidently none of Rembrandt&#x27;s family attended the marriage. That Saskia fell in love with an artist who was socially no match for the daughter of a patrician and that she pressed for a speedy betrothal against all conventions certainly shows that she was a very strong and independent character. In 1635 the couple moved to one of the most desirable addresses in Amsterdam, the Nieuwe Doelenstraat, with prominent neighbors and a view of the river Amstel.

Rembrandt gained financial success through his artwork, and decided in 1639 to buy a house in the Jodenbreestraat, next to the place where he worked. A year before, by 16 July 1638, Saskia&#x27;s Friesian relatives complained that Saskia was spoiling her inheritance. Rembrandt asked his brother-in-law Ulricus van Uylenburgh, also a lawyer, to help them out, confirming he was successful and able to pay for the house.

Three of their children died shortly after birth and were buried in the nearby Zuiderkerk. The sole survivor was Titus, who was named after his mother&#x27;s sister Titia (Tietje) van Uylenburgh. Saskia died the year after he was born, in Amsterdam, aged 29, probably from tuberculosis. She was buried in the Oude Kerk. For ten years Rembrandt focused on drawings and etchings.

Saskia allowed Rembrandt to use their son&#x27;s inheritance as long as he did not remarry. If Titus died without issue, Rembrandt would be the heir of the moveable property. Rembrandt hired Geertje Dircx as a wetnurse; in 1649 she expected him to marry her. The next year Rembrandt had her locked up in a house of correction when Hendrickje Stoffels became his new housekeeper and mistress. In 1662 Rembrandt, having been in financial trouble for several years, sold Saskia&#x27;s grave. Hendrickje died the following year.

Asteroid 461 Saskia is named in her honour.

==See also==
* &quot;The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age&quot;

==References==
==Sources==
*Driessen, Christoph (2011): &quot;Rembrandts vrouwen&quot;, Bert Bakker.
*Graaff, A. &amp; M. Roscam Abbing (2006) &quot;Rembrandt voor Dummies&quot;. Addison Wesley.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q109676" start="0" end="21" title="Saskia van Uylenburgh" label="Saskia van Uylenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="79" end="97" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt van Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="185" end="192" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="289" end="298" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390" start="329" end="339" title="Leeuwarden" label="Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="341" end="350" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942163" start="409" end="433" title="Rombertus van Uylenburgh" label="Rombertus van Uylenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="456" end="467" title="burgomaster" label="burgomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293929" start="500" end="522" title="University of Franeker" label="University of Franeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="548" end="557" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q257611" start="705" end="728" title="Hendrick van Uylenburgh" label="Hendrick van Uylenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="791" end="797" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="860" end="874" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="929" end="946" title="Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange" label="Maurice of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111297" start="1051" end="1060" title="grietenij" label="grietenij"/>
<link wikidata="Q850722" start="1061" end="1070" title="Het Bildt" label="Het Bildt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41974" start="1097" end="1105" title="Franeker" label="Franeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q944308" start="1230" end="1248" title="Johannes Maccovius" label="Johannes Maccovius"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="1322" end="1331" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q550401" start="1341" end="1354" title="Govert Flinck" label="Govert Flinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19032" start="1359" end="1371" title="Jacob Adriaensz Backer" label="Jacob Backer"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="1393" end="1402" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390" start="1538" end="1548" title="Leeuwarden" label="Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q636727" start="1587" end="1603" title="Wybrand de Geest" label="Wybrand de Geest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840555" start="1749" end="1766" title="Sint Annaparochie" label="Sint Annaparochie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218704" start="1819" end="1826" title="schepen" label="schepen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185405" start="2359" end="2365" title="Amstel" label="Amstel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689416" start="2466" end="2481" title="Jodenbreestraat" label="Jodenbreestraat"/>
<link wikidata="Q228629" start="2868" end="2878" title="Zuiderkerk" label="Zuiderkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200817" start="2902" end="2907" title="Titus van Rijn" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3062" end="3074" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q623558" start="3098" end="3107" title="Oude Kerk (Amsterdam)" label="Oude Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="3157" end="3164" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q514795" start="3359" end="3372" title="Geertje Dircx" label="Geertje Dircx"/>
<link wikidata="Q463440" start="3499" end="3518" title="Hendrickje Stoffels" label="Hendrickje Stoffels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="3694" end="3702" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q154544" start="3703" end="3713" title="461 Saskia" label="461 Saskia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3760" end="3841" title="The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age" label="The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488239" wikidata="Q3233924" url="?curid=488239" title="CBS Records (2006)">
<text>CBS Records was a record label founded by CBS Corporation in 2006 to take advantage of music from its entertainment properties owned by CBS Studios. The initial label roster consisted of only three artists: rock band Señor Happy and singer/songwriters Will Dailey and P.J. Olsson.

The label relied primarily on digital distribution such as iTunes and on direct sales from its own website. However, it signed a deal to distribute compact discs through RED Distribution, a subsidiary of Sony Music Entertainment which CBS Inc. formerly owned. CBS Records was headquartered at Television City in Los Angeles.

The &quot;CBS Records&quot; name was also used in the 1960s to release Columbia Records products outside the US and Canada. This was necessary because EMI owned another record label called Columbia, which operated in every market except North America, Spain and Japan. CBS sold the record company in 1988 to Sony. In 1991, the CBS label was officially renamed Columbia Records and the company was renamed Sony Music Entertainment.

== Current roster ==
=== Artists ===
* Will Dailey
* Keaton Simons
* Karmina
* Sharon Little
* P.J. Olsson
* Señor Happy
* The Wilshires
* You Are I Am

=== Soundtracks ===
* &quot;NCIS&quot;

== See also ==
* List of record labels

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3233924" start="0" end="11" title="CBS Records (2006)" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q950380" start="42" end="57" title="CBS Corporation" label="CBS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773207" start="61" end="65" title="2006 in music" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576666" start="136" end="147" title="CBS Studios" label="CBS Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="207" end="211" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931403" start="252" end="263" title="Will Dailey" label="Will Dailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117317" start="268" end="279" title="P.J. Olsson" label="P.J. Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="341" end="347" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="430" end="443" title="compact discs" label="compact discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276307" start="452" end="468" title="RED Distribution" label="RED Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="486" end="510" title="Sony Music Entertainment" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="517" end="520" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009284" start="575" end="590" title="Television City" label="Television City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="594" end="605" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="679" end="695" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="759" end="762" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112471" start="769" end="805" title="Columbia Graphophone Company" label="another record label called Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="877" end="880" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="916" end="920" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="1013" end="1037" title="Sony Music Entertainment" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931403" start="1079" end="1090" title="Will Dailey" label="Will Dailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382338" start="1093" end="1106" title="Keaton Simons" label="Keaton Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372761" start="1109" end="1116" title="Karmina" label="Karmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490131" start="1119" end="1132" title="Sharon Little" label="Sharon Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117317" start="1135" end="1146" title="P.J. Olsson" label="P.J. Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525" start="1215" end="1231" title="NCIS (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;NCIS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="1250" end="1271" title="List of record labels" label="List of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488240" wikidata="Q6264651" url="?curid=488240" title="John Wintermeyer">
<text>John Joseph Wintermeyer (December 4, 1916 – December 20, 1993) was a politician in Ontario, Canada. He was a Liberal member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario from 1955 to 1963 who represented the riding of Waterloo North. From 1958 to 1963 he served as leader of the Liberal party.

==Background==
Wintermeyer was born and raised in Kitchener, Ontario. His parents were Alfred and Caroline Wintermeyer. He attended University of Notre Dame in South Bend, Indiana and graduated with a degree in Commerce and Philosophy in 1939. He then went to Harvard Law School and later Dalhousie Law School. He became a lawyer and returned to his home town to begin his practice. In 1949 he established his own firm which became known as Wintermeyer Askin Casey Smith. In 1944, he marry Helen Delaney and together they raised seven children. After Helen died in 1972, he married Elizabeth Ann Lang Greene in 1980.

==Politics==
Wintermeyer enter politics as a municipal alderman for Kitchener City Council. He served three terms before moving to provincial politics.

In the 1955 provincial election, Wintermeyer ran as the Liberal candidate in the riding of Waterloo North. He defeated Progressive Conservative incumbent Stanley Francis Leavine by 2,264 votes.
and was chosen leader of the Ontario Liberal Party in 1958.

In the 1959 election, the Liberals under Wintermeyer&#x27;s leadership increased their legislative caucus from 10 to 21, but were unable to prevent the ruling Ontario Progressive Conservative Party of Premier Leslie Frost from winning another majority. In the campaign, Wintermeyer promoted policies such as universal medicare, improvements to general welfare assistance, amalgamation of the various municipalities that made up Metropolitan Toronto, and full funding of Catholic schools. Wintermeyer had long been an advocate of a provincial sales tax, which put him in a difficult position when the Frost government introduced a 3% retail sales tax in 1961. While Wintermeyer personally supported the tax, his caucus did not, and he was forced to publicly renounce his support.

In the 1963 election, the Liberals increased their total seats by two, but Wintermeyer lost his seat of Waterloo North, and he resigned as party leader. He was succeeded as party leader by Andy Thompson.

==Later life==
After leaving politics, He served as director of television station CKCO in Kitchener and was also a director at Kent Trust until it merged with Metropolitan Trust. He served as chairman of the board of Bauer Industries and director of York Centre Corporation. He also served as chair of the Metro Toronto Roman Catholic high schools and the Canadian Olympic Association. He died in 1993 after suffering from Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease.

==References==

===Notes===
===Citations===
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6264651" start="0" end="23" title="John Wintermeyer" label="John Joseph Wintermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="69" end="79" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="83" end="90" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="109" end="116" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="131" end="162" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974262" start="211" end="225" title="Waterloo North (provincial electoral district)" label="Waterloo North"/>
<link wikidata="Q200166" start="338" end="356" title="Kitchener, Ontario" label="Kitchener, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="420" end="444" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q486877" start="448" end="458" title="South Bend" label="South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="460" end="467" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="548" end="566" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432967" start="577" end="597" title="Schulich School of Law" label="Dalhousie Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418040" start="974" end="996" title="Kitchener City Council" label="Kitchener City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094968" start="1066" end="1090" title="1955 Ontario general election" label="1955 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="1115" end="1122" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974262" start="1150" end="1164" title="Waterloo North (provincial electoral district)" label="Waterloo North"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="1178" end="1202" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599608" start="1213" end="1236" title="Stanley Francis Leavine" label="Stanley Francis Leavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="1282" end="1303" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094969" start="1321" end="1334" title="1959 Ontario general election" label="1959 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="1473" end="1511" title="Ontario Progressive Conservative Party" label="Ontario Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850322" start="1515" end="1522" title="List of Ontario Premiers" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820783" start="1523" end="1535" title="Leslie Frost" label="Leslie Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806631" start="1632" end="1640" title="Medicare (Canada)" label="medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="1666" end="1673" title="Welfare (financial aid)" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795689" start="1742" end="1762" title="Metropolitan Toronto" label="Metropolitan Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451790" start="1784" end="1800" title="Separate school" label="Catholic schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="1856" end="1865" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094970" start="2101" end="2114" title="1963 Ontario general election" label="1963 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761392" start="2283" end="2296" title="Andy Thompson (Canadian politician)" label="Andy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2620" end="2634" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032282" start="2656" end="2684" title="Canadian Olympic Association" label="Canadian Olympic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="2723" end="2748" title="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="Lou Gehrig&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488242" wikidata="Q3118" url="?curid=488242" title="Oryol">
<text>Oryol (, ), also transliterated as Orel or Oriol, is a city and the administrative center of Oryol Oblast, Russia, situated on the Oka River, approximately south-southwest of Moscow. It is part of the Central Federal District, as well as the Central Economic Region.

First founded as a medieval stronghold of the Principality of Chernigov, Oryol was part of Lithuania in the late medieval period, and then Russia since the early modern period. It has served as the seat of regional administration since 1778. The city is particularly known for the infamous former prison for political and war prisoners of Tsarist Russia, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany.

== History ==
=== Early history ===
While there are no historical records, archaeological evidence shows that a fortress settlement existed between the Oka River and Orlik Rivers as early as the 12th century, when the land was a part of the Principality of Chernigov. The name of the fortress is unknown; it may not have been called Oryol at the time. In the 13th century, the fortress became a part of the Zvenigorod district of the Karachev Principality. In the early 15th century, the territory was conquered by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The city was soon abandoned by its population after being sacked either by Lithuanians or the Golden Horde. The territory became a part of the Tsardom of Russia in the 16th century.

=== Tsardom of Russia ===

Ivan IV Vasilyevich decreed that a new fortress be built on the spot in 1566 for the purpose of defending the southern borders of the country. The fortress was built starting in the summer of 1566 and ending in the spring of 1567. The location chosen was less than ideal strategically, as the fortress was located on a seasonally flooded low ground easily targeted from the neighboring high ground. False Dmitry I and his army passed through Oryol in 1605; Ivan Bolotnikov in 1606; False Dmitry II camped in Oryol for the winter of 1607–1608. Polish forces sacked it in 1611 and 1615. While the population fled after the second sacking and moved to Mtsensk, the Orlovsky Uyezd continued to exist administratively.

Oryol was rebuilt in 1636. The question of moving the fortress to the more advantageous high ground was debated until the 1670s, but the move was never made. The fortress was deemed unnecessary and taken apart in the early 18th century.

=== Russian Empire ===

In the mid-18th century Oryol became one of the major centers of grain production, with the Oka River being the major trade route until the 1860s when it was replaced by a railroad.

Oryol was granted town status in 1702. In 1708, Oryol was included as a part of Kiev Governorate; in 1719, Oryol Province was created within Kiev Governorate. The Province was transferred to the newly created Belgorod Governorate in 1727. On March 11 (February 28 old style), 1778 Oryol Vice-Royalty was created from parts of Voronezh and Belgorod Governorates. In 1779, the city was almost entirely rebuilt based on a new plan; and the Oryol River was renamed Orlik (lit: &quot;little eagle&quot;).

=== Russian Republic ===
After the October Revolution of 1917, the city was in Bolshevik&#x27;s hands, except for a brief period between October 13 and October 20, 1919, when it was controlled by Anton Denikin&#x27;s White Army.

=== Soviet Union ===
Oryol was once again moved between different oblasts in the 1920s and 1930s: first as Oryol Governorate until 1928, then Central Black Earth Region between 1928 and 1934, finally in Kursk Oblast), finally becoming the administrative center of its own Oryol Oblast on September 27, 1937.

The Oryol Prison was a notable place of incarceration for political prisoners and war prisoners of the Second World War. Christian Rakovsky, Maria Spiridonova, Olga Kameneva and 160 other prominent political prisoners were shot on September 11, 1941 on Joseph Stalin&#x27;s orders in the Medvedev Forest massacre outside Oryol.
During World War II, Oryol was occupied by the Wehrmacht on October 7, 1941.

The French air squadron Normandie-Niemen fought in the skies over Oryol.

Oryol was liberated on August 5, 1943 during the Oryol strategic offensive operation &quot;Kutuzov&quot; on the Oryol-Kursk Bulge. The city was almost completely destroyed. By Order No .2 of I. V. Stalin of August 5, 1943, on this day in Moscow, an artillery salute was given to the troops that liberated Oryol. Since then, the city has had the nickname, &quot;City of the First Salute&quot;, and the day of the liberation from the German invaders was celebrated as the city&#x27;s day.

On September 19, 1943, in the Oryol, was the first parade of partisan units stationed in the Oryol region during the war.

=== Russian Federation ===

On December 14, 2024 during the Russian invasion of Ukraine an oil depot in Oryol was attacked and set on fire by Ukrainian drones. Russian social media reported explosions and the governor confirmed a fire had broken out at an &quot;infrastructure facility&quot;. A fire at the oil depot was detected by NASA&#x27;s FIRMS.

== Geography ==
=== Time zone ===
Oryol has the same time zone as Moscow (Moscow time), or UTC+03:00.

=== Location ===
Oryol stands on the banks of the Oka River and its tributary Orlik river in the Central Russian Upland of the East European Plain, approximately south-southwest of Moscow.

===Layout===

Oryol was founded at the behest of Ivan the Terrible in 1566, in the area between the Oka and Orlik rivers. Little information exists about its early history; the earliest data available refers to 1636, when the city was rebuilt after its destruction during the Time of Troubles. According to historian T. G. Svistunova, the 16th-century Oryol fortress had three lines of fortifications and consisted of a city, an ostrog and a posad surrounded by gaps. The city housed a cathedral, a voivode&#x27;s (warlord or military leader&#x27;s) house, government buildings and courts for the boyar children; the prison consisted of gunners&#x27; yards, a blacksmith, and two parish churches near the prison towers. In the posad was a sloboda. In 1636, Oryol was rebuilt by the voivode B. Koltovsky; it expanded with annexation of land beyond the Oka. Oryol remained a fortress city with a corresponding garrison; Pushkarskaya Sloboda was still located in the prison, boyar children and nobles settled on the left bank of the Orlik, and a Cossack sloboda developed near the Oka. Oryol lost its military character after the 1689 fire, when the partially-burned city fortress was not rebuilt.

In central Oryol, streets fan out from the fortress; two main axes are the Upper and Lower Korchak Roads. Opposite the fortress was probably a second marketplace in the Zaotsk section, where the dragoon settlements had a relatively-regular layout along the river. Away from the river, the grid becomes a fan. The cityits fortress, three marketplaces, two monasteries and a number of parish churcheswas developed from the river. Its structure was visible from the Oka: the central fortress, the fan-shaped center and the grid of the Zaotsk settlements. The city was connected by bridges, making Oryol a military fortress and a trade center.

The city&#x27;s earliest plans, by Mikhail Buzovlev and Petr Botvinev, date to 1728. A 1778 plan fixed its radial layout, and a radial-semicircular system was proposed the following year. In 1848, a new plan including Polesskaya Square was approved.

Oryol&#x27;s modern layout was developed in 1939 by Suborov, an architect at the leningrad-based Russian State Research and Design Institute of Urbanism. The first post-war reconstruction plan was made in Lengiprogor under the direction of architect V. A. Gaikovich. Oryol&#x27;s development required a new general plan, which was drawn up in 1958 by V. A. Gaikovich and A. M. Suborov of Lengiprogor. The city&#x27;s center was Lenin Square, on which the House of Soviets was built in 1961. In 1966, construction of flood-control embankments in the central city began.

=== Climate ===
Oryol has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Dfb&quot;). Winters are moderately cold and changeable. The first half is softer, second with often warmings. Summers are warm, in separate years — they can be rainy or hot and dry.
== Administrative and municipal status ==
Oryol is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Orlovsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as the city of oblast significance of Oryol—an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the city of oblast significance of Oryol is incorporated as Oryol Urban Okrug.

=== City districts ===
Administratively, the city is divided into four districts:
* Severny (Северный) — population: 65,815 (2021)
* Sovetsky (Советский) — population: 74,315 (2021)
* Zheleznodorozhny (Железнодорожный) — population: 60,278 (2021)
* Zavodskoy (Заводской) — population: 103,288 (2021) (the biggest, oldest, and most populous)

== Politics ==
In February 2012, the city duma abolished the direct election of mayor. In December 2013, a referendum was held and 71% of the people supported the return of direct mayoral election.

=== Mayors ===
* 1991–1997: Alexander Kislyakov
* 1997–2002: Yefim Velkovsky
* 2002–2006: Vasily Uvarov
* 2006–2009: Alexander Kasyanov
* 2009–2010: Vasily Eremin
* 2010–2012: Viktor Safianov
* 2012–2015: Sergey Stupin
* 2015–2020: Vasily Novikov
* 2020–&quot;present&quot;: Yuri Parakhin

City-managers:
* 2012–2015: Mikhail Bernikov
* 2015–2017: Andrey Usikov
* 2017–2020: Alexander Muromsky

== Demographics ==
According to the Federal State Statistics Service, in January 2020 the number of residents came to 308 838. It is the 66th place among 1117 cities of Russia for 2019.

Largest ethnic groups in 2010:
* Russians (96,8%)
* Ukrainians (1,1%)
* Armenians (0,4%)
* Belarusians (0,3%)
* Azerbaijanis (0,2%)
* Tatars (0,1%)
* Jews (0,1%)

== Transportation ==
The formation of the Oryol as an important transportation hub is due to the favorable geographical position of the city on the borders of the Central and Central Black Earth economic regions.

The city has trolley, tram and bus systems. These kinds of public transport cover the entire territory of the city. Each bus, tram and trolley is equipped with route indicators that inform about the route through the city, designated stops. There are also taxis and rental cars.

In past years, in the summer on the Oka River waterbus operated as a form of transport excursion and walking orientation.

=== Automotive ===
In the Oryol converge important highways of federal and regional values:
* &quot;Crimea&quot;
* 
* 54А-1
* 54К-16

The main intercity terminal: Oryol Bus Station

==== Trolleybus ====

On 29 October 1968, a regular movement was opened. Length of the contact network . There are 4 routes for 2019.

=== Railway ===
Since 1868, there has been a railway connection between Oryol and Moscow. Here converge 5 railway lines: on Yelets, Moscow, Kursk, Bryansk, Mikhailovsky mine.

The main terminals: Oryol Station, Station Luzhki-Oryol.

==== Tram ====
On November 3, 1898, Oryol inaugurated an electric tram. The draft was prepared by the Belgian entrepreneur FF Gilon and firm «Compagnie mutuelle de tramways», which won the right to build not only a tram, but also lighting in the city. Oryol tram is one of the oldest electric tram systems in Russia. It is 1 year older than Moscow and 9 years — St. Petersburg. In 2017, the length of the lines in double-track calculation was . For 2019, there are 3 routes, which are operated: Tatra T3 (74 units), Tatra T6B5 (13 units), 71-403 (1 unit), 71-405 (1 unit).

=== Aerial ===

The city is served by the Oryol Yuzhny Airport, which is currently not working.

==Education==
There are six institutions of higher education in Oryol, as well as four branches of such institutions from other cities.
;Local
* Oryol Law Institute
* Oryol State Agrarian University
* Oryol State Institute of Culture
* Oryol State Institute of Economics and Trade
* Oryol State University
* Russian Federation Security Guard Service Federal Academy

;Branches
* Oryol Branch of the Russian University of Transport (Moscow)
* Oryol Branch of the Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration (Moscow)
* Oryol branch of the Financial University under the Government of the Russian Federation (Moscow)
* Oryol branch of the Voronezh Institute of Economics and Law (Voronezh)

==International cooperation==
===Twin towns – sister cities===

Oryol is twinned with:

* Razgrad, Bulgaria (1968)
* Offenbach am Main, Germany (1988)
* Leeuwarden, The Netherlands (1990–2002)
* Zhodzina, Belarus (2016)
* Mary, Turkmenistan (2017)
===Partner cities===

* Kaluga, Russia (2003)
* Kolpino, Russia (2010)
* Kolpinsky District, Russia (2010)
* Novosibirsk, Russia (2014)
* Volokolamsky District, Russia (2014)
* Novi Sad, Serbia (2017)
* Maribor, Slovenia (2017)
* Penza, Russia (2018)
== Notable people ==
* Leonid Andreyev, writer
* Mikhail Bakhtin, literary critic
* Fedor Baranov, fisheries scientist
* Denis Boytsov, boxer
* Yulia Bravikova, rhythmic gymnast
* Felix Dzerzhinsky, security chief
* Afanasy Fet, poet
* Nikolai Getman, painter and Gulag survivor
* Timofey Granovsky, historian
* Vasily Kalinnikov (1866–1901), composer
* Yakov Kasman, pianist
* Anna Petrovna Kern, socialite
* Stanislav Lebamba, association football player
* Josef Lhévinne, pianist and piano teacher
* Nikolai Leskov, novelist
* Denis Menchov, cyclist
* Artem Mikoyan, founder of the MiG aircraft manufacturer
* Fritz Noether, mathematician
* Nikolai Polikarpov, aviation designer
* Yevgeni Preobrazhensky, statesman
* Vladimir Karlovich Roth, neuropathologist
* Valerian Safonovich, statesman
* Aleksandr Selikhov, footballer
* Alexey Stakhanov, celebrated miner/engineer
* Pyotr Stolypin, statesman
* Maksymilian Stratanowski, painter
* Yakov Sverdlov, Bolshevik revolutionary
* Ivan Turgenev, novelist and playwright
* Aleksey Petrovich Yermolov, military general
* Gennady Zyuganov, politician

== References ==

=== Notes ===
=== Sources ===
* 

== External links ==
* Official website of Oryol 
* Unofficial website of Oryol 
* The murder of the Jews of Oryol during World War II, at Yad Vashem website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3118" start="0" end="5" title="Oryol" label="Oryol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118" start="35" end="39" title="Oryol" label="Orel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118" start="43" end="48" title="Oryol" label="Oriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="55" end="59" title="Classification of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="68" end="89" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129" start="93" end="105" title="Oryol Oblast" label="Oryol Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="107" end="113" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172089" start="131" end="140" title="Oka River" label="Oka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190778" start="201" end="225" title="Central Federal District" label="Central Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q918030" start="242" end="265" title="Central Economic Region" label="Central Economic Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322662" start="314" end="339" title="Principality of Chernigov" label="Principality of Chernigov"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="359" end="368" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="376" end="396" title="Late Middle Ages" label="late medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="424" end="443" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q190595" start="558" end="571" title="Oryol Prison" label="former prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="607" end="621" title="Russian Empire" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="627" end="639" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="644" end="656" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q172089" start="811" end="820" title="Oka River" label="Oka River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="825" end="836" title="Orlik River" label="Orlik River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322662" start="900" end="925" title="Principality of Chernigov" label="Principality of Chernigov"/>
<link wikidata="Q136834" start="1066" end="1076" title="Zvenigorod" label="Zvenigorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q145115" start="1093" end="1101" title="Karachev" label="Karachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1178" end="1202" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="1298" end="1310" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="1347" end="1364" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="1414" end="1433" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan IV Vasilyevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q209535" start="1813" end="1827" title="False Dmitry I" label="False Dmitry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524384" start="1871" end="1886" title="Ivan Bolotnikov" label="Ivan Bolotnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q469791" start="1896" end="1911" title="False Dmitry II" label="False Dmitry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q162698" start="2063" end="2070" title="Mtsensk" label="Mtsensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437277" start="2654" end="2670" title="Kiev Governorate" label="Kiev Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2681" end="2695" title="Oryol Province" label="Oryol Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401394" start="2783" end="2803" title="Belgorod Governorate" label="Belgorod Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="2838" end="2847" title="Julian calendar" label="old style"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2855" end="2873" title="Oryol Vice-Royalty" label="Oryol Vice-Royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q956083" start="2900" end="2908" title="Voronezh Governorate" label="Voronezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="3110" end="3128" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314" start="3271" end="3284" title="Anton Denikin" label="Anton Denikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="3292" end="3302" title="White movement" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="3371" end="3377" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190350" start="3447" end="3473" title="Central Black Earth Region" label="Central Black Earth Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178" start="3508" end="3520" title="Kursk Oblast" label="Kursk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190595" start="3618" end="3630" title="Oryol Prison" label="Oryol Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3717" end="3733" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q350857" start="3735" end="3753" title="Christian Rakovsky" label="Christian Rakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q266745" start="3755" end="3772" title="Maria Spiridonova" label="Maria Spiridonova"/>
<link wikidata="Q452517" start="3774" end="3787" title="Olga Kameneva" label="Olga Kameneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="3867" end="3880" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390509" start="3902" end="3926" title="Medvedev Forest massacre" label="Medvedev Forest massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3949" end="3961" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="3989" end="3998" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345569" start="4044" end="4060" title="Normandie-Niemen" label="Normandie-Niemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q672571" start="4143" end="4198" title="Operation Kutuzov" label="Oryol strategic offensive operation &amp;quot;Kutuzov&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="4206" end="4223" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Oryol-Kursk Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="4765" end="4792" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="5038" end="5042" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q130355879" start="5050" end="5055" title="Fire Information for Resource Management System" label="FIRMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q172089" start="5211" end="5220" title="Oka River" label="Oka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126906" start="5258" end="5280" title="Central Russian Upland" label="Central Russian Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191862" start="5288" end="5307" title="East European Plain" label="East European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q94080" start="5627" end="5643" title="Time of Troubles" label="Time of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q90668" start="5780" end="5786" title="Ostrog (fortress)" label="ostrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427510" start="5793" end="5798" title="posad" label="posad"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="5850" end="5857" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="5948" end="5953" title="boyar" label="boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130491" start="6090" end="6097" title="sloboda (settlement)" label="sloboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201771" start="7536" end="7591" title="Russian State Research and Design Institute of Urbanism" label="Russian State Research and Design Institute of Urbanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="8037" end="8062" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="8064" end="8093" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="8337" end="8358" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="8366" end="8372" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8389" end="8426" title="subdivisions of Russia#Administrative divisions" label="framework of administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886044" start="8475" end="8492" title="Orlovsky District" label="Orlovsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123997" start="8598" end="8625" title="city of federal subject significance" label="city of oblast significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q652762" start="8695" end="8704" title="administrative divisions of Oryol Oblast" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8711" end="8729" title="subdivisions of Russia#Municipal divisions" label="municipal division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624680" start="9783" end="9815" title="Russian Federal State Statistics Service" label="Federal State Statistics Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="9967" end="9975" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977290" start="9986" end="9996" title="Ukrainians in Russia" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="10006" end="10015" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="10025" end="10036" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="10046" end="10058" title="Azerbaijanis" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="10068" end="10074" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="10084" end="10088" title="Jews in Russia" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q918030" start="10260" end="10267" title="Central Economic Region" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q301538" start="10272" end="10307" title="Central Black Earth economic region" label="Central Black Earth economic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="10901" end="10911" title="Trolleybus" label="Trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102346" start="11155" end="11161" title="Yelets" label="Yelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="11171" end="11176" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801" start="11178" end="11185" title="Bryansk" label="Bryansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q838376" start="11760" end="11768" title="Tatra T3" label="Tatra T3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642248" start="11781" end="11791" title="Tatra T6B5" label="Tatra T6B5"/>
<link wikidata="Q604872" start="11881" end="11901" title="Oryol Yuzhny Airport" label="Oryol Yuzhny Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="11964" end="11996" title="Higher education" label="institutions of higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336909" start="12081" end="12100" title="Oryol Law Institute" label="Oryol Law Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336880" start="12103" end="12134" title="Oryol State Agrarian University" label="Oryol State Agrarian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q110931146" start="12137" end="12169" title="Oryol State Institute of Culture" label="Oryol State Institute of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101513" start="12219" end="12241" title="Oryol State University" label="Oryol State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059216" start="12244" end="12301" title="Russian Federation Security Guard Service Federal Academy" label="Russian Federation Security Guard Service Federal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477512" start="12335" end="12366" title="Russian University of Transport" label="Russian University of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822458" start="12398" end="12472" title="Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration" label="Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416632" start="12504" end="12571" title="Financial University under the Government of the Russian Federation" label="Financial University under the Government of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426" start="12644" end="12652" title="Voronezh" label="Voronezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="12728" end="12735" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q189650" start="12745" end="12752" title="Razgrad" label="Razgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042" start="12772" end="12789" title="Offenbach am Main" label="Offenbach am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390" start="12808" end="12818" title="Leeuwarden" label="Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q200905" start="12850" end="12858" title="Zhodzina" label="Zhodzina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713" start="12877" end="12881" title="Mary, Turkmenistan" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837" start="12927" end="12933" title="Kaluga" label="Kaluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q154738" start="12951" end="12958" title="Kolpino, Saint Petersburg" label="Kolpino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326302" start="12976" end="12994" title="Kolpinsky District" label="Kolpinsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="13012" end="13023" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q940875" start="13041" end="13062" title="Volokolamsky District" label="Volokolamsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="13080" end="13088" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="13106" end="13113" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="13133" end="13138" title="Penza" label="Penza"/>
<link wikidata="Q310866" start="13177" end="13192" title="Leonid Andreyev" label="Leonid Andreyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q185375" start="13203" end="13218" title="Mikhail Bakhtin" label="Mikhail Bakhtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077778" start="13238" end="13251" title="Fedor Baranov" label="Fedor Baranov"/>
<link wikidata="Q327073" start="13275" end="13288" title="Denis Boytsov" label="Denis Boytsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991609" start="13298" end="13313" title="Yulia Bravikova" label="Yulia Bravikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q188570" start="13334" end="13351" title="Felix Dzerzhinsky" label="Felix Dzerzhinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q314212" start="13370" end="13381" title="Afanasy Fet" label="Afanasy Fet"/>
<link wikidata="Q920801" start="13390" end="13404" title="Nikolai Getman" label="Nikolai Getman"/>
<link wikidata="Q555693" start="13435" end="13452" title="Timofey Granovsky" label="Timofey Granovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q368147" start="13466" end="13483" title="Vasily Kalinnikov" label="Vasily Kalinnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571367" start="13508" end="13520" title="Yakov Kasman" label="Yakov Kasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360522" start="13532" end="13550" title="Anna Petrovna Kern" label="Anna Petrovna Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842023" start="13564" end="13581" title="Stanislav Lebamba" label="Stanislav Lebamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q951486" start="13613" end="13627" title="Josef Lhévinne" label="Josef Lhévinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q209004" start="13657" end="13671" title="Nikolai Leskov" label="Nikolai Leskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q312283" start="13684" end="13697" title="Denis Menchov" label="Denis Menchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q314043" start="13709" end="13722" title="Artem Mikoyan" label="Artem Mikoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68527" start="13767" end="13780" title="Fritz Noether" label="Fritz Noether"/>
<link wikidata="Q314035" start="13798" end="13816" title="Nikolai Polikarpov" label="Nikolai Polikarpov"/>
<link wikidata="Q128511" start="13838" end="13860" title="Yevgeni Preobrazhensky" label="Yevgeni Preobrazhensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938394" start="13874" end="13897" title="Vladimir Karlovich Roth" label="Vladimir Karlovich Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409298" start="13918" end="13937" title="Valerian Safonovich" label="Valerian Safonovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152678" start="13951" end="13969" title="Aleksandr Selikhov" label="Aleksandr Selikhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q52253" start="13984" end="14000" title="Alexey Stakhanov" label="Alexey Stakhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q138487" start="14030" end="14044" title="Pyotr Stolypin" label="Pyotr Stolypin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14058" end="14082" title=":pl:Maksymilian Stratanowski" label="Maksymilian Stratanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q298384" start="14094" end="14108" title="Yakov Sverdlov" label="Yakov Sverdlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="14136" end="14149" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q328411" start="14177" end="14203" title="Aleksey Yermolov (general)" label="Aleksey Petrovich Yermolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182452" start="14224" end="14240" title="Gennady Zyuganov" label="Gennady Zyuganov"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14428" end="14440" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="14445" end="14455" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488245" wikidata="Q7634172" url="?curid=488245" title="Sue Lawley">
<text>Susan Lawley (born 14 July 1946) is a retired English television and radio broadcaster. Her main broadcasting background involved television news and current affairs. From 1988 to 2006, Lawley was the presenter of &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; on BBC Radio 4.

== Early life and education==
Sue Lawley was born at Sedgley, near Dudley, in July 1946, and was a pupil at Dudley Girls High School. She studied modern languages at the University of Bristol, where she dropped her Dudley accent in favour of received pronunciation.

== Career ==
She began her professional career as a trainee reporter on the &quot;Western Mail&quot; and &quot;South Wales Echo&quot; between 1967 and 1970, during which time she shared a house in Cardiff with Michael Buerk. She then moved to BBC Plymouth as a subeditor and freelance reporter from 1970 until 1972. In 1972, she worked as a sound recordist and then gained prominence as one of the reporters/presenters of BBC TV&#x27;s news magazine &quot;Nationwide&quot;. She appeared on the show until 1975, when she was offered the main anchor role on the nightly news show &quot;Tonight&quot;.

In 1974, Lawley was part of the BBC&#x27;s Election Team for the October general election and in 1979 she anchored the morning election results show the day after the general election night broadcast. 

Lawley left &quot;Tonight&quot; on maternity leave in 1978, being replaced by Valerie Singleton, and after her maternity leave, rejoined &quot;Nationwide&quot; as one of the two main anchors, alongside Frank Bough. Lawley remained with the show until it came to an end in 1983. During an interview with the Carpenters on &quot;Nationwide&quot; in October 1981 she surprised Karen Carpenter by asking her directly about her anorexia, an eating disorder which contributed to her death on February 4, 1983.

After &quot;Nationwide&quot;, Lawley became an anchor of the &quot;Nine O&#x27;Clock News&quot; bulletin on BBC1. When Robin Day suffered a heart attack, Lawley sat in for him as the chair of the topical discussion programme &quot;Question Time&quot; for several editions. In later years, Fiona Bruce was credited with being the first woman to host &quot;Question Time&quot; and the first woman to be part of the BBC&#x27;s Election Night team, when in fact Lawley had performed both roles many years before Bruce.

In September 1984 Lawley become the lead anchor of the newly-launched &quot;Six O&#x27;Clock News&quot;. Lawley was praised after a broadcast on 23 May 1988, when the studio was invaded by protesters opposed to Section 28: she continued to read the news whilst co-presenter Nicholas Witchell restrained one of them. In July 1988 Lawley left the &quot;Six O&#x27;Clock News&quot;.

In 1989, the BBC launched Lawley in her own Saturday night talk show titled &quot;Saturday Matters with Sue Lawley&quot;, which was received badly by critics and was cancelled after one series. The first guest interviewed was Sarah, Duchess of York. Lawley later left the BBC to work for ITV, but did little work for them, other than an occasional series of high-profile interviews, which included the Prime Minister, John Major. She returned to BBC1 in 1993 to host the show &quot;Biteback&quot;. Lawley was later part of ITN&#x27;s presenting team in its &quot;ITV Election 97&quot; coverage.

Lawley later introduced the BBC Radio 4 &quot;Reith Lectures&quot; and was also a board member of the English Tourism Council and English National Opera. 

In an interview in 2019 for an edition of BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;The Reunion&quot;, looking back at pioneering women newsreaders, Lawley confirmed to host Sue MacGregor that she is fully retired.

== Guest appearances and &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; ==
In 1981, she made a guest appearance in the &quot;Yes Minister&quot; episode &quot;The Quality of Life&quot;, playing herself. Throughout the 1980s and into the early 1990s, Lawley was the regular stand-in for Terry Wogan on his BBC1 thrice-weekly chat show &quot;Wogan&quot;. From 27 March 1988 to 27 August 2006 Lawley was the presenter of &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; on BBC Radio 4.

== Personal life ==
Lawley was first married in 1975 to David Ashby, a solicitor. Lawley&#x27;s second marriage was in 1987, to Hugh Williams, a television executive.

She was awarded the OBE in 2001.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7634172" start="0" end="12" title="Sue Lawley" label="Susan Lawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="220" end="239" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="249" end="260" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187271" start="316" end="323" title="Sedgley" label="Sedgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q213832" start="330" end="336" title="Dudley" label="Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311879" start="371" end="395" title="Dudley Girls High School" label="Dudley Girls High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="433" end="454" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="505" end="527" title="received pronunciation" label="received pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670849" start="612" end="624" title="Western Mail (Wales)" label="Western Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075898" start="641" end="657" title="South Wales Echo" label="South Wales Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="727" end="734" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133212" start="740" end="753" title="Michael Buerk" label="Michael Buerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="805" end="814" title="freelance" label="freelance"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="952" end="958" title="BBC Television" label="BBC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337012" start="986" end="996" title="Nationwide (TV series)" label="Nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146864" start="1114" end="1121" title="Tonight (1975 TV programme)" label="Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="1195" end="1219" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="1297" end="1313" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q772989" start="1368" end="1383" title="maternity leave" label="maternity leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911344" start="1411" end="1428" title="Valerie Singleton" label="Valerie Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859910" start="1535" end="1546" title="Frank Bough" label="Frank Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q223495" start="1636" end="1650" title="the Carpenters" label="the Carpenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250861" start="1707" end="1722" title="Karen Carpenter" label="Karen Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="1756" end="1764" title="anorexia" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="1946" end="1950" title="BBC One" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352352" start="1957" end="1966" title="Robin Day" label="Robin Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581397" start="2069" end="2082" title="Question Time (TV programme)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893114" start="2127" end="2138" title="Fiona Bruce" label="Fiona Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098925" start="2565" end="2575" title="Section 28" label="Section 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949215" start="2628" end="2645" title="Nicholas Witchell" label="Nicholas Witchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2748" end="2751" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355538" start="2817" end="2849" title="Saturday Matters with Sue Lawley" label="Saturday Matters with Sue Lawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720" start="2961" end="2983" title="Sarah, Duchess of York" label="Sarah, Duchess of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3023" end="3026" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="3153" end="3163" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="3181" end="3185" title="BBC One" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="3258" end="3261" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482202" start="3377" end="3391" title="List of Reith Lectures" label="Reith Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936276" start="3433" end="3456" title="English Tourism Council" label="English Tourism Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342882" start="3461" end="3483" title="English National Opera" label="English National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="3529" end="3540" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078259" start="3554" end="3565" title="The Reunion (radio series)" label="The Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634186" start="3644" end="3657" title="Sue MacGregor" label="Sue MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q732383" start="3796" end="3808" title="Yes Minister" label="Yes Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498917" start="3829" end="3848" title="The Quality of Life (Yes Minister)" label="The Quality of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="3956" end="3967" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029058" start="4010" end="4015" title="Wogan" label="Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="4094" end="4113" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4123" end="4134" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="4325" end="4328" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488248" wikidata="Q7966285" url="?curid=488248" title="Walter Thomson">
<text>Walter Cunningham Thomson (December 21, 1895 – April 27, 1964) was a Canadian politician, lawyer and rancher in Ontario, Canada.

Walter Cunningham Thomson was born on December 21, 1895 in Hastings, Ontario, the son of Reverend David Anderson Thomson and Janet née MacMillan.

On February 29, 1916, he enlisted into the army and was posted to the 93rd Battalion, Canadian Expeditionary Force, as a Lieutenant.

In 1923 he graduated from Osgoode Hall Law School in Toronto, Ontario as a solicitor. On June 25, 1924, he married Greeta Brophy Whitehead in Toronto.

In 1930 they settled on a dairy farm near Pickering, Ontario, where he opened a law practice in 1935.

In 1944 he was appointed as Ontario Solicitor for the Veteran’s Land Act.

Thomson first ran for the leadership of the Ontario Liberal Party in 1943 but came in fourth place losing to Harry Nixon. He was elected to the House of Commons of Canada in the 1949 federal election.

In 1951, he left federal politics and ran again for the leadership of the Ontario Liberal Party and won, defeating social reformer Harry Cassidy. In the 1951 Ontario provincial election, he failed to win election to the Legislative Assembly of Ontario, and the Liberals lost six of the 13 seats they had previously held. He remained leader of the party for another three years due to its state of disorganization. He resigned as leader on May 31, 1954, and was replaced by Farquhar Oliver.

On April 27, 1963, he died of a heart attack, whilst he was being treated at a Toronto hospital. Thomson was buried at the Erskine Cemetery in Dunbarton, Ontario.

==External links==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7966285" start="0" end="25" title="Walter Thomson" label="Walter Cunningham Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="112" end="119" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680222" start="189" end="206" title="Hastings, Ontario" label="Hastings, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460852" start="347" end="361" title="93rd Battalion (Peterborough), CEF" label="93rd Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915952" start="363" end="391" title="Canadian Expeditionary Force" label="Canadian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="398" end="408" title="Lieutenant" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016196" start="437" end="460" title="Osgoode Hall Law School" label="Osgoode Hall Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="464" end="471" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="486" end="495" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="785" end="806" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127880" start="850" end="861" title="Harry Nixon" label="Harry Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="885" end="911" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q912416" start="919" end="940" title="1949 Canadian federal election" label="1949 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="1017" end="1038" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497637" start="1074" end="1087" title="Harry Cassidy" label="Harry Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094966" start="1096" end="1128" title="1951 Ontario general election" label="1951 Ontario provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="1163" end="1194" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066999" start="1416" end="1431" title="Farquhar Oliver" label="Farquhar Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q386626" start="1577" end="1595" title="Pickering, Ontario" label="Dunbarton, Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488249" wikidata="Q1335064" url="?curid=488249" title="Military Cross">
<text>The Military Cross (MC) is the third-level (second-level until 1993) military decoration awarded to officers and (since 1993) other ranks of the British Armed Forces, and formerly awarded to officers of other Commonwealth countries.

The MC is granted in recognition of &quot;an act or acts of exemplary gallantry during active operations against the enemy on land&quot; to all members of the British Armed Forces of any rank. In 1979, Queen Elizabeth II approved a proposal that a number of awards, including the Military Cross, could be recommended posthumously.

==History==
The award was created on 28 December 1914 for commissioned officers of the substantive rank of captain or below and for warrant officers. The first 98 awards were gazetted on 1 January 1915, to 71 officers, and 27 warrant officers. Although posthumous recommendations for the Military Cross were unavailable until 1979, the first awards included seven posthumous awards, with the word &#x27;deceased&#x27; after the name of the recipient, from recommendations that had been raised before the recipients died of wounds or died from other causes.

Awards are announced in &quot;The London Gazette&quot;, apart from most honorary awards to allied forces in keeping with the usual practice not to gazette awards to foreigners.

From August 1916, recipients of the Cross were entitled to use the post-nominal letters MC, and bars could be awarded for further acts of gallantry meriting the award, with a silver rosette worn on the ribbon when worn alone to denote the award of each bar.

From September 1916, members of the Royal Naval Division, who served alongside the Army on the Western Front, were made eligible for military decorations, including the Military Cross, for the war&#x27;s duration. Naval officers serving with the division received 140 MCs and eight second award bars.

In June 1917, eligibility was extended to temporary majors, not above the substantive rank of captain. Substantive majors were made eligible in 1953.

In 1931, the award was extended to equivalent ranks in the Royal Air Force for actions on the ground.

After the Second World War, most Commonwealth countries created their own honours system and no longer recommended British awards. The last Military Cross awards for the Canadian Army were for Korea. The last four Australian Army Military Cross awards were promulgated in &quot;The London Gazette&quot; on 1 September 1972 for Vietnam as was the last New Zealand Army Military Cross award, which was promulgated on 25 September 1970. Canada, Australia and New Zealand have now created their own gallantry awards under their own honours systems.

Since the 1993 review of the honours system, as part of the drive to remove distinctions of rank in awards for bravery the Military Medal, formerly the third-level decoration for other ranks, was discontinued. The MC is now the third-level award for all ranks of the British Armed Forces for &quot;exemplary gallantry&quot; on land, not to the standard required to receive the Victoria Cross (for &quot;the most conspicuous bravery&quot;) or the Conspicuous Gallantry Cross.

== Description ==
The Military Cross was designed by Henry Farnham Burke, while its ribbon was created by Victoria Ponsonby, Baroness Sysonby.

In the &quot;Medal Yearbook 2015&quot; it is described as follows:
* 46 mm maximum height, 44 mm maximum width.
* Ornamental silver cross with straight arms terminating in broad finials, suspended from a plain suspension bar.
* Obverse decorated with imperial crowns, with the Royal Cypher in centre.
* Reverse is plain. From 1938 until 1957 the year of award was engraved on lower limb of cross, and since 1984 it has been awarded named to the recipient.
* The ribbon width is 32 mm and consists of three equal vertical moire stripes of white, purple, and white.
* Ribbon bar denoting a further award is plain silver, with a crown in the centre.

== Recipients ==
=== Numbers awarded ===
Since 1914, over 52,000 Military Crosses and 3,717 bars have been awarded. The dates below reflect the relevant &quot;London Gazette&quot; entries:

In addition, approximately 375 MCs have been awarded since 1979, including awards for Northern Ireland, the Falklands, and the wars in the Persian Gulf, Iraq, and Afghanistan.

The above table includes awards to the Dominions:
* In all, 3,727 Military Crosses have been awarded to those serving with Canadian forces, including 324 first bars and 18 second bars.
* A total of 2,930 were awarded to Australians, in addition to 188 first bars and four second bars. Of these, 2,403 MCs, 170 first Bars and four second Bars were for World War I.
* Over 500 MCs were awarded to New Zealanders during World War I and over 250 in World War II. The most recent awards were for service in Vietnam.
* The honorary MC awards were made to servicemen from fifteen Allied countries in World War I, and nine in World War II.

=== Notable awards ===

* During World War I, Acting Captain Francis Wallington of the Royal Field Artillery was the first person to be awarded the MC and three bars when he was invested with his third bar on 10 July 1918 (gazetted 13 September 1918: he had obtained the first three awards as a second lieutenant). Three other officers were subsequently awarded a third bar, Percy Bentley, Humphrey Arthur Gilkes and Charles Gordon Timms, all of whose awards appeared in a supplement to the &quot;London Gazette&quot; on 31 January 1919.
* For their key roles during World War I, the cities of Verdun and Ypres were awarded the Military Cross, in September 1916 and February 1920 respectively. In May 1920, Field Marshal French presented the decoration to Ypres in a special ceremony in the city.
* During World War II Captain Sam Manekshaw, Indian Army (who eventually rose to the rank of Field Marshal), was leading a counter-offensive operation against the invading Japanese Army in Burma. During the course of the offensive, he was hit by a burst of machine-gun fire and severely wounded in the stomach. Major General D.T. Cowan spotted Manekshaw holding on to life and was aware of his valour in face of stiff resistance from the Japanese. Fearing the worst, Cowan quickly pinned his own Military Cross ribbon on to Manekshaw saying, &quot;A dead person cannot be awarded a Military Cross.&quot;
* The first posthumous Military Cross was that awarded to Captain Herbert Westmacott, Grenadier Guards for gallantry in Northern Ireland during the period 1 February 1980 to 30 April 1980.
* The first woman to be awarded the Military Cross was Private Michelle Norris of the Royal Army Medical Corps, while attached to The Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment for her actions in Iraq on 11 June 2006. Norris was awarded her medal personally by Queen Elizabeth II on 21 March 2007.
* Able Seaman Kate Nesbitt, second woman, first in the Royal Navy, for acts in Afghanistan in March 2009 as a Medical Assistant attached to 1 RIFLES, 3 Commando Brigade.
* Sergeant Michael Lockett, awarded the MC in 2008, was killed in action in 2009 in Afghanistan. He was the first holder of the MC to be killed in action since World War II.
== See also ==
* :Category:Recipients of the Military Cross
* British and Commonwealth orders and decorations
* List of British gallantry awards for the Iraq War

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Abbott, Peter and Tamplin, John. &quot;British Gallantry Awards&quot;, 2nd ed. (1981). Nimrod Dix and Co., London. .
* Duckers, Peter. &quot;British Gallantry Awards 1855–2000&quot; (2011). Shire Publications, Risborough, Buckinghamshire. .
* Mussell, J. (ed.). &quot;Medals Yearbook 2015&quot; (2014). Token Publishing, Honiton, Devon. .

== External links ==
* Original Royal Warrant for the MC &quot;Supplement to London Gazette&quot;, 1 January 1915
* Current Royal Warrant for the MC &quot;Supplement to London Gazette&quot;, 17 September 2002
* Database of Australian Awardees at the Australian Government Honours website
* Search recommendations for the Military Cross The UK National Archives
* Notes on numbers awarded North East Medals</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="4" end="18" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="20" end="22" title="Military Cross" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788716" start="69" end="88" title="military decoration" label="military decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108620" start="126" end="137" title="Other ranks (UK)" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="145" end="165" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="209" end="221" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="624" end="645" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="673" end="680" title="Captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="698" end="713" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330404" start="1369" end="1389" title="post-nominal letters" label="post-nominal letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537204" start="1398" end="1402" title="Medal bar" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q646534" start="1597" end="1617" title="63rd (Royal Naval) Division" label="Royal Naval Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="1656" end="1669" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="1915" end="1920" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2073" end="2088" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2150" end="2162" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545795" start="2551" end="2557" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721675" start="2559" end="2568" title="Australian Honours System" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950229" start="2573" end="2584" title="New Zealand Royal Honours System" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q109511204" start="2669" end="2706" title="1993 reviews of the British honours system" label="the 1993 review of the honours system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="2786" end="2800" title="Military Medal" label="Military Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108620" start="2842" end="2853" title="Other ranks (UK)" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="3040" end="3054" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127626" start="3109" end="3136" title="Conspicuous Gallantry Cross" label="Conspicuous Gallantry Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492555" start="3192" end="3211" title="Henry Farnham Burke" label="Henry Farnham Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23618809" start="3245" end="3280" title="Victoria Ponsonby, Baroness Sysonby" label="Victoria Ponsonby, Baroness Sysonby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358618" start="3534" end="3549" title="Imperial State Crown" label="imperial crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739328" start="3560" end="3572" title="Royal Cypher" label="Royal Cypher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752512" start="3804" end="3809" title="moire (fabric)" label="moire"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="4207" end="4223" title="The Troubles" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="4229" end="4238" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="4260" end="4272" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="4274" end="4278" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="4284" end="4295" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479562" start="4992" end="5010" title="Francis Wallington" label="Francis Wallington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374174" start="5018" end="5039" title="Royal Field Artillery" label="Royal Field Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514318" start="5306" end="5319" title="Percy Bentley (soldier)" label="Percy Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513435" start="5321" end="5343" title="Humphrey Arthur Gilkes" label="Humphrey Arthur Gilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006106" start="5348" end="5368" title="Charles Gordon Timms" label="Charles Gordon Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="5525" end="5531" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="5536" end="5541" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="5638" end="5658" title="John French, 1st Earl of Ypres" label="Field Marshal French"/>
<link wikidata="Q558194" start="5758" end="5771" title="Sam Manekshaw" label="Sam Manekshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="5773" end="5784" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240314" start="6053" end="6063" title="David Tennent Cowan" label="D.T. Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735888" start="6398" end="6416" title="Herbert Westmacott" label="Herbert Westmacott"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="6418" end="6434" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837186" start="6584" end="6599" title="Michelle Norris" label="Michelle Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q516446" start="6607" end="6631" title="Royal Army Medical Corps" label="Royal Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="6655" end="6694" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="6785" end="6797" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375682" start="6830" end="6842" title="Kate Nesbitt" label="Kate Nesbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928465" start="6997" end="7012" title="Michael Lockett" label="Michael Lockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="7042" end="7058" title="killed in action" label="killed in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7146" end="7158" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7177" end="7219" title=":Category:Recipients of the Military Cross" label=":Category:Recipients of the Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100755" start="7222" end="7269" title="British and Commonwealth orders and decorations" label="British and Commonwealth orders and decorations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564997" start="7272" end="7321" title="List of British gallantry awards for the Iraq War" label="List of British gallantry awards for the Iraq War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488252" wikidata="Q13562315" url="?curid=488252" title="Diving helmet">
<text>A diving helmet is a rigid head enclosure with a breathing gas supply used in underwater diving. They are worn mainly by professional divers engaged in surface-supplied diving, though some models can be used with scuba equipment. The upper part of the helmet, known colloquially as the &quot;hat&quot; or &quot;bonnet&quot;, may be sealed directly to the diver using a &quot;neck dam&quot;, connected to a diving suit by a lower part, known as a &quot;breastplate&quot;, or &quot;corselet&quot;, depending on regional language preferences, or simply rest on the diver&#x27;s shoulders, with an open bottom, for shallow water use.

The helmet isolates the diver&#x27;s head from the water, allows the diver to see clearly underwater, provides the diver with breathing gas, protects the diver&#x27;s head when doing heavy or dangerous work, and usually provides voice communications with the surface (and possibly other divers). If a helmeted diver becomes unconscious but is still breathing, most helmets will remain in place and continue to deliver breathing gas until the diver can be rescued. In contrast, the scuba regulator used by recreational divers must be held in the mouth by bite grips, and it can fall out of an unconscious diver&#x27;s mouth and result in drowning.

Before the invention of the demand regulator, all diving helmets used a free-flow design. Gas was delivered at an approximately constant rate, independent of the diver&#x27;s breathing, and flowed out through an exhaust valve against a slight over-pressure. Most modern helmets incorporate a demand valve so the helmet only delivers breathing gas when the diver inhales. Free-flow helmets use much larger quantities of gas than demand helmets, which can cause logistical difficulties and is very expensive when special breathing gases (such as heliox) are used. They also produce a constant noise inside the helmet, which can cause communication difficulties. Free-flow helmets are still preferred for some applications of hazardous materials diving, because their positive-pressure nature can prevent the ingress of hazardous material in case the integrity of the suit or helmet is compromised. They also remain relatively common in shallow-water air diving, where gas consumption is of little concern, and in nuclear diving because they must be disposed of after some period of use due to irradiation; free-flow helmets are significantly less expensive to purchase and maintain than demand types.

Most modern helmet designs are sealed to the diver&#x27;s skin at the neck using a neoprene or latex &quot;neck dam&quot; which is independent of the suit, allowing the diver a choice of suits depending on the dive conditions. When divers must work in contaminated environments such as sewage or dangerous chemicals, the helmet (usually of the free-flow type or using a series exhaust valve system) is directly sealed to a dry suit made of a fabric with a smooth vulcanised rubber outer coating to completely isolate and protect the diver. This equipment is the modern equivalent of the historic &quot;standard diving dress&quot;.

== Function and structure ==
The usual meaning of &quot;diving helmet&quot; is a piece of diving equipment that encases the user&#x27;s head and delivers breathing gas to the diver, but the term &quot;diving helmet&quot;, or &quot;cave diving helmet&quot; may also refer to a safety helmet like a climbing helmet or caving helmet that covers the top and back of the head, but is not sealed. These may be worn with a full-face mask or half mask to provide impact protection when diving under an overhead, and may also be used to mount lights and video cameras.

An alternative to the diving helmet that allows communication with the surface is the full-face diving mask. These cover most of the diver&#x27;s face, specifically including eyes, nose and mouth, and are held onto their head by adjustable straps. Like the diving helmet, the full-face mask is part of the breathing apparatus.

Another style of helmet construction, seldom used, is the , which uses a front section with a hinged back section, clamped closed, and sealed along the joint. These were seldom satisfactory due to problems with the seal. Prototypes of this type were made by Kirby Morgan and Joe Savoie.

===Components===

Basic components and their functions:
*Helmet casing or shell – A rigid watertight structure that encloses the diver&#x27;s head and supports most of the other components. The part of a standard helmet that encloses the head may also be called the &quot;bonnet&quot; (British English), and the whole unit may be called the &quot;hat&quot; by professional divers. Traditionally made from spun copper, more recently from glass fibre reinforced resin or stainless steel.
*Lower seal – Most deep-water helmets have a means of excluding water from the helmet regardless of the posture of the diver. Shallow water helmets rely on the diver keeping the helmet approximately upright, and the flow of breathing air keeps the water level lower than the diver&#x27;s nose and mouth, and excess air escapes at the bottom of the helmet.
**Direct to the dry suit – The helmet may be sealed directly to the neck opening of the dry suit, making the helmet and suit a single watertight unit. The weight of the helmet may be carried by the head and neck, so it must be nearly neutrally buoyant, or can be supported by a breastplate or corselet, in which case it may be negatively buoyant, or positively buoyant and held down by jocking straps.
**Via a neck dam – The more recent development is for the helmet to clamp to a neck dam, supported by a rigid ring, or clamped to the lower edge of the helmet. The neck dam seals against the skin of the divers neck in the same way that the neck seal of a dry suit works, making the helmet a sealed unit independent of the suit, which may be a dry suit, wet suit or hot-water suit, or even just a pair of overalls in warm water. The weight of the helmet is carried by the head and neck, so it must be nearly neutrally buoyant, and is generally slightly heavy in the water so that it rests on the head and does not have a tendency to float off. When the helmet is buoyant, it is held down by a jocking strap.
**Breastplate/corselet – An alternative system is for the helmet to seal to a corselet (UK) or breastplate (US), which in turn is sealed to the dry suit. The helmet and suit become a single sealed unit, somewhat more complex than with a direct seal, but easier to put on and take off. The weight of the helmet is carried on the shoulders via the breastplate, so it does not have to be neutrally buoyant, and can be directly weighted or held down by a jocking strap.
* {{visible anchor|Faceplate}} (or {{visible anchor|viewport}}, in older helmets also called a light) – The diver&#x27;s window to the world. A transparent window in the front of the helmet or full-face mask. If the helmet is light and carried directly on the head and neck, and can move with the head, it is usually relatively small, and the helmet too is compact and relatively light. If the helmet is supported by the shoulders it cannot turn with the head, and must have a larger volume with a larger viewport or more than one viewport to give an adequate field of vision. A four-light helmet was a common design, with a front port which could be opened when out of the water, two side-lights, to the left and right, and an upper light above the front light to give an upward view.
*Gas supply – The breathing gas supply is connected to the helmet. This is usually a low pressure surface supply hose attached through a non-return valve to a gas block with a bailout gas supply connected to the bailout valve on the gas block, but other systems have been used.
**Inlet valve or demand valve – The primary gas supply may be free-flow or demand controlled. If it is demand controlled there is usually a free-flow bypass, which may also serve as a defogging system, by blowing air over the inner face of the front viewport.
** An internal oro-nasal mask is used in demand supplied helmets to minimise dead space. The oro-nasal mask seals around the nose and mouth, forming a small volume gas space through which the breathing gas normally flows from demand valve to nose or mouth, and from nose or mouth to the exhaust valves. There are also one-way valves from the main helmet space into the oro-nasal mask, to allow flow into it while breathing from the free-flow supply, or from a pneumo-hose for emergency supply.
* Gas exhaust system – Exhaled gas is exhausted from the helmet through non-return valves, either directly to the surrounding water, or via a reclaim regulator system through a hose to the surface. There may be two or more sets of non-return valves in series to reduce the risk of back-flow of contaminated water
* Voice communications microphone and headphone speakers connected to the surface via copper conductors in the umbilical cable.
* Nose blocker, also known as a valsalva device – A device is provided which the diver can use to block the nose for ear equalising maneuvers.
* Other accessories may be present, such as a lifting handle, {{visible anchor|ballast weights}}, light and video camera brackets, a welding visor, spitcock and internal padding.
** A lifting handle allows the attendant to lift the helmet with one hand, without it swinging or tilting excessively.
** Ballast weights provide neutral or slightly negative buoyancy, and place the centre of gravity where it will not cause off-centre loads on the diver&#x27;s neck.
** Brackets allow easy mounting of lights and video cameras so that the diver can see in dark conditions, and the supervisor can see what the diver is doing.
** A welding visor is fitted on a hinge to protect the diver from bright light and ultraviolet light produced by welding arcs or cutting flames. It is flipped down over the faceplate for use when needed.
** A {{visible anchor|spitcock}} was provided on some standard helmets to allow the diver to suck in a mouthful of water which would then be spat onto the inner surface of a viewport to wash off condensation fogging. The water would then usually be trapped between the outside of the suit and the inside of the breastplate. The spitcock could also be opened as an auxiliary exhaust port when the diver was working in some non-upright positions.
** Internal padding is fitted to lightweight helmets to cushion the diver&#x27;s head against shock loads, to support the helmet more comfortably and so that it will closely follow the head movement. A chin strap can be used to help with these functions. A close-fitting insulated cap may be provided for warmth.
** A {{visible anchor|jocking strap }} or jocking harness can be used to transfer excess buoyancy forces of the helmet to the diver&#x27;s weighting system, or part of the weighting system can be directly attached to the helmet.
** Part of the water used to heat a hot water suit can be routed through a water jacket (shroud) around part of the breathing gas supply tubing on the helmet, typically the metal tube between the bailout valve block and the demand valve inlet to heat the gas just before delivery through the demand valve. As a large part of body heat loss is in heating the inspired air to body temperature on every breath, this can reduce heat loss significantly on deep dives in cold water.
* A {{visible anchor|yoke}}, or {{visible anchor|locking collar}} is a component that folds under the bottom opening of a lightweight helmet making the opening smaller than the head, and when locked in place, prevents the helmet from lifting off the diver&#x27;s head.

==History==
{{Further|History of underwater diving}}

===Deane brothers===

The first successful diving helmets were produced by the brothers Charles and John Deane in the 1820s. Inspired by a fire accident he witnessed in a stable in England, he designed and patented a &quot;Smoke Helmet&quot; to be used by firemen in smoke-filled areas in 1823. The apparatus comprised a copper helmet with an attached flexible collar and garment. A long leather hose attached to the rear of the helmet was to be used to supply air - the original concept being that it would be pumped using a double bellows. A short pipe allowed air to escape, as more was pumped in. The user breathed from the airflow as it passed the face. The garment was made of leather or airtight cloth, secured by straps.

The brothers lacked money to build the equipment themselves, so they sold the patent to their employer, Edward Barnard. In 1827, the first smoke helmets were built, by German-born British engineer Augustus Siebe. In 1828 the brothers decided to find another application for their device and converted it into a diving helmet. They marketed the helmet with a loosely attached &quot;diving suit&quot; so that a diver could perform salvage work, but only in a mainly vertical position (otherwise water entered the suit).

In 1829 the Deane brothers sailed from Whitstable for trials of their new underwater apparatus, establishing the diving industry in the town. In 1834 Charles used his diving helmet and suit in a successful attempt on the wreck of &quot;Royal George&quot; at Spithead, during which he recovered 28 of the ship&#x27;s cannons. In 1836, John Deane recovered from the discovered &quot;Mary Rose&quot; shipwreck timbers, guns, longbows, and other items.

By 1836 the Deane brothers had produced the world&#x27;s first diving manual, &quot;Method of Using Deane&#x27;s Patent Diving Apparatus&quot;, which explained in detail the workings of the apparatus and pump, and safety precautions.

===The Siebe helmet===

In the 1830s the Deane brothers asked Siebe to apply his skill to improve their underwater helmet design. Expanding on improvements already made by another engineer, George Edwards, Siebe produced his own design; a helmet fitted to a full length watertight canvas diving suit. The equipment included an exhaust valve in the helmet, which allowed excess air to escape without allowing water to flow in. The closed diving suit, connected to an air pump on the surface, became the first effective standard diving dress, and the prototype of hard-hat rigs still in use today.

Siebe introduced various modifications on his diving dress design to accommodate the requirements of the salvage team on the wreck of {{HMS|Royal George|1756|6}}, including making the helmet detachable from the corselet; his improved design gave rise to the typical standard diving dress which revolutionised underwater civil engineering, underwater salvage, commercial diving and naval diving.

===Lightweight helmets===

Commercial diver and inventor Joe Savoie is credited with inventing the helmet neck dam in the 1960s, which made possible a new era of lightweight helmets, including the Kirby Morgan Superlite series (an adaption of Morgan&#x27;s existing &quot;Band Mask&quot; into a full helmet.) Savoie did not patent this invention, though he did hold patents on other diving equipment, which allowed widespread development of the concept by other manufacturers. The neck dam seals the helmet around the diver&#x27;s neck in the same way that a dry suit neck seal works, using similar materials. This allows the helmet to be carried on the head and not supported by the shoulders on a corselet (breastplate), so the helmet can turn with the head and can therefore be a much closer fit, which considerably reduces the volume, and as the helmet must be ballasted for neutral buoyancy, the overall weight is reduced. Neck dams were already in use on space suits in Project Mercury, and neck seals had been used on dry suits even longer, but Savoie was the first to use the technology to seal the underside of a diving helmet.

{{expand section|{{cite web |url=https://www.kirbymorgan.com/company/history |title=Kirby Morgan History |website=www.kirbymorgan.com |access-date=13 May 2024 }} |date=May 2024}}

==Types==
===Standard diving helmets (Copper hats)===

{{main|Standard diving dress}}
The original standard diving equipment was a copper helmet or &quot;bonnet&quot; (British English) clamped onto a copper breastplate or &quot;corselet&quot;, which transferred the weight to the diver&#x27;s shoulders. This assembly was clamped to a rubber gasket on the dry suit to make a watertight seal. Breathing air and later sometimes helium based gas mixtures were pumped through a hose to a non-return inlet valve on the helmet or breastplate, and released to the surroundings through an exhaust valve.

Historically, deep sea diving helmets were described by the number of bolts used to clamp them to the rubber gasket of the diving suit, and where applicable, the number of bolts used to secure the bonnet (helmet) to the corselet (breastplate). This ranged from the no bolt, two, three, and four bolt helmets; corselets with six, eight, or 12 bolts; and Two-Three, Twelve-Four, and Twelve-Six bolt helmets.{{citation needed|date=July 2021}} For example, the US twelve-four helmets used 12 bolts to clamp the breastplate to the suit, and four bolts to seal the helmet to the breastplate. The no-bolt helmet used a spring-loaded clamp to secure the helmet to corselet over the suit gasket, and many helmets were sealed to the breastplate by a 1/8 turn interrupted screw thread. Swedish helmets were distinctive for using a neck ring instead of a corselet, a precursor of more modern diving equipment, but cumbersome and uncomfortable for the diver. A further distinction is the number of viewports, or &quot;lights&quot;, usually one, three or four. The front light could be opened for air and communications when the diver was out of the water. This equipment is commonly referred to as Standard diving dress and &quot;heavy gear.&quot;{{citation needed|date=December 2016}}

Occasionally, divers would lose consciousness while working at 120 feet in standard helmets. The English physiologist J.S. Haldane found by experiment that this was partly due to a buildup of carbon dioxide in the helmet caused by insufficient ventilation and a large dead space, and established a minimum flow rate of {{convert|1.5|cuft|L}} per minute at ambient pressure.

A small number of copper Heliox helmets were made by the US Navy for the Second World War. These helmets were Mk Vs modified by the addition of a bulky brass carbon dioxide scrubber chamber at the rear, and are easily distinguished from the standard model. The Mk V Helium weighs about {{convert|93|lb|kg|abbr=on}} complete (bonnet, scrubber canister and corselet) These helmets and similar models manufactured by Kirby Morgan, Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company and DESCO used the scrubber as a gas extender, a form of semi-closed rebreather system, where breathing gas was recirculated through the scrubber by entraining the helmet gas in the flow from an injector supplying fresh gas, a system pioneered by Dräger in 1912.

===Shallow-water helmets===
The shallow water helmet is a very simple concept: a helmet with viewports which is fitted by lowering over the diver&#x27;s head to rest on the shoulders. It must be slightly negatively buoyant when filled with air so that it does not float off the diver in use. Air is supplied through a low pressure hose and escapes at the bottom of the helmet, which is not sealed to the suit, and can be lifted off by the diver in an emergency. The helmet will flood if the diver leans over or falls over. The shallow water helmet generally has a handle on top to help the tender lift it onto and off the diver when out of the water. The structure is variable, and ranges from relatively heavy metal castings to lighter sheet metal shells with additional ballast.

The concept has been used for recreational diving as a breathing system for use by untrained tourists in the direct care of a dive leader in a benign diving environment, marketed as the Sea Trek diving system.

===Lightweight demand helmets===
The lightweight diving helmet is a type which is fitted more closely to the diver&#x27;s head, reducing the interior volume, and thereby reducing the displaced volume of the helmet, so less mass is required to make the helmet&#x27;s buoyancy neutral. The consequence is a reduced overall mass for the equipment carried by the diver, who must not be buoyant in the water. This reduction in volume and mass allows the diver to more safely support the helmet on the head and neck when out of the water, so when it is immersed and neutrally buoyant, it is comfortable to move around with the head, allowing the diver to use neck movement to change the direction of view, which in turn increases the diver&#x27;s total field of vision while working. Since the lightweight helmet can be supported by the head and neck, it can be sealed to the neck, using a neck dam, independent of the diving suit, making operations equally convenient with dry suits and wetsuits, including hot water suits. Some models can be sealed directly to a dry suit for maximum isolation from the environment.

The foam neoprene or latex neck dam of many of the popular Kirby-Morgan helmets is fitted to an oval metal neck ring which hooks onto the bottom of the helmet in front. A folding locking collar at the back of the helmet swings forward and up to push the back of the neck ring up into the base of the helmet, and also prevents the helmet from lifting off the head by partly occluding the neck ring opening at the back. The locking collar is secured in the locked position by two spring loaded pull-pin latches. The helmet seals over the neck ring with a barrel seal O-ring. Other arrangements may be used with similar effect on other models, such as the KMSL 17B, where the seal is made on the outside of the helmet to an O-ring seated in a groove in the fibreglass rim. A lever operated clamp with a yoke is mounted on the neck dam and seals to the helmet rim, or a moulded rubber seal bonded to a dry suit is clamped to the helmet using a similar clamp system.

====Open circuit demand helmets====
Notable modern commercial helmets include the &quot;Kirby Morgan&quot; Superlite-17 from 1975 and developments from that model. These helmets are of the demand type, usually built on a fiberglass shell with chrome-plated brass fittings, and are considered the standard in modern commercial diving for most operations.

Kirby Morgan dominates the new helmet market, but there have been other manufacturers including Savoie, Miller, Gorski, Composite-Beat Engel,Divex, and Advanced Diving Equipment Company. Many of these are still in use; a new helmet represents an investment of several thousand dollars, and most divers purchase their own or rent one from their employer.{{citation needed|date=December 2016}}

====Reclaim helmets====

{{see also|Saturation diving#Gas reclaim systems}}
Reclaim helmets use a surface supply system to provide breathing gas to the diver in the same way as in the open circuit helmets, but also have a return system to reclaim and recycle the exhaled gas to save the expensive helium diluent, which would be discharged to the surrounding water and lost in an open circuit system. The reclaimed gas is discharged from the helmet through a back-pressure regulator and returned to the surface through a hose in the umbilical which is provided for this purpose, passed through a scrubber to remove carbon dioxide, blended with oxygen to the required mix and repressurised for immediate re-use or stored for later use.

In order to allow the exhaust gas to be discharged from the helmet safely, it must pass through an exhaust back-pressure regulator, which works on the same principle to a built-in breathing system exhaust valve, activated by the pressure difference between the interior of the helmet and the ambient pressure. The reclaim exhaust valve may be a two-stage valve for lower resistance, and will generally have a manual bypass valve which allows exhaust to the ambient water. The helmet will have an emergency flood valve to prevent possible exhaust regulator failure from causing a helmet squeeze before the diver can bypass it manually.

===Free-flow helmets===
In a free-flow or constant flow helmet, gas is delivered at an approximately constant rate, set by the panel operator, independent of the diver&#x27;s breathing, and flows out through an exhaust valve against a slight adjustable over-pressure. Free-flow helmets use much larger quantities of gas than demand helmets, which can cause logistical difficulties and is very expensive when special breathing gases (such as heliox) are used. They also produce a constant noise inside the helmet, which can cause communication difficulties. Free-flow helmets are still preferred for some applications of hazardous materials diving, because their positive-pressure nature can prevent the ingress of hazardous material in case the integrity of the suit or helmet is compromised. They also remain relatively common in shallow-water air diving, where gas consumption is of little concern, and in nuclear diving because they must be disposed of after some period of use due to irradiation; free-flow helmets are significantly less expensive{{citation needed|date=June 2024}} to purchase and maintain than demand types.

The DESCO &quot;air hat&quot; is a metal free-flow helmet, designed in 1968 and still in production. Although it has been updated several times, the basic design has remained constant and all upgrades can be retrofitted to older helmets. Its robust and simple design (it can be completely disassembled in the field with only a screwdriver and wrench) makes it popular for shallow-water operations and hazardous materials diving. The helmet is secured to the diving suit by a neck ring, and held in place on the diver against buoyancy by means of a &quot;jocking strap&quot; which runs between the legs. Buoyancy can be fine-tuned by adjusting intake and exhaust valves to control the internal pressure, which will control the volume of gas in the attached dry suit. Concept and operation are very similar to the standard diving helmet. Noise level can be high and can interfere with communications and affect diver hearing.

The US Navy replaced the Mark V helmet in 1980 with the Morse Engineering Mark 12 deep water helmet which has a fibreglass shell with a distinctive large rectangular front faceplate for a better field of vision for work. It also has side and top viewports for peripheral vision. This helmet can also be used for mixed gas either for open circuit or as part of a modular semi-closed circuit system, which uses a back mounted recirculating scrubber unit connected to the lower back of the helmet by flexible breathing hoses. The helmet uses a neck dam or can be connected directly to a dry suit, and uses a jocking harness to keep the helmet in position, but is ballasted to provide neutral buoyancy and a centre of gravity at the centre of buoyancy for stability. Airflow is directed over the faceplate to prevent fogging. Both the Mk V and the Mk 12 were in use in 1981. The noise level in the Mk 12 in open circuit mode can have adverse effects on diver hearing. Sound intensity levels have been measured at 97.3 dB(A) at 30.5 msw depth. The Mk 12 was phased out in 1993.

Other manufacturers include Dräger, Divex, and Ratcliffe/Oceaneering.

Light-weight transparent dome type helmets have also been used. For example, the Sea Trek surface supplied system, developed in 1998 by Sub Sea Systems, is used for recreational diving. Also the Lama, a near spherical acrylic dome helmet developed by Yves Le Masson in the 1970s, has been used in television to let viewers see the face and hear the voice of the presenter speaking underwater.

===Push-pull helmets===
These are helmets which use a flow of supply gas which is recovered and recycled in a closed circuit system, such as from the atmosphere of a saturation system like a closed bell or submersible. The gas is pumped to the diver through the umbilical, and pumped back to the life-support system for carbon dioxide scrubbing and oxygen replenishment. Pressure in the helmet is maintained at ambient pressure, and the work of breathing is low. A high flow rate must be maintained in a continuous flow system to compensate for potential dead space in the helmet, but as the gas is recycled, very little is lost. Lateral excursions are limited by the umbilical reach, but vertical excursions are restricted by the ability of the control valves to manage pressure variations between gas source and the helmet while providing acceptable work of breathing. The Divex Arawak system is an example of a successful push-pull system used in the SEALAB projects

==Safety==
{{see also|Diving safety#Surface-supplied equipment|Human factors in diving equipment design#Masks and helmets}}
Use of a sealed helmet for diving is generally safer than a full-face or half mask, as the airway is relatively well protected, and the diver can survive a loss of consciousness until rescued in most circumstances, provided the breathing gas supply is not interrupted. There are hazards associated with helmet use, but the risks are relatively low. A helmet is also substantial protection against the environment. It protects against impact to the head and neck, external noise, and heat loss from the head. If sealed to a dry suit, and fitted with a suitable exhaust system, it is also effective against contaminated ambient water. Shallow-water helmets which are open at the bottom do not protect the airway if the diver does not remain upright.

One of the more obvious hazards is the potential for flooding, but as long as an adequate breathing gas supply is available, the helmet can be purged of water that gets into it. A helmet sealed by a neck dam can be purged without affecting the diving suit, and water will drain from the exhaust ports if there is no major structural damage to the shell, view-ports or neck dam. The shell and view-ports are tough and not easily penetrated. The neck dam is more vulnerable, but even a major tear can be managed by keeping the head upright to prevent flooding up against the gas inside. There have been cases of a helmet separating from the yoke, due to locking cam or locking pin failure, but safety clips on the cam levers and locking pin redesign make the risk extremely low on more recent designs.

Helmet squeeze occurs when the internal pressure of the helmet is lower than the ambient pressure. In the early days of surface supplied diving this could occur if the diver descended so fast the manually powered air supply pump could not keep up with the compression due to hydrostatic pressure increase. This is no longer a problem as gas supply systems have been upgraded. The other cause of catastrophic pressure reduction in the helmet was when the air supply hose ruptured much shallower than the diver, and air would flow out of the damaged hose, reducing helmet internal pressure to the pressure at the depth of the rupture, which could be several atmospheres. Since the standard diving helmet is sealed to a watertight dry suit, all the air from inside the suit would rapidly be lost, after which the external pressure would squeeze as much of the diver as possible into the helmet. Crushing injuries caused by helmet squeeze could be severe and sometimes fatal. An accident of this type is recorded from Pasley&#x27;s salvage work on HMS Royal George (1756) in 1839. Helmet squeeze due to air hose failure is prevented by fitting a non-return valve in the line at the connection to the helmet. Testing of this valve is an essential daily pre-use check. A similar mechanism is possible in the helium reclaim systems used for heliox diving, where a failure of the reclaim regulator can cause loss of gas through the return hose. This risk is mitigated by the capacity of the neck dam or an emergency flood valve to allow the helmet to temporarily flood, relieving the pressure difference, until the diver can switch to open circuit and purge the helmet of water.

==Manufacturers==
{{see also|Standard diving dress#Manufacturers|List of diving equipment manufacturers}}
* Advanced Diving Equipment Company is an American manufacturer of diving helmets that produces the Swindell free-flow open circuit air helmets.
*Erik Andersson of Stockholm made standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 104 }}
*Bikkers of Rotterdam made standard helmets.
*Emil Carlsson of Stockholm, Sweden, made standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 102 }}

*Composite-Beat Engel is a Swiss manufacturer of composite helmets, including lightweight demand diving helmets.
*John Date of Montreal made standard diving helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 138 }}
* DESCO, also known as Diving Equipment and Supply Company Inc, is an American diving equipment manufacturer in Milwaukee, Wisconsin They produce surface-supplied and scuba equipment, including standard diving helmets, and shallow water helmets.
*Divex, a subsidiary of James Fisher &amp; Sons plc, manufacture the AH5 free-flow helmet, and some of its earlier versions. They also produce helium reclaim helmets using Kirby-Morgan Superlite 17C helmets with Divex Ultraflow demand regulators and Ultrajewel exhaust reclaim regulators the &quot;Dirty Harry&quot; helmet for contaminated encironments, and the Arawak series of &#x27;push-pull&#x27; closed circuit helmets.
*Dräger &amp; Gerling, Lubeck, Established 1889. In 1902 their name changed to Drägerwerk, Heinr. &amp; Bernh. Dräger. Drägerwerk produced both rebreather and free-flow standard helmets.&gt;{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=pp. 88–91 }}
*Drass-Galeazzi is an Italian diving equipment manufacturer of Drass D-ONE lightweight diving helmets.
*Eterne was a Brazilian manufacturer of shallow water helmets.
*Friedrich Flohr, of Kiel. Established 1890. Manufactured apparatus of Denayrouze type with three-bolt helmets and regulator backpacks. Later also produced free-flow helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 97 }} 
* General Aquadyne Inc. of Santa Barbara, California manufactured the fibreglass shell AH-2 free-flow helmet and DM-4 to DM-6 band masks. Production of the AH series helmets was later continued by Divex.
*Galeazzi of La Spezia, made standard diving equipment, including helmets for mixed gas.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 121–123 }}
* Gorski is a brand of lightweight demand diving helmet with a stainless steel shell, owned by Aqua Lung. In 2004, Leszek Górski&#x27;s G2000SS diving helmet went into production, and in 2011, Gorski’s company was bought out by Aqua Lung. The G3000 helmet uses a high-performance Apeks GX300 regulator.
* L.G. Hammond of Miami, Florida, was a manufacturer of cast bronze shallow water helmets.
*Heinke of London, UK, manufactured standard diving helmets.
*IAC, of Italy, made standard diving helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 125 }} 
*Kimura (Nagasaki iron works), of Japan, made standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 137 }}
*Kirby-Morgan of California have produced a large range of lightweight demand helmets with fibre composite and stainless steel shells for air and mixed gas diving, including reclaim helmets. Several of the models are still in production, and several others are still supported.
*C.A. Lindqvist of Stockholm, Sweden, made standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 99 }}
*Marinverkst of Karlskrona, Sweden, made standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 105 }} 
* Medi, of East Germany, made 3-bolt standard helmets {{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 97 }}
* Miller-Dunn Diving Co. of Miami, Florida, manufactured standard diving helmets and shallow water helmets.
* Morse Diving of Boston, Massachusetts, also known as Morse Diving International and A J Morse and Son, manufactured standard diving helmets, the US Navy Mark 12 deep water helmet, and shallow water helmets.
*Nemrod of Spain manufactured standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 133 }}
*Ocean Development Corporation produced the Ratcliffe helmet, commonly known as the &quot;Rat Hat&quot;, and was later bought out by Oceaneering International which continued production for a few years for their own use. It can function in either free-flow or demand mode.
* Charles Person, of São Paulo, Brazil, manufactured standard diving equipment {{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 132 }} and shallow water helmets.
*Pusan of Korea made standard helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 131 }}
* Rouquayrol–Denayrouze, later Specialites Mecaniques Reunis, then Societe Charles Petit, and eventually Rene Piel (several name changes) manufactured both 3-bolt and 12-bolt standard helmets, and both demand and free-flow air supply systems. Trademarks include Rene Piel of Paris,{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 126 }}and C H Petit, of Paris.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 127 }} 
*Joe Savoie of Boutte, Louisiana, produced several versions of lightweight helmet of his own design, both free-flow and demand supplied.
*Scauda of Mareilles manufactured standard diving helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 129 }}
* A. Schräder&#x27;s Son of Brooklyn, New York, manufactured standard diving equipment and shallow water helmets.
* Siebe Gorman of London, UK, manufactured a wide range of standard helmet models over several years, including 12-bolt oval and square corselets, 6-bolt oval corselets,{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=pp. 25–44 }} and a rebreather model.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 50 }}
* Snead Co., of Jersey City N.J. was a manufacturer of shallow water helmets.
*Società Anonima Lavorazioni Vari Appararecchi di Salvataggio (SALVAS), manufactured mostly military salvage equipment, including diving helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 124 }}&lt;
*Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company, of Japan manufactured standard helmets, including helium gas extender helmets.{{sfn|Pardoe|2016|loc=p. 134 }}

== See also ==
* {{annotated link|Diving equipment}} 
* {{annotated link|Human factors in diving equipment design}}
* {{annotated link|Standard diving dress}}

== References ==
{{Reflist|refs=















































===Sources===
{{cite book |url=http://www.bhandl.co.uk/sales/assets/SS/2016/06/15/SS150616.pdf |title=The Anthony and Yvonne Pardoe Collection of Diving Helmets and Equipment – illustrated catalogue |publisher=Bearnes Hampton &amp; Littlewood |location=Exeter, UK |date=2016 |last= |ref={{harvid|Pardoe|2016}} |access-date=13 September 2016 |archive-date=29 October 2020 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20201029133525/http://www.bhandl.co.uk/sales/assets/SS/2016/06/15/SS150616.pdf |url-status=dead }}

== External links ==
* Modern helmet photo collection
* U.S. Navy Mark V Diving Helmet
* Diving helmets collection of Diving Heritage museum

{{Breathing apparatus|underwater}}
{{helmets|state=autocollapse}}
{{Underwater diving|divequ}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Diving Helmet}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="2" end="15" title="Diving helmet" label="diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="121" end="140" title="professional diving" label="professional divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="152" end="175" title="surface-supplied diving" label="surface-supplied diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079255" start="213" end="228" title="Scuba set" label="scuba equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="757" end="770" title="breathing gas" label="breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="955" end="966" title="unconsciousness" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283891" start="1086" end="1093" title="Diver rescue" label="rescued"/>
<link wikidata="Q754360" start="1112" end="1127" title="Diving regulator" label="scuba regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719546" start="1136" end="1155" title="Recreational diving" label="recreational divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="1268" end="1276" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q754360" start="1307" end="1323" title="demand regulator" label="demand regulator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1351" end="1360" title="Diving regulator#Open circuit free-flow regulator" label="free-flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q905892" start="1823" end="1829" title="heliox" label="heliox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2002" end="2028" title="Professional diving#HAZMAT diving" label="hazardous materials diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="2144" end="2148" title="Diving suit" label="suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325149" start="2290" end="2304" title="nuclear diving" label="nuclear diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="2902" end="2910" title="dry suit" label="dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="2942" end="2959" title="Vulcanization" label="vulcanised rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="3081" end="3102" title="standard diving dress" label="standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639207" start="3408" end="3423" title="climbing helmet" label="climbing helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055149" start="3427" end="3440" title="caving helmet" label="caving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972089" start="3758" end="3779" title="full-face diving mask" label="full-face diving mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q117254339" start="4275" end="4285" title="Joe Savoie" label="Joe Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="4492" end="4507" title="standard helmet" label="standard helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="5146" end="5154" title="dry suit" label="dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="5540" end="5548" title="neck dam" label="neck dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102696" start="8044" end="8058" title="oro-nasal mask" label="oro-nasal mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164998" start="8106" end="8116" title="Dead space (physiology)" label="dead space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929396" start="9085" end="9105" title="Ear clearing" label="equalising maneuvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q787354" start="9733" end="9746" title="welding visor" label="welding visor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973530" start="10994" end="11006" title="water jacket" label="water jacket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11115" end="11128" title="Surface-supplied diving#Bailout gas supply" label="bailout valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="11244" end="11253" title="body heat" label="body heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161752" start="11808" end="11815" title="Charles Anthony Deane" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161750" start="11820" end="11830" title="John Deane (inventor)" label="John Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q76692" start="12647" end="12661" title="Augustus Siebe" label="Augustus Siebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q964785" start="13008" end="13018" title="Whitstable" label="Whitstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194034" start="13199" end="13223" title="HMS Royal George (1756)" label="&amp;quot;Royal George&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783560" start="13227" end="13235" title="Spithead" label="Spithead"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="13350" end="13359" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259259" start="13935" end="13941" title="canvas" label="canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="13942" end="13953" title="diving suit" label="diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208443" start="13989" end="13994" title="valve" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="14172" end="14193" title="standard diving dress" label="standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="14517" end="14538" title="standard diving dress" label="standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="14560" end="14570" title="underwater" label="underwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="14571" end="14588" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="14601" end="14608" title="Marine salvage" label="salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753570" start="14610" end="14627" title="commercial diving" label="commercial diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="14632" end="14644" title="naval diving" label="naval diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q117254339" start="14704" end="14714" title="Joe Savoie" label="Joe Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14890" end="14903" title="Bev Morgan" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972089" start="14919" end="14928" title="Band mask" label="Band Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="15623" end="15638" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="15672" end="15680" title="dry suit" label="dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q559029" start="17954" end="17966" title="John Scott Haldane" label="J.S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037959" start="18369" end="18392" title="carbon dioxide scrubber" label="carbon dioxide scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18639" end="18672" title="Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company" label="Yokohama Diving Apparatus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204856" start="18677" end="18682" title="DESCO" label="DESCO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18730" end="18752" title="Diving rebreather#Standard diving dress rebreathers" label="semi-closed rebreather"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19905" end="19927" title="Sea Trek (diving system)" label="Sea Trek diving system"/>
<link wikidata="Q117254339" start="22457" end="22463" title="Joe Savoie" label="Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q622935" start="22473" end="22479" title="Gorski (diving helmet)" label="Gorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="22481" end="22501" title="Composite-Beat Engel" label="Composite-Beat Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648843" start="22502" end="22507" title="Divex" label="Divex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745379" start="23660" end="23685" title="built-in breathing system" label="built-in breathing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204856" start="25260" end="25265" title="DESCO" label="DESCO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26237" end="26254" title="Morse Engineering" label="Morse Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q605908" start="27283" end="27289" title="Dräger (company)" label="Dräger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648843" start="27291" end="27296" title="Divex" label="Divex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150535" start="27312" end="27323" title="Oceaneering" label="Oceaneering"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="27623" end="27633" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919945" start="28674" end="28680" title="SEALAB" label="SEALAB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31379" end="31405" title="HMS Royal George (1756)#Pasley (1839)" label="Pasley&amp;#x27;s salvage work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194034" start="31409" end="31432" title="HMS Royal George (1756)" label="HMS Royal George (1756)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119938" start="31667" end="31688" title="helium reclaim system" label="helium reclaim system"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359066" start="31737" end="31754" title="reclaim regulator" label="reclaim regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204856" start="32707" end="32712" title="DESCO" label="DESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648843" start="32952" end="32957" title="Divex" label="Divex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133908" start="32975" end="32998" title="James Fisher &amp;amp; Sons" label="James Fisher &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q605908" start="33495" end="33505" title="Dräger (company)" label="Drägerwerk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33705" end="33711" title="Eterne" label="Eterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648843" start="34170" end="34175" title="Divex" label="Divex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="34190" end="34199" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622935" start="34303" end="34309" title="Gorski (diving helmet)" label="Gorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q622935" start="34396" end="34405" title="Aqua Lung" label="Aqua Lung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34606" end="34618" title="L.G. Hammond" label="L.G. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699800" start="34696" end="34702" title="Heinke (diving equipment manufacturer)" label="Heinke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35476" end="35498" title="Miller-Dunn Diving Co." label="Miller-Dunn Diving Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q6914242" start="35584" end="35596" title="Morse Diving" label="Morse Diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991347" start="35792" end="35798" title="Nemrod" label="Nemrod"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35871" end="35900" title="Ocean Development Corporation" label="Ocean Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150535" start="36003" end="36028" title="Oceaneering International" label="Oceaneering International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36145" end="36159" title="Charles Person (Brazil)" label="Charles Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="36353" end="36374" title="Rouquayrol–Denayrouze" label="Rouquayrol–Denayrouze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36382" end="36411" title="Specialites Mecaniques Reunis" label="Specialites Mecaniques Reunis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36418" end="36439" title="Societe Charles Petit" label="Societe Charles Petit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36456" end="36465" title="Rene Piel" label="Rene Piel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117254339" start="36721" end="36731" title="Joe Savoie" label="Joe Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="36949" end="36971" title="A. Schräder&amp;#x27;s Son" label="A. Schräder&amp;#x27;s Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049441" start="37063" end="37075" title="Siebe Gorman" label="Siebe Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37321" end="37330" title="Snead Co." label="Snead Co."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488255" wikidata="Q233169" url="?curid=488255" title="Beni Department">
<text>Beni (), sometimes El Beni, is a northeastern department of Bolivia, in the lowlands region of the country. It is the second-largest department in the country (after Santa Cruz), covering 213,564 square kilometers (82,458 sq mi), and it was created by supreme decree on November 18, 1842, during the administration of General José Ballivián. Its capital is Trinidad.

==Population==

With a population of 425,780, according to the 2012 censeus, Beni is the second least-populated of the nine departments of Bolivia, after Pando.

Although Beni is rich in natural resources, the poverty level of its inhabitants is high, mainly as a result of centuries of exploitation of native populations by European-descended elites. The main economic activities are agriculture, timber, and cattle. In addition, an underground economy linked to illegal narcotics activities flourished in the area during the last decades of the 20th century, with many cocaine laboratories hidden behind the façade of remote cattle ranches.

The Beni region is wide and flat, featuring many large mounds connected by straight earthen causeways, which are believed by researchers to have been built by ancient inhabitants. The earthwork mounds provide raised living areas and enable the growth of trees that could not survive otherwise in the frequently flooded lowland area. In the 21st century, archeologists and anthropologists such as Americans Clark Erickson and William Balée, respectively, believe these earthwork structures are evidence of a large and sophisticated indigenous civilization that flourished for thousands of years before European colonization.

The first European settlers in this area were Spanish Jesuit missionaries during the 18th century, sent to convert the native inhabitants, chiefly in the southern half of the department. The religious origins of many of the Beni&#x27;s towns can be attested to by the centrality of the local church in most of the communities, and in the very names of the towns: Trinidad, Santa Ana, San Borja, Reyes, etc. Today, the Beni region is the seat of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Vicariate of El Beni.

The importance of cattle ranching is prominent in the regional culture. Cowboys, or &quot;vaqueros&quot;, still play an important role in Beni society, comprising a large portion of the working class. Other industries significant to the region include logging, small-scale fishing and hunting, farming, and in recent years, eco-tourism.

Though the Beni lies in the southern reaches of the Amazon Basin, an area renowned for tropical disease, the population has fewer health problems than in the Andes Region, especially those related to malnutrition.

The inhabitants (Benianos) are mostly descendants of Cruceños (people from Santa Cruz) who streamed north following the course of navigable rivers, and native peoples.

The Beniano diet consists largely of rice, bananas, beef, and fish. Some popular dishes include Majao, Masaco, and others, many featuring cured/salted meats.

The majority of the population in Beni is mestizo. The white/mestizo Benianos have traditionally been mistrustful, and often somewhat contemptuous, of Andean culture. They identify as being lighter skinned and of more Spanish ancestry than the Quechua and Aymara-speaking populations of the highlands. Considerable resentment existed against the central government, which allegedly did very little to build roads or integrate the Beni into the economy and political life of Bolivia. These attitudes persisted although Beni residents benefited greatly by the Agrarian Reform instituted following the 1952 Revolution, with many citizens gaining ownership of significant tracts of land. Most of these turned to cattle ranching. The absence of a reliable road linking the department to the main centers of power in the country (owing to the difficult terrain) continued to contribute to the Benianos&#x27; perception of isolation, as did a downturn in the cattle industry. As a result, both the white/mestizo population and departmental authorities supported the Santa Cruz-led effort to federalize the country and devolve powers to the departments at the expense of the central government. Considerable social unrest took place in 2007 and 2008, leading some to consider separatism as plausible.

==History==

Beni was a very important center of a pre-Columbian civilization known as the hydraulic culture of Las Lomas (the hills), a culture that constructed over 20,000 man-made artificial hills, all interconnected by thousands of square kilometers of aqueducts, channels, embankments, artificial lakes and lagoons, as well as terraces. Between about 4000 BC (and probably earlier as this date is taken from ceramics that have been carbon dated) and the 13th century AD this region was settled by sophisticated and organized groups of human societies. Their civil structures were based, both environmentally and economically, on the use of specific environmental characteristics (such as the use of aquatic plants as fertilizer, and enormous fishing systems they constructed). Miles of these channels and man-made earthworks are visible from the air when flying over Beni.

When the Spanish arrived, the region had already been in decline for about three hundred years. However, this is where many products that are now used worldwide originated in native cultivation: among them tobacco, peanuts, cotton, cassava (manioc), vanilla and sweet potatoes. The Spanish initially were intensely interested in this area. During the first century of colonization, they believed the mythical city of &quot;El Dorado&quot; (also known as &quot;Paititi&quot;) could be found in this region. However, they never found this legendary city of gold and they soon lost interest in the area, which would remain marginalized for several centuries after.

Between the 19th and 20th centuries northern Beni became Bolivia&#x27;s rubber capital. The abundance of rubber trees attracted many people to the region, many of them adventurers and workers (many of whom were indigenous) to work in the huge rubber plantations that arose. The worldwide demand for rubber rose with industrialization and the use of automotive vehicles. For decades this was one of the most active, dynamic regions of Bolivia. Cachuela Esperanza was an important center for rubber exports as it is located along the shores of the Beni River. As a measure of its success, it had one of the best-equipped hospitals in Bolivia at the end of the 19th century. But these enormous rubber plantations all but disappeared by the end of the Second World War, as developers had been cultivating rubber introduced to plantations of Southeast Asia and Africa. Today many of the properties have been converted to cattle ranches. Only some small rubber producers still use the river to transport their production.

==Government==
===Executive offices===
The chief executive office of Bolivia departments (since May 2010) is the governor, who is elected to office; until then, the office was called the prefect. Until 2006 the prefect was appointed by the president of Bolivia. As of 2011 Beni had an interim governor, Haysen Ribera Leigue, who was selected by the Departmental Legislative Assembly on 16 December 2011. Governor Ernesto Suárez Sattori, who was elected on 4 April 2010, was suspended following his indictment for irregular expenditures related to a power plant in San Borja, Beni, in compliance with a Bolivian legal mandate that indicted officials may not continue to serve. As a replacement for the governor Carmelo Lens was elected in the special election on 20 January 2013. The current governor, Alejandro Unzueta of the MTS was elected on 7 March 2021.

===Legislative Assembly===
Under the 2009 Constitution, each Bolivian department has an elected Departmental Legislative Assembly. The first elections were held 4 April 2010. The leading party in the twenty-eight member assembly is Beni First, with 11 seats. The Movement towards Socialism (MAS-IPSP) holds 10 seats, and the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement (MNR) holds 3 seats. Two seats each were selected by indigenous people and by peasants through &quot;usos y costumbres&quot;. In alliance with the indigenous and peasant representatives, the MAS-IPSP controls the presidency of the Assembly. The three MNR representatives and their alternates were derecognized by the national party in 2010 when they backed MAS-IPSP policies and leadership.

The December 2011 suspension of Governor Ernesto Suarez was backed by 15 votes, including the MAS and MNR delegations, and two indigenous or campesino representatives. Two members of the assembly were also indicted simultaneously and replaced by their alternates: Sonia Suárez Araúz (MNR) was replaced by Juan Carlos Herrera; and Carlos Navia Ribera (MAS-IPSP) was replaced by Tatiana Paniagua Zabala. The interim governor was also a member of the Assembly.

===National Congress===
In the National Congress of Bolivia Beni elects nine out of 130 members of the &quot;Cámara de Diputados&quot; (Chamber of Deputies), and four members of the &quot;Cámara de Senadores&quot; (Chamber of Senators).

;Senators
* Freddy Bersatti Tudela (MAS-IPSP)
* Zonia Guardia Melgar (MAS-IPSP)
* Carlos Alberto Sonnenschein Antelo (PPB)
* Jeanine Áñez Chávez (PPB)

==Geography==

Beni&#x27;s weather is tropical and humid, with a prevalence of warm to hot temperatures.

Beni borders upon Brazil to the northeast, and the departments of Santa Cruz to the southeast, La Paz to the west, Pando to the northwest, and Cochabamba to the south. Beni&#x27;s territory is mainly covered by rainforest (particularly the northern and eastern portions of the department) and pampa (notably the grassland Moxos Plain to the south, closer to the Andean reaches). 
Much of Beni is at about 155 meters above sea level. Although most of the department is flat, along the border with La Paz there are two sierra chains called Eva Eva and Pelado. Beni is criss-crossed by numerous rivers, all of which are Amazon tributaries. The largest of these are the Iténez (also known as Guaporé), Mamoré, Madre de Dios, Madera, Yata, Ivón, Machupo, Itonama, Baures, San Martín, San Miguel, San Simón, Negro, Sécure, Yacuma, Maniquí, Ibare and Apere, all of which are navigable.
Beni also has numerous lakes and lagoons. The most important of these are: Laguna Suárez, Rogagua, Rogaguado, San Luis, San Pablo, Huachi, Huatunas, Yusala, Huachuna, Agua Clara, Ginebra, La Dichosa, Bolivia, Navidad, Las Abras, Larga, Maracaibo and Aquiles Lake.

===Flora and fauna===

In the region&#x27;s many rivers over 400 species of fish have been found. Trinidad has an entire museum, the &quot;Museo Ictícola&quot;, dedicated to Beni&#x27;s fish fauna which is the third largest of its type in South America. The most commonly fished and consumed species are pacú, tambaquí, surubí, palometa (a type of piranha), sábalo, bagre (catfish), and blanquillo. Alligators are also hunted for their leather and meat, which is considered a delicacy and is a common part of meals in Beni. Beni now also exports huge amounts of lumber, although over the past 20 years the government of Bolivia has worked with numerous international entities and NGOs to certify its lumber concessions and all lumber exported must be accompanied by certificates of origin.
===Climate===
Beni is hot and humid during most of the year with an annual rainfall average between . It is one of the wettest regions in Bolivia, with more wetlands than the better-known Pantanal. During the winter (June and July) the weather can be cool and winds blowing northward from the South Pole and Argentina&#x27;s Patagonia region can cause temperatures to drop quite drastically very quickly.

==Agriculture and livestock==
Because of its climate and rich soils, the department is Bolivia&#x27;s second largest agricultural center after Santa Cruz. There are extensive fields of corn, yucca (manioc), sunflowers, rice, and many tropical fruits such as cacao (from which chocolate is made), Brazil nuts (one of the regions main crops and exports), soybeans, bananas, maracuya, guayaba, papaya, and many other citrus fruits. Coffee is also grown extensively. Beni is also the second Bolivia&#x27;s largest cattle-ranching region. Official estimates calculate there are anywhere between 2 and 2.5 million heads of cattle throughout the year. Most of these are turned out to pasture and thus are naturally fed.

==Provinces of Beni==
The department is divided into 8 provinces which are further subdivided into municipalities and 48 cantons.

==Languages==
The dominant language in the department is Spanish. The following table shows the number of those belonging to the recognized group of speakers.

==Places of interest==
* Beni Biological Station Biosphere Reserve
* Isiboro Sécure National Park and Indigenous Territory
* Cachuela Esperanza
* Pilón Lajas Biosphere Reserve and Communal Lands

== Notes ==
==See also==
==References==
*Gonzalez Moscoso, Rene. 1984. Enciclopedia Boliviana: Diccionario Geográfico Boliviano. Editorial “Los Amigos del Libro”, La Paz. 278pp.

==External links==

* Weather in Beni 
* Bolivian Music and Web Varieties
* Departmental Government of Beni
* Beni Department
* Full information of Beni Department]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233169" start="0" end="4" title="Beni Department" label="Beni"/>
<link wikidata="Q233169" start="19" end="26" title="Beni Department" label="El Beni"/>
<link wikidata="Q250050" start="46" end="56" title="Departments of Bolivia" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="60" end="67" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q734711" start="326" end="340" title="José Ballivián" label="José Ballivián"/>
<link wikidata="Q34986" start="357" end="365" title="Trinidad, Bolivia" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q250050" start="492" end="514" title="departments of Bolivia" label="departments of Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235362" start="522" end="527" title="Pando Department" label="Pando"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="802" end="821" title="underground economy" label="underground economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="939" end="946" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584134" start="1067" end="1072" title="mound" label="mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="1104" end="1113" title="causeways" label="causeways"/>
<link wikidata="Q620295" start="2086" end="2131" title="Roman Catholic Apostolic Vicariate of El Beni" label="Roman Catholic Apostolic Vicariate of El Beni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401609" start="2224" end="2231" title="vaquero" label="vaquero"/>
<link wikidata="Q170688" start="2762" end="2772" title="Santa Cruz de la Sierra" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035965" start="4400" end="4430" title="Llanos de Moxos (archaeology)" label="hydraulic culture of Las Lomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="5394" end="5401" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="5403" end="5409" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="5412" end="5418" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="5420" end="5427" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="5438" end="5445" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="5450" end="5462" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="5611" end="5620" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q992821" start="6294" end="6312" title="Cachuela Esperanza" label="Cachuela Esperanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q142604" start="6397" end="6407" title="Beni River" label="Beni River"/>
<link wikidata="Q250050" start="6937" end="6956" title="Departments of Bolivia" label="Bolivia departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q373548" start="7108" end="7128" title="president of Bolivia" label="president of Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307472" start="7432" end="7447" title="San Borja (Beni)" label="San Borja, Beni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887920" start="7610" end="7626" title="Beni special gubernatorial election, 2013" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7863" end="7878" title="Bolivian regional election, 2010#Beni" label="first elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887896" start="7960" end="7970" title="Beni First" label="Beni First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142239" start="7991" end="8017" title="Movement for Socialism – Political Instrument for the Sovereignty of the Peoples" label="Movement towards Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536051" start="8053" end="8087" title="Revolutionary Nationalist Movement" label="Revolutionary Nationalist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902087" start="8189" end="8206" title="usos y costumbres" label="usos y costumbres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968458" start="8970" end="8998" title="National Congress of Bolivia" label="National Congress of Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142239" start="9213" end="9221" title="Movement for Socialism – Political Instrument for the Sovereignty of the Peoples" label="MAS-IPSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q117713810" start="9259" end="9293" title="Carlos Alberto Sonnenschein" label="Carlos Alberto Sonnenschein Antelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200906" start="9295" end="9298" title="Plan Progress for Bolivia – National Convergence" label="PPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581287" start="9302" end="9321" title="Jeanine Áñez" label="Jeanine Áñez Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="9453" end="9459" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q235106" start="9501" end="9511" title="Santa Cruz Department (Bolivia)" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q272784" start="9530" end="9536" title="La Paz Department, Bolivia" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q235362" start="9550" end="9555" title="Pando Department" label="Pando"/>
<link wikidata="Q233917" start="9578" end="9588" title="Cochabamba Department" label="Cochabamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="9646" end="9656" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q184382" start="9728" end="9733" title="pampa" label="pampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356821" start="10389" end="10402" title="Laguna Suárez" label="Laguna Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10404" end="10411" title="Rogagua" label="Rogagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924977" start="10445" end="10451" title="Huachi Lake" label="Huachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939512" start="10514" end="10521" title="Laguna Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782941" start="10564" end="10576" title="Aquiles Lake" label="Aquiles Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q14517578" start="10883" end="10887" title="pacú" label="pacú"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10889" end="10897" title="tambaquí" label="tambaquí"/>
<link wikidata="Q311350" start="10899" end="10905" title="surubí" label="surubí"/>
<link wikidata="Q185215" start="10927" end="10934" title="piranha" label="piranha"/>
<link wikidata="Q157603" start="11557" end="11565" title="Pantanal" label="Pantanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062593" start="12544" end="12553" title="Provinces of Bolivia" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062710" start="12588" end="12602" title="Municipalities of Bolivia" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12610" end="12617" title="Cantons of Bolivia" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="12677" end="12684" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887894" start="12805" end="12846" title="Beni Biological Station Biosphere Reserve" label="Beni Biological Station Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651313" start="12849" end="12902" title="Isiboro Sécure National Park and Indigenous Territory" label="Isiboro Sécure National Park and Indigenous Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q992821" start="12905" end="12923" title="Cachuela Esperanza" label="Cachuela Esperanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q599051" start="12926" end="12974" title="Pilón Lajas Biosphere Reserve and Communal Lands" label="Pilón Lajas Biosphere Reserve and Communal Lands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488259" wikidata="Q5553285" url="?curid=488259" title="Gertrude Blanch">
<text>Gertrude Blanch (February 2, 1897 – January 1, 1996) was an American mathematician who did pioneering work in numerical analysis and computation. She was a leader of the Mathematical Tables Project in New York from its beginning. She worked later as the assistant director and leader of the Numerical Analysis at UCLA computing division and was head of mathematical research for the Aerospace Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio.

==Early years and education==
Blanch was born on February 2, 1897, as Gittel Kaimowitz in Kolno to Wolfe Kaimowitz and Dora Blanc. Kolno was historically a part of Poland, but was part of the Russian Empire at the time. Blanch was the youngest of seven or nine children. Wolfe Kaimowitz emigrated to the United States, and in 1907, Dora Blanc, ten-year-old Blanch, and one other daughter joined him in New York.

Blanch attended schools within Brooklyn, New York, and graduated from Eastern District High School in 1914. Later that year, Kaimowitz died, so Blanch decided to take a job to support her family. Blanch worked clerical positions for fourteen years (1914-1928), saving money for school along the way. She became an American citizen in 1921. After her mother died in 1927, Blanch started taking evening classes at Washington Square College, part of New York University. In 1932, Blanch received her Bachelor of Science degree in Mathematics with a minor in Physics from New York University. She graduated with summa cum laude and was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, a prestigious academic honor society. That same year, she changed her name from Kaimowitz to Blanch, an Americanized version of her mother&#x27;s name. After writing her thesis titled &quot;&quot;Properties of the Veneroni Transformation in S4&quot;,&quot; she received her Ph.D. from Cornell University in algebraic geometry in 1935. The results from her thesis were published in the American Journal of Mathematics in 1936.

==Career==
Blanch was unable to find a job in her area of study after she graduated with her PhD, due to the Great Depression. For a year (1935-1936), she worked in place of a colleague on leave at Hunter College. Afterwards, she worked a clerical position.

Blanch enrolled in an evening course on relativity at Brooklyn College, instructed by Arnold Lowan. Upon learning of Blanch&#x27;s PhD in mathematics, Lowan extended an invitation to Blanch to join the Works Progress Administration project, where she was assigned to a supervisory position. In February 1938, she began work on the Mathematical Tables Project of the WPA, for which she was mathematical director and Chair of the Planning Committee. As a member of the Planning Committee, Blanch decided which mathematical functions were to be calculated, and constructed the computing plans used by the computers. While the Planning Committee was in operation, it included women other than Blanch such as Ida Rhodes, Jenny Rosenthal, and Irene Stegun. The Planning Committee was in charge of 450 human computers with varying knowledge of mathematics.

Blanch&#x27;s duties entailed designing algorithms that were executed by teams of human computers under her direction. Many of these computers possessed only rudimentary mathematical skills, but the algorithms and error checking in the Mathematical Tables Project were sufficiently well designed that their output defined the standard for transcendental function solutions for decades. This project later became the Computation Laboratory of the National Bureau of Standards. During her last two years at the WPA, she worked as an evening tutor at Brooklyn College.

The Mathematical Tables Project became an independent organization following the termination of the WPA at the end of 1942. During World War II, it operated as a major computing office for the US government and did calculations for the Office of Scientific Research and Development, the Army&#x27;s map grid, the Navy&#x27;s LORAN radio navigation system, the Manhattan Project and other institutions. The project also performed important calculations for Operation Overlord. Using a mathematical model developed by Jerzy Neyman, the group helped evaluate strategies designed to bomb the Normandy beaches. Blanch led the group throughout the war.

After the war, Blanch&#x27;s career was hampered by FBI suspicions that she was secretly a communist. During this time the National Bureau of Standards was investigated by the loyalty board of the Department of Commerce. Their evidence for her communist ties was scarce and included, for example, the observation that she had never married or had children, as well as the fact that her sister was affiliated with the Communist Party. In a May 1952 hearing, all charges were resolved. With her name cleared, she was able to resume her work.

Subsequently, she worked for the Institute for Numerical Analysis at UCLA until it was closed in June 1954. While at UCLA, she interviewed Grace Hopper for a position there, though Hopper instead took a position at UNIVAC. Blanch then became a mathematician for the computer division of Consolidated Engineering in Pasadena, California for a couple of months until a friend she had made at the Mathematical Tables Project, Chief mathematician Knox Millsaps, recruited her to be a senior mathematician for the Aerospace Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. The Air Force hired her to work on computations dealing with turbulence, air flow, and transonic and supersonic flight. In 1962, Blanch was promoted to government senior scientist. She was an early member of the ACM.

==Publications==
Blanch published over 30 articles on functional approximation, numerical analysis and Mathieu functions. Between 1940 and 1942, while at the Mathematical Tables Project, several important papers were jointly published with Lowan, including a project with physicist Hans Bethe which involved complex calculations to determine various properties of stars.
* The Gertrude Blanch Papers (1932–1996)
* Tables of Planck&#x27;s Radiation and Photon Functions (1940)
* Error in Hayashi&#x27;s Table of Bessel Functions for Complex Arguments (1941)
* On the Inversion of the Q-Series Associated with Jacobian Elliptic Functions (1942)
* The Internal Temperature Density Distribution of the Sun (1941)

==Honors, awards, and tributes==
In 1963, she was elected a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1964, she received the Federal Woman&#x27;s Award, an award for women who had exemplary professional service in the United States Government.
* Air Force Outstanding Performance Award (1958)
* Air Force Exceptional Service Award (1963)
* Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (1963)
* Federal Woman&#x27;s Award (1964)
* Inducted into the Portrait Gallery at the National Institution of Standards and Technology (2017)

Ida Rhodes dedicated her 1965 talk &quot;The Mighty Man-Computer Team&quot; to Blanch, saying &quot;She has always exemplified for me everything that is noble, true, and admirable in a human being. To her I owe whatever success I have had in my career, for she taught me everything I know about computation and numerical analysis.&quot;

In 1967, Gaetano Fichera wrote of &quot;the critical sharpness of [Blanch&#x27;s] mind, her sensitivity to the quantitative study of problems, her capacity to perceive the subtle barrier which separates a purely theoretical procedure from a method leading to effective evaluation and, above all her intransigeant scientific scrupulousness, all these many qualities make of her a very distinguished numerical analysis. Ample witness of our affirmation is not only is not only the high acknowledgment accorded to her mathematical activity but especially the imposing mass of her work in the field of numerical analysis.&quot;

==Later years==
Blanch retired in 1967 at the age of 69, but through Ohio State University continued working as a consultant for the Air Force until 1970 when Ohio State canceled all military funded contracts. Thereafter she moved to San Diego, California where she worked on her book about functional approximations until it was completed in 1982 but never published. Blanch then continued to work on numerical solutions of Mathieu functions, specifically concentrating on the use of continued fractions to achieve highly accurate results in a small number of computational steps to which she completed an unpublished manuscript. She continued this research until her death in January 1996.

The &quot;Gertrude Blanch Papers&quot;, 1932–1996 are accessible at the Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.

==References==

* Grier, David Alan, &quot;Gertrude Blanch of the Mathematical Tables Project&quot;, &quot;Annals of the History of Computing&quot;, 19.4 (1997), 18–27.
* Grier, David Alan, &quot;The Math Tables Project of the Work Projects Administration: the reluctant start of the computing era&quot;, &quot;Annals of the History of Computing&quot;, 20 (1998), 33–50.
* Grier, David Alan, &quot;When Computers Were Human&quot;, 2005.

==External links==
*&quot;Gertrude Blanch&quot;, Biographies of Women Mathematicians , Agnes Scott College
*Gertrude Blanch Papers, 1932-1996 Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
*Computer Oral History Collection: Dr. Gertrude Blanch, 1969-1973 Smithsonian National Museum of American History
*Gertrude Blanch, The History of Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing 
*Blanch Biography, University of St Andrews </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5553285" start="0" end="15" title="Gertrude Blanch" label="Gertrude Blanch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="69" end="82" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="110" end="128" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="133" end="144" title="computation" label="computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="313" end="317" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="416" end="447" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="451" end="463" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614791" start="556" end="561" title="Kolno" label="Kolno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="630" end="636" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="658" end="672" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="770" end="783" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q112740560" start="949" end="977" title="Eastern District High School" label="Eastern District High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339065" start="1291" end="1316" title="Washington Square College" label="Washington Square College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1326" end="1345" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="1523" end="1537" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1824" end="1842" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="1846" end="1864" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584927" start="1924" end="1955" title="American Journal of Mathematics" label="American Journal of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2075" end="2091" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446181" start="2164" end="2178" title="Hunter College" label="Hunter College"/>
<link wikidata="Q371625" start="2279" end="2295" title="Brooklyn College" label="Brooklyn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786846" start="2311" end="2323" title="Arnold Lowan" label="Arnold Lowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="2427" end="2456" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786846" start="2556" end="2583" title="Mathematical Tables Project" label="Mathematical Tables Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="2591" end="2594" title="Works Progress Administration" label="WPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987187" start="2929" end="2939" title="Ida Rhodes" label="Ida Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013946" start="2941" end="2956" title="Jenny Rosenthal Bramley" label="Jenny Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q274848" start="2962" end="2974" title="Irene Stegun" label="Irene Stegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202952" start="3020" end="3035" title="Computer (job description)" label="human computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q864333" start="3415" end="3438" title="transcendental function" label="transcendental function"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="3522" end="3550" title="National Bureau of Standards" label="National Bureau of Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3774" end="3786" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q501416" start="3879" end="3924" title="Office of Scientific Research and Development" label="Office of Scientific Research and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="3968" end="3973" title="LORAN" label="LORAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="4003" end="4020" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="4099" end="4117" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q539544" start="4159" end="4171" title="Jerzy Neyman" label="Jerzy Neyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4343" end="4346" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="4382" end="4391" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419906" start="4467" end="4480" title="Executive Order 9835" label="loyalty board"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="4488" end="4510" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="4708" end="4723" title="Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="4901" end="4905" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11641" start="4971" end="4983" title="Grace Hopper" label="Grace Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443793" start="5047" end="5053" title="UNIVAC" label="UNIVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976801" start="5119" end="5143" title="ElectroData Corporation" label="Consolidated Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5275" end="5288" title="Knox Millsaps" label="Knox Millsaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="5374" end="5405" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="5409" end="5421" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="5635" end="5638" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075290" start="5695" end="5719" title="Hybrid functional" label="functional approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908689" start="5744" end="5760" title="Mathieu function" label="Mathieu function"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="5923" end="5933" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="6425" end="6476" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273578" start="6794" end="6820" title="Federal Woman&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Federal Woman&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q982570" start="7276" end="7291" title="Gaetano Fichera" label="Gaetano Fichera"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="7961" end="7982" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908689" start="8317" end="8333" title="Mathieu function" label="Mathieu function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="8377" end="8395" title="continued fraction" label="continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="8657" end="8682" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="8684" end="8707" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="8709" end="8720" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826926" start="9248" end="9267" title="Agnes Scott College" label="Agnes Scott College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="9303" end="9328" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="9434" end="9481" title="Smithsonian National Museum of American History" label="Smithsonian National Museum of American History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="488277" wikidata="Q647405" url="?curid=488277" title="Wang Zhizhi">
<text>Wang Zhizhi (, pronounced ; born 8 July 1977) is a Chinese former professional basketball player who was the head coach of the Bayi Rockets, the team with which he spent his domestic career in the Chinese Basketball Association (CBA). He also played in the National Basketball Association (NBA) for the Dallas Mavericks, Los Angeles Clippers, and Miami Heat, becoming China&#x27;s first player to compete in the NBA.

==Early and personal life==
The son of two former basketball players, Wang Zhizhi started playing basketball at the age of 8, and when he was 14 his parents signed him up for the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, considering the PLA to have the best coaching and facilities in China. He grew up watching weekly NBA game broadcasts on television in Beijing, idolizing Hakeem Olajuwon and Charles Barkley. Although Wang was born in 1977, when processing his travel documents, authorities instead represented his birth year as 1979 so that he could participate longer in youth athletics competitions.

Wang has been married twice. The first marriage was to Song Yang, a real estate agent from Haicheng, Liaoning. They were married from 2000 to 2016 and had a son named Wang Xilin who was born in April 2004 in the United States. He is currently following in his father&#x27;s footsteps to becoming a professional basketball player. Wang Zhizhi is currently married to Zhou Lei, a television host from Chengdu, Sichuan. They had one private wedding at the end of 2018 followed by a second wedding in May 2019.

==Early CBA career==
Wang signed his first professional contract with the Bayi Rockets in 1994. When the Chinese Basketball Association staged its first season in 1995–96, Wang was one of the youngest players in the league, but he soon became a starter and key member on the star-studded squad.

From 1995–96 until his departure for the National Basketball Association after the 2000–01 season, he and the import-less Bayi Rockets won the first six CBA championships, but the team&#x27;s dynasty was upended by Yao Ming and the Shanghai Sharks as soon as Wang left for the NBA.

==NBA career==
To the surprise of almost all Chinese basketball officials and reporters, the Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association selected Wang with the 36th pick in the second round of the 1999 NBA draft. Dallas&#x27; assistant general manager Donnie Nelson had grown an interest in Wang ever since he spotted him in a 1993 game in Russia. Once Wang&#x27;s agent Xia Song learned about Wang&#x27;s real date of birth, which made him 22 and automatically eligible for the draft, he contacted Nelson and started arranging for his client to join the NBA. Xia was in Dallas on draft night, and had a proof of Wang&#x27;s age through his old military identification. Unprepared and confused, the Bayi Rockets refused to allow their only center to leave for the National Basketball Association, at least immediately.

After long periods of negotiations, Wang was finally let go by his team and the Chinese basketball officials to pursue his NBA dream, two years after he was drafted. He became the first ever Chinese player to play in the National Basketball Association. Wang arrived in Dallas after winning his last CBA championship title when there were fewer than ten games left in the 2000–01 season. Despite some adjustment difficulties, Wang managed well by averaging 4.8 points per game and 1.4 rebounds per game, making the team&#x27;s playoff roster. Two days after Dallas were eliminated from the playoffs, Wang hurried back to China to play in the 2001 East Asian Games according to an agreement formed between the Chinese authorities and the Dallas Mavericks. However, Wang still had one obligation to fulfill before being allowed to return to the National Basketball Association. His former club Bayi requested that he stay in China to play in the 2001 National Games in November 2001. Wang returned to Dallas after barely defeating Yao Ming&#x27;s Shanghai team by one point in the final, but he found that he had a lot of catching up to do as other players already had two months of preparation and training.

Wang&#x27;s contract with Dallas expired after the 2001–02 season. With his future up in the air, he decided that he would spend the summer in the United States, rather than returning to China for training, as the Dallas Mavericks had promised the Chinese basketball officials. Wang fired his agent Xia Song when the latter suggested otherwise, and following the advice of his American-born Chinese friend Simon Chan, moved to Los Angeles without telling either Dallas or his Chinese side about his intentions. During his stay, Chinese basketball officials faxed two letters to him urging him to return to China as soon as possible to train with the Chinese national basketball team. A major blow to all parties involved was an article by Jodie Valade that appeared in &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot; which hinted that Wang, who had not yet stated his intentions, might consider defecting to the United States. China sent two military officials who had known Wang very well to go to the United States for a final negotiation. During a press conference, Wang stressed that the relationship between him and the Chinese was like one between &quot;a son and a mother&quot;, and the conflict was all a big misunderstanding. He was ultimately dismissed from the Chinese national team for failing to return to China for practice in 2002.

Wang signed with the Los Angeles Clippers in 2002 and after a season with them, he was placed on waivers. The Miami Heat decided to sign Wang to a multi-year contract after picking him up. He became a free agent at the end of the 2004–05 season after playing for two seasons with Miami, over which he played 34 games and averaged 2.5 PPG.

==Later CBA career==
Following the 2004–05 season, Wang returned to China to rejoin Bayi in the Chinese Basketball Association, but would not be activated by the Rockets until the 2006–07 season. The impact of his return was immediate, as in March 2007, he led Bayi to their eighth CBA title. Wang was named CBA Finals MVP for the second time in his career as the Rockets beat the Guangdong Southern Tigers in the championship series.

He announced his retirement at the end of the 2013–14 season, but briefly returned to the court the next year, after Bayi went 0–7 in their first seven games. On July 12, 2016, Wang officially finalized his retirement from professional basketball. He had already become an assistant coach for the Rockets in 2015, and took over as head coach prior to the 2018–19 season.

==National team career==
Wang became the first ever Chinese player to be invited to play for the international squad against the best American high school players in the prestigious Nike Hoop Summit. He started the game and scored six points and six rebounds. He was then offered a basketball scholarship from John Thompson to play for Georgetown University. Wang was included in the Chinese national basketball team for the 1996 Summer Olympics, where he averaged 11.1 points per game and 5.6 rebounds per game, helping the team to finish as 8th place overall. After leading the Chinese national team to the 1999 FIBA Asia Championship title, Wang again starred for China in the 2000 Summer Olympics, averaging 13.5 points per game and 5.0 rebounds per game.

On 10 April 2006, following weeks of rumors from the Chinese media, Wang returned to China from the National Basketball Association after being expelled from the national team for four years due to conflicts with Chinese officials. He publicly apologized for his past mistakes and stated that he wanted to represent his national team in the 2006 FIBA World Championship as well as the 2008 Summer Olympics. Over a period of four weeks in the lead-up to the 2006 FIBA World Championship, he was a significant contributor to the Chinese national team in the absence of injured Houston Rockets player Yao Ming, scoring 4.3 points per game and 2.6 rebounds per game in eight matches before suffering a torn ligament during an exhibition against France in July 2006. Wang recovered in time to play in the tournament and averaged 8.2 points per game and 3.5 rebounds per game.

==Career statistics==

===CBA statistics===
Regular season and Playoffs combined
===NBA statistics===
====Regular season====
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Dallas
| 5 || 0 || 7.6 || .421 || .000 || .800 || 1.4 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 4.8
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Dallas
| 55 || 0 || 10.9 || .440 || .414 || .737 || 2.0 || 0.4 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 5.6
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 
| align=&quot;left&quot; | L.A. Clippers
| 41 || 1 || 10.0 || .383 || .348 || .724 || 1.9 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 4.4
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Miami
| 16 || 0 || 7.1 || .370 || .286 || .900 || 1.1 || 0.1 || 0.2 || 0.3 || 3.0
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Miami
| 19 || 0 || 4.8 || .472 || .667 || .583 || 1.0 || 0.3 || 0.2 || 0.1 || 2.3
| colspan=&quot;2&quot; align=center|Career
| 136 || 1 || 9.2 || .417 || .387 || .735 || 1.7 || 0.3 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 4.0
====Playoffs====
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 2001
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Dallas
| 5 || 0 || 4.6 || .375 || .500 || 1.000 || 0.4 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 2.0
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 2002
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Dallas
| 8 || 0 || 5.5 || .438 || .500 || .500 || 1.0 || 0.4 || 0.0 || 0.1 || 2.5
| align=&quot;left&quot; | 2004
| align=&quot;left&quot; | Miami
| 3 || 0 || 2.3 || .000 || .000 || .000 || 0.0 || 0.3 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 0.0
| colspan=&quot;2&quot; align=center|Career
| 16 || 0 || 4.6 || .417 || .500 || .667 || 0.7 || 0.3 || 0.2 || 0.1 || 1.9
== References ==
== External links ==

* Expelled star Wang makes humble return to China (Washington Post)
* Stats at Basketball-reference.com
* Wang wants spot on Chinese National Team (ESPN.com)
* Player profile at www.Asia-Basket.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q647405" start="0" end="11" title="Wang Zhizhi" label="Wang Zhizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="79" end="89" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505050" start="127" end="139" title="Bayi Rockets" label="Bayi Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="197" end="227" title="Chinese Basketball Association" label="Chinese Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="257" end="288" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="303" end="319" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q976396" start="321" end="341" title="Los Angeles Clippers" label="Los Angeles Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="347" end="357" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="597" end="626" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q273256" start="782" end="797" title="Hakeem Olajuwon" label="Hakeem Olajuwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192707" start="802" end="817" title="Charles Barkley" label="Charles Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q599867" start="983" end="998" title="youth athletics" label="youth athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011073" start="1105" end="1123" title="Haicheng, Liaoning" label="Haicheng, Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="1413" end="1429" title="Chengdu, Sichuan" label="Chengdu, Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505050" start="1596" end="1608" title="Bayi Rockets" label="Bayi Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="1627" end="1657" title="Chinese Basketball Association" label="Chinese Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590927" start="1685" end="1692" title="1995–96 CBA season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="1859" end="1890" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598160" start="1901" end="1908" title="2000–01 CBA season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="2033" end="2041" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502166" start="2050" end="2065" title="Shanghai Sharks" label="Shanghai Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="2194" end="2210" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="2218" end="2249" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q598538" start="2310" end="2324" title="1999 NBA draft" label="1999 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q357561" start="2365" end="2378" title="Donnie Nelson" label="Donnie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2561" end="2597" title="Eligibility for the NBA draft#Automatic eligibility" label="automatically eligible for the draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505050" start="2812" end="2824" title="Bayi Rockets" label="Bayi Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132667" start="3305" end="3319" title="2000–01 NBA season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370049" start="3575" end="3596" title="2001 East Asian Games" label="2001 East Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872126" start="3877" end="3896" title="2001 National Games of China" label="2001 National Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="3962" end="3970" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132622" start="4192" end="4206" title="2001–02 NBA season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q862262" start="4791" end="4823" title="Chinese national basketball team" label="Chinese national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="4916" end="4939" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q976396" start="5498" end="5518" title="Los Angeles Clippers" label="Los Angeles Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="5587" end="5597" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q941115" start="5707" end="5721" title="2004–05 NBA season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q941115" start="5852" end="5866" title="2004–05 NBA season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607390" start="5997" end="6011" title="2006–07 CBA season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873974" start="6125" end="6139" title="CBA Finals MVP" label="CBA Finals MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629395" start="6198" end="6223" title="Guangdong Southern Tigers" label="Guangdong Southern Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057371" start="6299" end="6313" title="2013–14 CBA season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q56042780" start="6608" end="6623" title="2018–19 CBA season" label="2018–19 season."/>
<link wikidata="Q2840859" start="6807" end="6823" title="Nike Hoop Summit" label="Nike Hoop Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459540" start="6935" end="6948" title="John Thompson (basketball)" label="John Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="6961" end="6982" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q862262" start="7009" end="7041" title="Chinese national basketball team" label="Chinese national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005505" start="7050" end="7070" title="Basketball at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653622" start="7234" end="7261" title="1999 ABC Championship" label="1999 FIBA Asia Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005491" start="7305" end="7325" title="Basketball at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="7486" end="7517" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q27933" start="7771" end="7791" title="Basketball at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q241329" start="7843" end="7871" title="2006 FIBA World Championship" label="2006 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="7961" end="7976" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="7984" end="7992" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q499328" start="8127" end="8133" title="France national basketball team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="8438" end="8444" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="8575" end="8581" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q976396" start="8714" end="8727" title="Los Angeles Clippers" label="L.A. Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="8860" end="8865" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="8997" end="9002" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722473" start="9244" end="9248" title="2001 NBA Playoffs" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="9276" end="9282" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724313" start="9386" end="9390" title="2002 NBA Playoffs" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="9418" end="9424" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603423" start="9527" end="9531" title="2004 NBA Playoffs" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="9559" end="9564" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="9850" end="9865" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="9947" end="9951" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
</links>
</doc>
