<doc id="498834" wikidata="Q2663901" url="?curid=498834" title="Culture of Tunisia">
<text>Tunisian culture is a product of more than three thousand years of history and an important multi-ethnic influx. Ancient Tunisia was a major civilization crossing through history; different cultures, civilizations and multiple successive dynasties contributed to the culture of the country over centuries with varying degrees of influence. Among these cultures were the Carthaginian – their native civilization, Roman (Roman Africans), Vandal, Jewish, Christian, Arab, Islamic, Turkish, and French, in addition to native Amazigh. This unique mixture of cultures made Tunisia, with its strategic geographical location in the Mediterranean, the core of several civilizations of Mare Nostrum.

The history of Tunisia reveals this rich past where different successive Mediterranean cultures had a strong presence. After the Carthaginian Republic, the Roman Empire came and left a lasting effect on the land with various monuments and cities such the El-Jem Amphitheater and the archaeological site of the ancient city of Carthage, which is classified as a World Heritage Site, one of eight found in Tunisia.

After a few centuries of the presence of Christianity, represented by the Church of Africa, the Arab Islamic conquest transformed the whole country and founded a new city called Al-Qayrawan, a renowned center for religious and intellectual pursuits.

With the annexation of Tunisia by the Ottoman Empire, the center of power shifted from Tunis to Istanbul. This shift in power allowed the local government of the new Ottoman Province to gain more independence, which was maintained until the institution of the French Protectorate (which was later seen as occupation). The protectorate introduced elements of French culture.

The important elements of Tunisian culture are diverse and represent a unique, mixed heritage. This heritage can be experienced first-hand in museums such as the Bardo, city architecture such as Sidi Bou Said or the medina of Tunis, cuisine such as French cheeses and croissants, music reflecting Ottoman influences, and other areas of Tunisian culture.

==Cultural diversity==
The &quot;Encyclopédie 360&quot; describes Tunisia as a country that &quot;did not develop truly original art&quot; but is &quot;strongly marked by various influences and is engrained with monuments which illustrate the various stages of its history &quot;. In his thesis study on Cultural Policy in Tunisia, Rafik Said has mused that, &quot;this relatively small area has produced estates, overlapping of cultures, and a confrontation of morals and doctrines throughout its history. Janice Rhodes Deledalle has referred to Tunisia as &quot;cosmopolitan&quot; and has said that &quot;Tunisia cannot be considered in the category of as other colonies&quot;, because of the diversity of cultures embedded in Tunisia&#x27;s heritage throughout the ages.

===History===
Tunisia&#x27;s cultural life dates to prehistoric times, as illustrated by dolmens near Bou Salem and rock carvings of the Tunisian Sahara. The Hermaïon of El Guettar, discovered near the city of El Guettar in the south, is the oldest extant religious display discovered.

The dawning era of Tunisian cultural history was shaped by Carthaginian influences including Phoenician, Greek. There is much evidence of Phoenician and western artwork and glass work found in Punic tombs, notably in masks which the Phoenician used to drive out evil spirits or demons of death with their decorations, such as the lotus motifs found on many objects or in the artistic design buildings. The paintings and sculptures of the lids of sarcophagi from the necropolis of Carthage and El Alia, the architecture of the mausoleum of Dougga are characterized by the combined influence of Greece and Egypt. In addition, we find a trace of Hellenic influences overlapping Roman and Punic culture. In sculpture found in Tunisia, there has been a distinct, almost symbolic evolution towards a style which is a representative, idealized perfection of a body, state, etc. Greek pottery is also emulated, and it is a fact that potters from Greece were employed to produce objects in Carthage.

The works of Roman Tunisia do not differ greatly from those of Europe. Among those handed down to us are Thuburbo Majus, Gigthis, the amphitheater of El Jem, the capital of Dougga, the Baths of Antoninus at Carthage and the Triumphal Arch of Caracalla. Subsequently, when Christianity was founded in Carthage, numerous monuments were erected. The Church in Africa, having been illustrated with famous martyrs such as St. Cyprian of Carthage or bishops as Saint Augustin d&#x27;Hippone, grew quickly in prestige. Many Christian monuments are erected including the catacombs of Sousse or the Makthar baptistery. Basilicas in multiple aisles, like St. Cyprian, were built based on the Syrian influences. However, the Church suffered persecution under a long reign of the Vandals who confiscated some of its properties. The arrival of the Byzantines lead to the disappearance of the latter and the restoration of a dense network of Orthodox bishops. During this period, many hills were crowned with Byzantine fortifications, such as in Kélibia.

With the Arab conquest, specifically during the reign of the dynasty Aghlabids, Kairouan became a renowned intellectual center, attracting many scholars. It played an important role in translation and research, particularly in the dissemination of medical science knowledge. In mathematics, contributions to computational algorithms were also made in Kairouan. The Arabs then erected buildings specific to Islamic architecture. While some retain a Byzantine essence, such as Three Doors Mosque in Kairouan (built in the ninth century) or ribat Sousse, many of the ancient columns are purely Arab such as the great Zitouna Mosque of Tunis (ninth century), the Great Mosque of Mahdia and the Great Mosque of Kairouan.

In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, poets, scholars, historians increased in number in Tunisia. Zitouna Mosque, in the medina of Tunis housed the first Islamic university, and replaced Kairouan as an active center of intellectuals that included doctors and scholars, such as Ibn Zaïtoun, Ibn Al Abhar, Ibn Al Gafsi and Ibn Arafa. Thanks to scholars like Ibn Khaldun and writers such as Aboul-Qacem Echebbi, Tunisia for centuries became a major cultural center in the Arab-Muslim world and Mediterranean.

During the Turkish conquest in the sixteenth century, mosques, such as that of Sidi Mahrez Mosque in Tunis were erected in a manner to those in Constantinople, although the Zaouias generally retain their north African style in Kairouan.

The French protectorate in turn left its mark on local architecture by adding a new urban style that can be found in the construction of a new city plan juxtaposed against the old medina of Tunis. Heavily influenced by Paris, with the Avenue Bourguiba, the style is known as &quot;Rococo Tunisian &quot;.

The Tunisian revolution brought about important changes to the intersection of art and politics in post-2011 Tunisia.

==Nation ==

The most spoken language is Tunisian Arabic. Other languages include French and Berber. Mediterranean Lingua Franca and Sened are languages that are not spoken anymore. National identity is strong and Tunisian efforts to create a national culture have proved stronger than in the nineteenth century. National culture and heritage is constantly referred to with reference to the country&#x27;s modern history, in particular, the fight against the French protectorate and the construction of the modern state that followed from the 1950s. This is celebrated through national holidays, in the names of streets recalling historical figures or key dates or the subject of films or documentaries. With the start of the rule of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali on November 7, 1987, the official reference to the figure 7 and the theme of &quot;Change&quot; contributes to the perpetuation of that tradition.

===Flag===

The national flag of Tunisia is predominantly red and consists of a white circle in the middle containing a red crescent around a five-pointed star. The Bey of Tunis Al-Husayn II ibn Mahmud decided to create the flag after the Battle of Navarino on October 20, 1827, which was adopted in 1831 or 1835. It remained the country&#x27;s official flag during its time as a French protectorate, and was confirmed as the national flag of the Republic of Tunisia with the signing of the Constitution of Tunisia on June 1, 1959. It was not until June 30, 1999 that its proportions and design were clearly specified in law.

The crescent and star recalls the Ottoman flag and is therefore an indication of Tunisia&#x27;s history as a part of the Ottoman Empire. It differs from the Turkish flag, however, in the color of the crescent and the position of the star and circle. The crescent is white on the Turkish flag, but red on the Tunisian flag. On the Turkish flag, the star is off-centered, while on the Tunisian flag, the star and circle is located in the center of the flag.

===Coat of arms===
As for the national coat of arms, they are officially adopted in 1861 and include revised versions on June 21, 1956 and May 30, 1963. The top has a Carthaginian galley sailing on the sea while the lower part is divided vertically and on the right depicts a black lion seizing a silver scimitar. A banner bears the national motto: &quot;Liberty, Order, Justice&quot;.

===Jasmine===
Imported by the Andalusians in the sixteenth century, jasmine has become the national flower of Tunisia. The gathering takes place at dawn and then, upon nightfall, when young boys collect small bouquets, and later sell them to passersby on the street or to motorists stopped at intersections.

Furthermore, jasmine is the subject of a specific sign language. A man who wears jasmine on his left ear indicates that he is single and in addition, offering white jasmine is seen as a proof of love while on the contrary, offering odorless winter jasmine is a sign of insolence.

===Hamsa===

The hamsa (, also romanized khamsa), is a palm-shaped amulet popular in Tunisia and more generally in the Maghreb and commonly used in jewelry and wall hangings. Depicting the open right hand, an image recognized and used as a sign of protection in many times throughout history, the hamsa is believed to provide defense against the evil eye. It has been theorized that its origins lie in Carthage (modern-day Tunisia) and may have been associated with the Goddess Tanit.

===Sign of Tanit===

The sign of Tanit is an anthropomorph symbol present on many archaeological remains of the Ancient Carthage Civilization. Both the symbol and the name of the goddess Tanit, are still frequently used within Tunisian culture such as with the tradition of Omek Tannou or the grand film prize of the Tanit d&#x27;or. Some scholars also relate the name of the capital Tunis and by extant the one of the modern country and its people to the Carthaginian goddess &quot;Tanith&quot; (&#x27;Tanit or Tanut), as many ancient cities were named after patron deities.

==Religion==
The Tunisian Constitution provides freedom of thoughts and beliefs, as well as the free exercise of religion, as long as it does not affect public order. The government generally respects this right but do not allow the establishment of political parties based on religion. Muslim religious holidays such as Eid el-Adha, Eid el-Fitr or Mouled are considered national holidays. The government also recognizes the sanctity of religious holidays for non-Muslims, particularly those of the monotheistic religions.

Islam is the main official religion of Tunisia with a rate of around 99% of the population. 99% of Tunisians are Sunni Muslims of the Maliki rite, the rest being attached to the Hanafi school of thought. There is also a small community of Muslim Sufis but there are no statistics regarding its size. The country is also dotted with small white mausoleums scattered in rural and urban areas and called marabouts. These tombs of saints, often male, are usually housed in places such as caves, hills, springs or points on the coast. Through meditation, these characters were supposed to heal the sick and blind. Their graves are still key to the relationship between the human and the divine in the context of festivals bringing together members of a particular community (a village, or extended family or tribe). Today, some Tunisians continue to pray and to ask them for favors.

In the 1970s, an Islamist movement, based on close adherence to the Koran and other sacred texts, opposed to some unorthodox practices developed and reached its climax with the formation of a political movement, the Ennahda (&quot;Renaissance&quot;) in the 1980s. Most of their leaders were arrested or exiled during the 1990s.

Roman Catholics, Jews, Greek Orthodox, and Protestants are some others. These religious groups are promised their rights of practicing their religion by Tunisian government. The country is characterized by its tolerance and openness to other cultures. For instance, the teaching of Islam is compulsory in public schools but the program of religious studies at the secondary level also includes the history of Judaism and Christianity. The Tunisians also retain some native beliefs of Berber origin such as the evil eye. A number of practices, such as shutters painted blue are also used to repel evil spirits.

==Languages==

Tunisia is homogeneous in terms of language, since nearly all of the population masters French and Arabic (the state Official language) and speaks Tunisian Arabic which is the mother-tongue of almost all Tunisians. Tunisian Arabic is actually a dialect – or more accurately a set of dialects, for which there is no official body of standards. It is established on a berber and punic substratum, influenced by the languages of the people that lived or administered the region, during the course of history, including: Arabic, Turkish, Italian, Spanish and French. Tunisian Arabic is not understood by most Arab speaking countries as it does derive from a mixture of a few languages. Tunisian is spoken mostly in the context of a daily dialogue between Tunisians and within the family. The chelha, meanwhile, is spoken by less than 1% of the population, mainly in the semi-Berber villages of the south, including Chenini, Douiret, Matmata, Tamezrett, etc., and in some villages of the island of Djerba, mainly Guellala/Iquallalen, Ajim, Sedouikech / Azdyuch and Ouirsighen / At Ursighen.

During the French protectorate in Tunisia, the French introduced many institutions, especially in education. These became a strong vehicle for dissemination of the French language, which quickly became a marker of social advancement and openness to more modern and liberal values.
From independence, the country gradually became Arabized even if the administration, justice and education had long been bilingual, while the knowledge of European languages had been enhanced by exposure of Tunisia to the continent through television. Visas were introduced by the French minister Charles Pasqua in 1986 for population movements between Tunisia and France. Beginning in October 1999, commercial establishments were forced to give twice the space for Arabic characters as Latin characters. At the same time, the administration of Tunisia was forced to communicate only in Arabic, although only the departments of Defense and Justice and the legislature are actually fully Arabized. Like many other documents produced by the administration, the Official Journal of the Republic of Tunisia, which enacts laws and decrees, is written in Arabic but is translated in French, although this version has no legal value and can not be considered official. In this context, the use of French seemed to be on the decline despite the increased number of graduates of the educational system, which leads to the fact that much of French remains an important social indicator. Since it is widely practiced in the business, the medical world and cultural world, we can even consider that it has gentrified.

Kindergarten and the first three grades of school are taught entirely in Arabic; thereafter, the second cycle of primary and secondary education is half Arabic and half French. English was also taught from the age of 15 from 1970, from the age of 10 from 1994, from the age of 14 from 1997, and from the age of 12 in 2000.

==Education==

===Development of education===

There was, until the nineteenth century, no modern state education in Tunisia. There was actually a score of European schools run by religious institutions while traditional learning was taught in the Zaytuna mosque and the kouttab, particularly the religious sciences studied from commentaries on the Qur&#x27;an and Sunnah.

The first educational institution of modern Tunisia was the Sadiki College, founded in 1875 by the Grand Vizier Pasha Kheireddine, followed by the Khaldounia School in 1896. In 1956, after independence, began a policy of education reform that was characterized by the unity, the nationalization and the Arabization of the education system. In this context, Habib Bourguiba said in 1958: &quot;Living on the margins of institutions and harassing the protectorate system for recognition of our rights, I told myself that if the government passed into our hands, we&#x27;d address primarily the problem of education.&quot; This &quot;problem&quot; was so vast that the state gave priority to national education and culture from then on. This is one reason why the Tunisian government specifically created a body dedicated to culture, then called &quot;Ministry of Cultural Affairs and Information&quot;. The second reason was the need to separate culture and education, the latter no longer the only means of transmitting culture. The third reason was the responsibility to the nation.

In 1966, as part of increasing political literacy of the workforce, the Institute of Adult Education became responsible for making some 150,000 people literate in a period of five years. It conducted these activities mainly in the productive sectors – agricultural cooperatives, factories, mines and large companies – but also in the craft centres, army, prisons and youth centres. The lessons of this institute include, in addition to reading, writing and arithmetic lessons, geography, history, civics, law, and social and religious education. There are also opportunities provided to take additional courses of vocational training. The length of the main course is two years with five sessions of one hour and a half per day, a total of 450 hours, culminating with a certificate of social education. A third year bilingual course was created in 1968 for those wishing to continue their studies. Some 1,090 people attended this course during the 1968–1969 school year, resulting in the institute being awarded the Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Prize during the third International Day of Literacy, on September 8, 1969, &quot;for decisive contribution to the launch and implementation of a national adult literacy in which is developed, tested and has implemented an effective methodology for literacy and education &quot;.

On December 31, 1966, there were 21 public libraries for children and independent public libraries for adults, the former run by women. Mobile teachers and librarians were employed to ensure the promotion of culture in rural areas, and some 52 centers of literature were established with the purpose of loaning books for home study. This measure was aimed at increasing the development of reading habits into the customs of the Tunisian people.

===Educational system===
The non-compulsory preschool education, which is for children 3 to 6 years of age, is provided in kindergartens. Basic education is compulsory and free, from 6 to 16 years, and is divided into two cycles: primary school for the first six years, followed by college for another three years. This course is sanctioned by a diploma of graduation from basic education to enable graduates to access secondary education (always free) taught in high schools for four years after the 1995 reform. Students are then directed to a second cycle of three years with five subjects (letters, science, technology, computer science and economics and management) and sanctioned by the BA for access to higher education. Tunisia has twelve universities – five in Tunis, one in Sousse, one in Sfax, one at Kairouan, one in Gabès, one in Gafsa, one in Monastir and one in Jendouba – but it also has 178 other institutions, including 24 colleges for Technology Studies (ISET) and six higher institutes of teacher training (ISFM).

There are two secondary schools in Tunisia run by the French government: the Lycée Pierre Mendes-France and the Lycée Gustave Flaubert. These apply methods and programs similar to those in France. There is also the American Cooperative School of Tunis, the International School of Carthage, the British International School of Tunis and the Tunis International School. New updates to the educational curriculum have been implemented during the last 20 years, so that it is now qualified to be an international system. 80% of Tunisians hold some kind of degree, almost 66% holding a bachelor&#x27;s. The penetration rate of education among Tunisian is 87%. Attendance remains strong despite high tuition fees (from 1.400 to 1.800 dinars per year in the cycle). Originally intended to educate the children of expatriates and a Francophile elite, they now attract a majority of Tunisians (over 60% of the 3,000 students today); the Tunisian bourgeoisie, in particular, are attracted by the multicultural courses and the possibility of pursuing higher studies in France. As a result, the Paris Dauphine University is considering opening an office in Tunisia in 2009 to accommodate 1,000 students.

Vocational training is provided by a group of public operators which include the Tunisian Agency for Vocational Training, which provides instructional supervision of all public and private operators. The diplomas issued after an initial training are given at three levels: the certificate of vocational aptitude (CAP) which is a course lasting a minimum of one year after basic education, certification as professional engineer (construction) which is a course lasting a minimum of one year after the first cycle of secondary education after obtaining a CPC, and a higher technical certificate (BTP) from a course lasting a minimum of two years after the baccalaureate or after obtaining the construction certificate.

In 2001, 19.9% of the Tunisian national budget was spent on education. In 2005, the literacy rate was 76.2%, and the enrollment of children 12 to 17 years was 66% among both boys and girls. Access to higher education is 27% of the age group it concerns.

===Museums===


The Bardo National Museum is one of the largest institutions of its kind in the Mediterranean, consisting of archaeological treasures from over several millennia by many cultures. The museum officially opened on May 7, 1888, and offers one of the finest and largest collections of mosaics of ancient Rome. The Archaeological Museum of Sousse, founded in 1951, has the second largest collection of mosaics after the Bardo. The Oceanographic Museum of Salammbo, with its 11 rooms, is the main Tunisian museum dedicated to the sea. The National Museum of Islamic Art in Tunisia has several collections of pottery, pieces of Korans and calligraphy dating from when Raqqada occupied the Aghlabids capital, from the 9th century.

In the 1970s, a program was implemented in cooperation with UNESCO. It provides four types of museum: museums synthesis, regional museums, local museums and specialized museums. The Bardo Museum is a good example of museum synthesis since this type of museum is expected to house objects from all periods of the history of Tunisia without taking into account the origin of these.

The existence of these museums is justified by the fact that they illustrate the evolution of artistic creation over the civilizations. Regional museums are limited to chief towns and governorates, specializing in the history of each region. As for local museums, they are part of a policy of decentralization of culture to participate through museum education of the masses by encouraigng more and more people to visit the museums. Some local museums exist in Makthar, Utica, Carthage and Monastir. Finally, specialized museums themselves can be divided into two other categories of museums: the museums dedicated to a historical period and museums specializing in a given subject. In the first category, there is already the Dar Hussein museum, entirely devoted to the medieval Tunisia. In the second category, two projects were selected: the mosaic museum and a Paleo-Christian museum. The mosaic museum is fully justified by the richness of Tunisia in art museums and provides an evolution both thematically and chronologically on the subject. As for the Paleo-Christian Museum, it is now located in Carthage.

Other specialized museums are also considered as museums of culture and science museums. These are used to trace the history and evolution of technology.

==Arts==
Most of the country&#x27;s older art came from the influences of China, Spain, Persia and the Near East forming the style known as Arabesque. Tunisian artists are known for their mosaics and pottery. Their mosaics use a variety of colors in repetitive patterns to adorn walls and floors by depicting a story or person. Mosaics are often used in architecture by implementing the use of geometric shapes and accenting with gold. Though, the displays of some artwork can be seen on buildings and architecture, one could find many sources of art in one place in the Bardo Museum in Tunis.

===Music===

Tunisian music is the result of a cultural mix. According to Mohammed Abdel Wahab, Tunisian music has also been influenced by old Andalusian songs injected with Turkish, Persian and Greek influences. He believes that the Tunisian music has undergone three phases of outside influences: the first from the East and whose center was in Mecca and Medina, the second coming from Muslim Spain which was the center of Andalusia and the last coming from the Ottoman Empire and whose center was Istanbul. The legacy of its three phases are illustrated respectively in the creation of Tunisian traditional music, the Malouf the introduction of the Nuba in Tunisian music, and finally the use of forms such as Turkish, Samai and Bashraf. Also influenced by Western culture, it is relatively diversified.

Of major note in Tunisian classical music is the Malouf. Deriving from the reign of the Aghlabids in the 15th century, it is a particular type of Arab-Andalusian music. In urban areas it uses stringed instruments (fiddle, oud and Kanun) and percussion (darbuka) while in rural areas, it may also be accompanied by instruments like the mezoued, gasba and the zurna.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, musical activity was dominated by the liturgical repertoire associated with different religious brotherhoods and secular repertoire which consisted of instrumental pieces and songs in different Andalusian forms and styles of origins, essentially borrowing characteristics of musical language. In 1930 The Rachidia was founded well known thanks to artists from the Jewish community. The founding in 1934 of a musical school help revive Arab Andalusian music largely to a social and cultural revival led by the elite of the time who became aware of the risks of loss of the musical heritage and which they believed threatened the foundations of Tunisian national identity. The institution did not take long to assemble an elite group of musicians and poets and scholars. The creation of Radio Tunis in 1938 allowed musicians are greater opportunity to disseminate their works.

The 1960s and 1970s witnessed the emergence of composers and performers working mostly in the orchestra of the Tunisian Radio and Television. Song using melodies and popular rhythms experienced a significant rise. From the 1980s, the music scene saw the emergence of a generation of musicians, composers and performers of Arab and Western musical training who believed that Tunisian music needed new song writing techniques. The emergence of new patterns of racial and improvised music since the late 1990s changed the musical landscape of Tunisia. At the same time, the majority of the population is attracted by the music of Arab origin (Egyptian, Lebanese or Syrian). Popular western music has also had major success with the emergence of many groups and festivals, including rock music, hip hop, reggae and jazz.

Among the major Tunisian contemporary artists include Hedi Habbouba, Saber Rebaï, Dhafer Youssef, Belgacem Bouguenna, Sonia M&#x27;barek and Latifa. Other notable musicians include Salah El Mahdi, Anouar Brahem, Zied Gharsa and Lotfi Bouchnak.

===Cinema===

Tunisian cinema is today recognized as one of the most liberal, inventive, and prize-winning cinemas of the Arab world. Beginning in the 1990s, Tunisia became an attractive place for filming, and numerous successful companies have emerged serving the foreign film industry.

Cinema has been present in Tunisia since its first world appearance. Starting from 1896, the Lumière brothers were showing animated films in the streets of Tunis. In 1919, the first feature-length movie produced on the African continent, &quot;Les Cinq gentlemen maudits&quot; (&quot;The Five Accursed Gentlemen&quot;), was filmed in Tunisia. In 1924, Zohra directed a medium-length film called &quot;Ain Al-Ghazal&quot; (&quot;The Girl from Carthage&quot;), making him one of the first native filmmakers on the African continent. In 1966, the first feature Tunisian film, &quot;Al-Fajr&quot; (&quot;The Dawn&quot;), was directed and produced by Omar Khlifi; it was 95 minutes long, shot on 35 mm film. Tunisia also hosts the Carthage Film Festival which has been taking place since 1966. The festival, which gives priority to films from Arab and African countries, is the oldest film festival on the African continent and the Arab World.

In 1927, the first Tunisian film distribution company, Tunis-Film, started its activities. After independence, movies were exclusively produced by SATPEC (Société Anonyme Tunisienne de Production et d&#x27;Expansion Cinématographique), which controlled cinema and filming productions in the country at the time. Nevertheless, during the 1980s, private production companies and studios emerged and wanted to make Tunisia the Mediterranean Hollywood. The producer Tarak Ben Ammar, a nephew of Wasila Bourguiba, succeeded in attracting some big production companies to shoot in his studios in Monastir. Major foreign movies were filmed in Tunisia, including Roman Polanski&#x27;s &quot;Pirates&quot; and Franco Zeffirelli&#x27;s &quot;Jesus of Nazareth&quot;. After visiting Tunisia, George Lucas was seduced by the natural beauty and authentic old architecture of some southern Tunisian towns, where he decided to film the important Tatooine scenes of &quot;Star Wars&quot;, as well as &quot;Indiana Jones&quot;. Moreover, Anthony Minghella filmed the nine Academy Awards winner &quot;The English Patient&quot; in a southwestern oasis of the country.

Domestic Tunisian productions were rare. The few movies which were produced since 1967 tried to reflect the new social dynamics, development, identity research and modernity shock. Some of them achieved relative success outside Tunisia, including &quot;La Goulette&quot; (&quot;Halq El-Wadi&quot;, 1996). Directed by Ferid Boughedir, &quot;La Goulette&quot; showed a flashback of typical community life in the eponymous small suburb, during a period when Muslims, Jews and Christians lived together in tolerance and peace. Boughedir&#x27;s &quot;Halfaouine: Child of the Terraces&quot; (&quot;Asfour Stah&quot;, 1990) is possibly the biggest popular success in the history of Tunisian cinema; it showed the life of a child from the Halfouine suburb of Tunis in the 1960s, and his quest to understand relationships, the world of women and how to be a man.

In earlier films, including &quot;Man of Ashes&quot; (&quot;Rih Essedd&quot;, 1986), director and writer Nouri Bouzid depicts controversial issues in Tunisian society, addressing social issues like prostitution, pedophilia and inter-faith relations between Tunisian Muslims and Tunisian Jews. In the 1991 film &quot;Bezness&quot;, he explores the country&#x27;s emerging sexual tourism trade.

&quot;The Ambassadors&quot; (As-Soufraa, 1975), directed by Naceur Ktari, portrayed the life of immigrant Maghrebins in France and their struggle against racism. The film won the Golden Tanit for the best picture in the Carthage Film Festival in 1976 and the special jury award from the Locarno International Film Festival in the same year, and was classified in the &quot;Un Certain Regard&quot; category during the 1978 Cannes Film Festival.

The first feature film ever to be directed by a woman in the Arab World was &quot;The Silences of Palace&quot; (&quot;Samt Al-Qusur&quot;, 1994). The director, Moufida Tlatli, won several international jury awards for her work. The movie shows the daily life in an aristocratic palace in Tunis through the eyes of a young woman.

In 2007, several films were produced and grabbed public attention, such as Nouri Bouzid&#x27;s &quot;Making Of&quot; and Nejib Belkadi&#x27;s &quot;VHS Kahloucha&quot;.

===Theatre===
The Tunisian theater was mostly developed in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, during the French protectorate. Theaters grew up, such as the French Theater, Politeama Rossini, Arena, Theater Tunisia, the Gringa, Paradiso, etc. Some wooden theaters have since been destroyed by fire, while others have simply changed their function; only one is still in use as a theater, the Municipal Theater of Tunis. In over a century of existence, the theater has hosted big names of the Tunisian and international theatrical scene, such as Sarah Bernhardt, Pauline Carton, Gérard Philipe and Jean Marais. On November 7, 1962, the Tunisian president Habib Bourguiba (whose brother, Mohamed Bourguiba, was a playwright), devoted his speech to theater, which he considers &quot;a powerful means of disseminating culture and a most effective means of popular education&quot;. From this date, November 7 is regarded as the Tunisian National Day of drama.

In 1970, under the leadership of the actor Aly Ben Ayed, &quot;Caligula&quot; by Albert Camus was translated into Arabic, to great popular success. Other works written by Habib Boularès, such as &quot;Murad III&quot; or &quot;The Time of Buraq&quot;, retained the themes of bloody violence. Increasingly, more and more shows are restricted for the benefit of a more sophisticated audience. The New Theater of Tunis grew up with Mohamed Driss as one of the most prolific authors. In 1988, Driss was appointed head of the Tunisian National Theater (TNT), and took charge of renovating a neglected theatre, Le Paris, located in the heart of Tunis. He acquired a stage, employed a team of modern architects to rebuild it, and renamed it the &quot;Fourth Art&quot;. Opened in 1996, it alternates between cycles of TNT theater and ballet, circus and song. Each cultural season lasts from October 1 to June 30; the theatre has hosted more than 80 theatrical performances.

In addition to the activities in Tunis other large cities had professional theater groups, most notably Sfax, which boasted of a modern theater venue built post World War II. Many hit plays were produced by the theater group of Sfax in the 1960s and 1970s featuring one of their leading actors at the time, Habib Laroussi, who also played in many national and international TV movies and TV series. Two of the hit plays of the 1960s were &quot;Rabeh Zmim El Houma&quot; (Rabeh the neighborhood leader) directed by Jamil El Joudi and starred by Habib Laroussi, and &quot;Hares El Mahattah&quot; (The train station attendant) directed by Jamil El Joudi and starred by Mohieddin and Habib Laroussi. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s Laroussi collaborated heavily with Jamil El Joudi and the prominent Sfaxien playwright Ameur Tounsi, who discovered and mentored Laroussi in the early 1950s. Tounsi wrote several hit plays that were broadcast by radio Sfax, such as &quot;Intikam El Zaman&quot; (revenge of time)starred by Laroussi and other actors from the Sfax theater community.

El Teatro is the first private theatre in Tunisia. Founded in 1987 by Taoufik Jebali, in a wing of the hotel El Mechtel Tunis, El Teatro consists of the main hall of representatives with some 200 seats, an annex called the Carré d&#x27;Art, and a gallery called Free Area. El Teatro is directed by Zeineb Farhat. Throughout the year, El Teatro offers theater, dance performances, jazz concerts, galas of Arabic music, art exhibitions and poetry readings.

===Dance===

Dancing in Tunisia is characterized by the multitude of forms it takes and contexts in which it appears, including circumcisions, weddings, festivals, concerts, and football games. Tunisian dance resembles Egyptian dance, and is distinguished mainly by its dynamic, which is faster with more staccato, and its multitude of forms, each region having its own &quot;style&quot;. It is therefore difficult to speak of a Tunisian dance, especially since the Egyptian influence appears to have long proven itself in major cities.

The variety of dances performed by the Tunisians probably reflects the migration flows that have traversed the country throughout the centuries. The early Phoenicians brought with them their songs and dances, whose traces can still be seen in Tunisian dance; on the other hand, the Roman occupation had little influence on Tunisian dance, especially compared to its significant architectural legacy. The arrival of the Banu Hilal in the eleventh century completed the implementation of the Arab Maghreb in Tunisia, introducing the traditions, music and dance of the nomads of Upper Egypt. Religious dances were influenced by Sufism, but by the end of the 15th century they were increasingly subject to the influence of Andalusian dance and urban music. The time at which Oriental dance arrived in Tunisia is disputed: it is generally believed to have arrived at a later date with the Ottomans, but some experts in the history of North African art have said it was brought to Tunisia by the first Turkish corsairs in the sixteenth century, and others claim that it originated even earlier, founded by the early Phoenicians during the era of matriarchy in Mesopotamia. Characteristic features of oriental dance as performed in Tunisia include the rhythmic movements of the pelvis, movement highlighted by the elevation of the arms to horizontal, and feet moving in rhythm and transferring weight onto the right or left leg.

The dance reflects a social phenomenon born in the working classes of Tunisian cities. The male dance is typically accompanied by love songs which evoke libertine seduction, attraction and the carnal pleasures of life; it has long been performed in cafes backed by music, typically the darbuka and mezoued. Since the 1970s, however, the dance has declined in cafes and is more often displayed at festivals, circumcision ceremonies, and weddings in big cities.

The Nuba, more rooted in popular practice, is linked to the dancers, and to a lesser extent the Kerkennah Djerba. Some experts say that the associated dress is of Greek origin. The dance, which is structured into several scenes, is often accompanied by acrobatic games involving jars of water.

The most common religious dance is probably the Stambali, which originated as a ritual dance to glorify Sidi Saad, a devout Sudanese Muslim who arrived in Tunisia with his followers in the sixteenth century. Today his shrine is located in the Mornag region. However, in the aftermath of independence, the authorities have banned the ritual and closed many of the sanctuaries. While followers still continue their rituals at home, the dance has subsequently been adopted by the Jews and lost its connection to its Islamic origins.

The National Troupe Folk Art Center and the National Dance of Ariana continue practice the traditional Tunisian dances. The national archives notably suffer from a lack of documents related to these dances, as well as to folk arts more broadly.

===Painting===
Because of the Muslim prohibition on reproducing the human image, the ruling dynasties of Tunisia stifled pictorial art for centuries; painters therefore often turned to calligraphy. Painting as a Tunisian art form was not reborn until the French protectorate. Although at the beginning of the twentieth century galleries were reserved for European painters, native Tunisian artists such as Moses Levy and Yahia Turki were able to obtain permission to present their work.

The birth of a Tunisian contemporary style of painting is strongly linked to the School of Tunis. Established in 1949 by a group of Tunisian artists headed by Pierre Boucherle and including Yahia Turki, Abdelaziz Gorgi, Moses Levy, Ammar Farhat and Jules Lellouche, it aimed to incorporate native themes and reject the influence of Orientalist colonial painting, bringing together French and Tunisian Muslims, Christians and Jews. Some members of the school have turned to the Arab-Muslim sources for inspiration, such as miniature Islamic architecture. The school includes both Expressionist painters such as Amara Debbache, Jellal Ben Abdallah and Ali Ben Salem, and abstract artists such as Edgar Naccache, Nello Levy and Hedi Turki.

After independence in 1956, the art movement in Tunisia was propelled by the dynamics of nation building and by artists serving the state. A Ministry of Culture was established, under the leadership of ministers such as Habib Boularès who saw art and education and power. Artists such as Hatem El Mekki and Zoubeir Turki gained international recognition and influenced a new generation of young painters. Sadok Gmech drew his inspiration from national wealth, while Moncef Ben Amor turned to fantasy. Youssef Rekik revived the technique of painting on glass and founded Nja Mahdaoui calligraphy with its mystical dimension.

In the 1970s, a new wave of artists appeared, who were less homogeneous in their academic formation. Many of them had received an artistic education almost exclusively provided by Tunisian professors at the Tunis Institute of Fine Arts or at the National School of Architecture and Urbanism; such artists included Ali Zenaidi, Abdelmajid Ben Messaoud, Fethi Ben Zakour, Adel Megdiche, Noureddine El Hani, Raouf Gara, Brahim Azzabi, Mohamed Njeh, and Habib Bida.

Many European painters have also been influenced by Tunisia; the most famous of these being the Franco-Russian Alexander Roubtzoff, often regarded as the &quot;painter of Tunisia&quot;. He arrived in Tunis in 1914 through a grant from the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts in St. Petersburg, and subsequently settled permanently in Tunisia, producing some 3,000 paintings representing aspects of Tunisia before his death in 1949. Paul Klee and August Macke also visited Tunisia in 1914 and left a lasting impression. Macke is noted for his series of watercolors in the cubist style, while Klee is noted for his advocation of light and colors to illustrate the Tunisian landscape.

There are currently fifty art galleries housing exhibitions of Tunisian and international artists. These include Gallery Yahia in Tunis and the Carthage Essaadi gallery.

===Literature===


Tunisian literature exists in two forms: Arabic and French. Arabic literature dates back to the seventh century with the arrival of Arab civilization in the region. It is more significant in both volume and literary quality than French literature, introduced during the French protectorate from 1881.
Tunisian literary figures include Douagi Ali, who has produced more than 150 radio stories, over 500 poems and folk songs and nearly 15 plays; Khraief Bashir, an Arabic novelist who published many notable books in the 1930s, causing a scandal because the dialogues were written in Tunisian dialect; and others such as Moncef Ghachem, Mohamed Salah Ben Mrad and Mahmoud Messaadi. Tunisian poetry is characterized by nonconformity and innovation, such as that seen in the works of Aboul-Qacem Echebbi, while French Tunisian literature is most notable for its critical approach. Contrary to the pessimism of Albert Memmi, who predicted that Tunisian literature was sentenced to die young, many Tunisian writers have been successful traveling abroad, including Abdelwahab Meddeb, Bakri Tahar, Mustapha Tlili, Hele Beji and Mellah Fawzi. Their writing focuses on themes of wandering, exile and heartbreak.

The national bibliography lists 1249 non-school books published in 2002 in Tunisia, with 885 titles in Arabic. In 2006 this figure had increased to 1,500; in 2007, to 1,700. Nearly a third of these are children&#x27;s books.

==Publishing==

At the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth century, there was a close relationship between the bourgeois elite and business associations and the Khaldounia Alumni College Sadiki printing press. The French protectorate controlled the press, and affected the publication and dissemination of newspapers at a local level. After the First World War, Tunisian gradually moved into a better position, and during the inter-war years Arabic publishing began to flourish. Before Tunisian independence was proclaimed in 1956, the publication of Tunisian literature was provided by the booksellers, printers and a few publishing houses run by the private French press; subsequently, the state commanded the creation of a major new publishing structure, with the aim of establishing a modern national culture as part of its general culture and education targets. Thus, the state produced over 70% of the books between 1956 and 1987, leaving private publishing little opportunity to evolve.

It was not until the early 1990s that the state abandoned its role in centralising publishing. Private publishing companies quickly sprang up in reaction; the editorial production between 1987 and 1996 amounted to 6,068 titles. Most of Tunisia&#x27;s present book production comes from the private sector, with over a hundred publishers in operation. The budget devoted to literature by the Ministry of Culture in 2003 exceeded three million Tunisian dinars for the purchase of Tunisian and foreign books and periodicals. 2003 was proclaimed &quot;National Book Year&quot; in Tunisia, and celebrated with fairs, exhibitions, meetings for reflection and debate, and writing contests.

==Media==
Tunisian television has long been controlled by the Establishment of the Broadcasting Authority Tunisia (ERTT) and its predecessor, the Tunisian Radio and Television, founded in 1957. On November 7, 2006, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali announced the demerger of the business, which became effective on August 31, 2007. Until then, ERTT managed all public television stations (Télévision Tunisienne 1 and Télévision Tunisienne 2, which had replaced the defunct RTT 2), four national radio stations (Radio Tunis, Tunisia Radio Culture, Youth and Radio RTCI), and five regional (Sfax, Monastir, Gafsa, Le Kef and Tataouine). Most programs are in Arabic, with a minority in French. Since 2003, a growth in private sector broadcasting is underway, including the creation of Radio Mosaique FM, Jawhara FM, Zaytuna FM, Hannibal TV, and Nessma TV.

In 2007, some 245 newspapers and magazines (compared to only 91 in 1987) are 90% owned by private groups and independents. The Tunisian political parties have the right to publish their own newspapers, but those of the opposition parties (such as Al Mawkif or Mouwatinoun) have very limited editions. Freedom of the press is guaranteed by the constitution, but almost all newspapers following the government line report uncritically on the activities of the president, government and the Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (in power) through the Agence Tunis Afrique Presse.

==Festivals==

Hundreds of international festivals, national, regional or local punctuate the calendar year. Music and theatrical festivals dominate the national cultural scene.

Several festivals take place annually in summer: the Carthage International Festival in July, the International Festival of Arts of Mahr from late July to early August, and the International Festival of Hammamet in July and August.

The Carthage Film Festival is held in October and November of every other year, alternating with the Carthage Theatre Festival. It was created in 1966 by the Tunisian Minister of Culture to showcase films from the Maghreb, Africa and the Middle East. In order to be eligible for the competition, a film must have a director of African or Middle Eastern nationality, and have been produced at least two years before entry. The grand prize is the &quot;Tanit d&#x27;or&quot;, or &quot;Golden Tanit,&quot; named for the lunar goddess of ancient Carthage; the award is in the shape of her symbol, a trapezium surmounted by a horizontal line and a circle.

The International Festival of the Sahara, celebrated annually at the end of December, honors the cultural traditions associated with the Tunisian desert. This attracts many tourists and musicians from all around the world, as well as horsemen who flaunt their saddles and local fabrics and skills.

There are also a number of musical festivals; some honor traditional Tunisian music, while others, including the Tabarka Jazz Festival, focus on other genres.

In the city of Sousse, the Carnival of Awussu is an annual festive and cultural event that unfolds each 24th of July. It&#x27;s a parade of symbolic chariots, fanfares and folk groups from Tunisia and elsewhere which takes place near the beach of Boujaafar, at the eve of the beginning of &quot;&#x27;Awussu&quot; (The word designating the heat wave of the month of August according to the Berber calendar). Originally it was a Pagan feast (Neptunalia) celebrating the god of the seas, Neptune in the Roman province of Africa, and might even go back to Phoenician times : the appellation Awussu is a possible deformation of Oceanus.

Omek Tannou is an ancient Tunisian rainmaking festival which was inherited from Punic and Berber traditions involving invocations of the goddess Tanit. It features the ritual use of the sculpted head of a woman (somewhat resembling the head of a girl&#x27;s doll), which is carried in procession between the houses of a village during periods of drought by children singing the refrain (transliteration: &quot;amk ṭangu ya nsaʾ tlbt rbi ʿalshta&#x27;a&quot;, &quot;Amek tango, o women, ask God to rain&quot;. This song varies according to the region because the term &quot;shta&quot; designates rain only in certain urban areas. Each housewife then pours a little water on the statuette, invoking rain.

==Architecture==

Islamic architecture and Roman architecture are expressed in various facets in Tunisia. Through many buildings, Kairouan forms the epicenter of an architectural movement expressing the relationship between buildings and spirituality with the ornamental decoration of religious buildings in the holy city. In Djerba, the architecture such as the fortress of Kef reflects the military and spiritual destiny of a Sufi influence in the region.

The influential role of the various dynasties that ruled the country, particularly in building cities and princes of Raqqada Mahdia, illuminates the role of the geopolitical context in the architectural history of the country. Thus, many original fortresses that protected the coast from Byzantine invasions evolved into cities, like Monastir, Sousse or Lamta.

The medina of Tunis, is World Heritage Site of UNESCO, and is a typical example of Islamic architecture. However, in the areas between the ports of Bizerte and Ghar El Melh, settlements founded by the Moors fleeing Andalusia were reconquered by Catholic sovereigns and has more of a Christian influence.

Given the cosmopolitan nature of cities in Tunisia, they have retained a diversity and juxtaposition of styles. Many buildings were designed by many different architects, artisans and entrepreneurs during the French protectorate. Among the most famous architects of that time were Victor Valensi, Guy Raphael, Henri Saladin, Joss Ellenon and Jean-Emile Resplandy. Five distinct architectural and decorative styles are particularly popular: those of the eclectic style (neo-classical, baroque, etc..) Between 1881 and 1900 and then again until 1920 the style was neo-Mauresque, between 1925 and 1940 it was in the Art Deco style and then the modernist style between 1943 and 1947.

In the south, the oasis of Gafsa, Tozeur and Nefta, and ksours and cave dwellings of Matmata are characterized by their response to the hostile environment arising from the heat and dryness of the desert or semi-desert.

==Traditions==

===Crafts===
Tunisia is also known for its many craft products and many of the regions of Tunisia have different specialities and trades.

Tunisian pottery is mainly influenced by Guellala, a city behind the creation of other pottery centers on the coast of Tunisia, including Tunis, Nabeul, Moknine, etc. Yellow, green or brown enamel is the trademark of Nabeul for example. Shaping, baking and decoration of pottery however, remain primitive.

The ironwork in Tunisia dates back to the Andalusian era when the studded ornamental wrought iron doors become a characteristic. Blue is the tradition with the window shutters, intended to beautify the homes and preserve the privacy of residents and ward off evil spirits. The grids recall the lattices of the Arab-Andalusian tradition, and carved wood panels, which enabled women to watch the street without being seen.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, each region and often even each village had its own costume. Today, traditional dress is mostly reserved for only weddings and other national or native ceremonies. On a national level, the jebba has become traditional dress, a wide coat covering the whole body, which differs depending on the quality of its fabric, its colors and its trimmings. The men&#x27;s slippers are usually the natural color of the leather, while women&#x27;s are generally of embroidered silk, cotton, gold and silver with floral patterns. Although the workshops in each city and some villages produce textiles typical of the region such as Gabes, the quantity sold is low compared to centers such as Kairouan which is still the national center of carpet production. The kilim, an embroidered rug is a legacy of Ottoman rule in Tunisia.

Finally, Tunisia has a rich tradition of mosaics dating back to ancient times. Punic mosaics were found at sites around Kerkouane or Byrsa hill at Carthage dating to Roman times, a mosacis with pictorial representation, combined with high quality marble, has been found, especially on the site of Chemtou.

===Traditional clothing===

====Masculine clothing====
In rural areas, the jebba is considered a ceremonial garment. White in summer and grey in winter, it is a sleeveless tunic that a man wears over a shirt, vest and baggy trousers (called seroual). On ordinary days, the men merely wear simple trousers and shirts, or/and a woollen tunic of a slimmer fit than the jebba and fitted with long sleeves. In winter, they wear a heavy wool cloak which is often hooded, or in the north a kachabiya, which differs from the latter by its brown and white stripes.

In urban areas, the ceremonial dress consists of a linen shirt with collar and long sleeves. The seroual is adorned at the bottom of the legs with decorative pockets. A wide belt, cut from the same material keeps the seroual in shape. A jebba, a wool and silk full dress is worn in winter. The shoes, leather slippers, leave the heel exposed. Finally, the headdress is a chechia, a red felt hat which is sometimes adorned with a tassel of black thread. For a casual ceremony, during leisure hours, often just a jebba is worn.

====Feminine clothing====
Women&#x27;s clothing is much more diverse than that of men. In the towns, the vast majority of young women have adopted the European style but women of a certain age, even in urban areas, often wrap a sefseri, white veil of silk or fine wool that covers the head with a blouse and baggy pants. These figures of women wearing sefseri is engrained in the traditional culture of Tunisia as much as the blue and white houses of Sidi Bou Said. In rural areas, women still wear brightly colored dresses, often in the Berber style and made of blue or red cotton, representing their region or their village. The fabric is opened on the side and is held at the waist with a belt and at the shoulders by two clasps. Women of all ages typically wear a massive amount of jewelry with the clothing and it is common to see women with tens, even hundreds of gold sovereigns, necklaces and other trimmings around their necks and from the sides of the headdress.
The festive ceremonial costumes differ somewhat across regions. In the Sahel, the centerpiece of the ceremonial dress is a dress draped in wool or cotton, drawn to a bodice embroidered with silk and silver, a velvet jacket decorated with gold, lace pants and a silk belt. Until the middle of the nineteenth century, the brides of the wealthy aristocracy of Tunis often wore a Kaftan cut in velvet, brocade or silk and richly embroidered with gold and enriched with precious stones. Nowadays, some marrying in Sousse and Hammamet still wear a kaftan with elbow-length sleeves, an open front, and varying in length from the knee to the mid calf. The richness and originality of the costumes are typically based less on the cut or the fabric as they are on woven patterns or embroidery.

Wearing the hijab is not widespread in Tunisia although the country has seen a relative increase since the early 2000s. Indeed, the state prohibited it in schools and in the government offices.

Among other cultural and artistic traditions of women&#x27;s adornment, jewellery of the Berber cultures made of silver, beads and other applications was a common trait of Berber/Amazigh identities especially on the island of Djerba up to the mid-20th century.

===Oral traditions===
Until the beginning of the twentieth century, Tunisia was characterized by the existence of a popular culture of oral narratives and puppet shows (marionettes). The narrator, known under the terms of Rawi, or fdaoui meddah was highly respected and appreciated by both the Islamic elite and by the popular classes. Often itinerant, traveling from city to city on foot, they used a bendir, flute and some dolls as an accompaniment. The performance would often include the technique of imitating various characters in the context of Halqa, when two or three other narrators are involved and invite the public to participate. Other forms of narrative are the stories told by the cyclic meddah, the character of boussadia and Stambali shows, both of which are linked to communities from sub-Saharan Africa.

The narratives are institutionalized into different types: Nadira, the Hikaye, the Qissa and Khurafi. The Nadira (story), as well as recitations of the Koran was considered the oral genre par excellence by the Tunisian elite and working classes. It consists of cycles, relating a vast repertoire of stories based on vulgar but intelligent and witty character named Jha. Other narrators specialize in Hikaye or Hikayat, a Tunisian term to describe the epic sagas that recall the history of Tunisian towns and villages, particularly from the eleventh century. The latter emphasize the female characters, in which the character of Zazi represents the archetype of Tunisian women, and are a fundamental part of oral tradition as they include elements of local Arab epics. As for the Qissa, it can be defined in terms of classical Koranic stories. Didactic in nature, it is considered part of Arab-Islamic religious literature Finally, the Khurafi is the most imaginative and popular oral tradition of Tunisia. Functioning as a kind of collective memory, it results from an interaction between the narrators and the public.

The puppet called karakouz, has been present in North Africa from the fourteenth century, and the Teatro dei Pupi (originating in Sicily), enjoyed popularity until the early twentieth century. The performances took place during the month of Ramadan in Halfaouine, a district of Tunis. Karakouz was once played in Turkish until the beginning of the nineteenth century before moving to the Tunisian dialect. The main characters are lively and include officials, a smoker of hashish, the French Madama, Salbi, Nina and ethnic Albanians amongst others. This type of show relies heavily on double entendres, puns, satire, black comedy and caricature. Among the themes addressed are superstition, sexuality or women. The Teatro dei Pupi, executed in Tunisian dialect, account for its three main characters: Nina the Jew, Nekula the Maltese and Ismail Pasha, a valiant warrior who fought against the Christian kings.

==Gender roles==
Gradually after independence, gender roles and behavioral norms views start to change in Tunisian culture with the development of gender equality inside the society. In 1957 the Code of Personal Status (CSP) came into force, which gives women a new status, unprecedented in the Arab-Muslim world. This code establishes in particular the principle of equality between man and woman in terms of citizenship, forbade polygamy, allows women to divorce, established the minimum age for marriage at 15 for women and 18 for men and requires the consent of both spouses as a rule of validity of any marriage. Later, in 1964, the minimum age for marriage was advanced to 17 years for women and 20 years for men. Later, on the 50th anniversary of the CSP, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali decided to unify this age for young men and women in 2007.

Today, the position of women in Tunisia is among the most privileged in North Africa, and can be compared to that of European women. In 2002, the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women commended Tunisia for &quot;its great strides forward in promoting equality between men and women&quot;. Nevertheless, in rural places where life to some degree remains traditional, Tunisian women still have a long way to go to reach genuine equality. The man is still considered the head of family and inheritance is completely unequal.

The official government policies and programs for decades has strongly emphasized on gender equality and on promoting social development, translating into concrete results. According to latest figures, women make up 26% of the working population and more than 10,000 women are heads of businesses. At the same time, over one third of the approximately 56,000 graduates emerging annually from Tunisian universities are girls. On November 1, 1983, President Habib Bourguiba appointed the first two women ministers: Fethia Mzali (Family and Promotion of Women) and Souad Yaacoubi (Public Health) as leaders. Today the proportions of female representation in legislative and advisory bodies are: 22.7% in the Chamber of Deputies, over 15% in the Chamber of Advisors, over 27% in municipal councils, 18% in the Economic and Social Council, 13.3% in the Higher Council of the Judiciary, 12% among ministry departmental staff. In some areas, women outnumber men, for instance in the pharmaceutical sector women represent more than 72% of all Tunisian Pharmacists. In addition, Tunisian Women are present in key national domains such Education where they constitute half of the educational body and 40% of university professors.

== Attitudes towards minority groups ==

=== The LGBTQ+ community ===
Although Tunisia is considered to be one of the more modern and liberal countries in the Arab world, homosexuality is still considered a criminal offense. Under Article 230 of the penal code of 1913, male or female acts of homosexuality are forbidden in the Republic of Tunisia and penalized by 2-3 years of imprisonment. 

=== The Black community ===
Despite Tunisia being an African country, racism and acts of hate crime are still prominent. It was only recently that Tunisia criminalized racial discrimination. In 2018  Law 50 or Loi 50 was passed after the society&#x27;s long term denial of the existence of racism. 

===Family life===
In the field of marriage, partners may be selected by agreement between the family or an individual selection. Mothers often go in search of a bride for their son. Once a commitment is made it usually follows a series of visits between the two families, but disputes can lead to a rupture of the agreement. The wedding ceremony itself involves the passage of the bride to the house of her husband who waits outside. After consummation of the marriage it is followed by a period of isolation of the couple.

The Tunisian household is based on the patriarchal model where the man is placed in the dominant role. Most households are based upon the model of the nuclear family within which the tasks are assigned according to age and sex and personal skills. Developments in education and employment, however, have somewhat altered this situation.

==Gastronomy==

Tunisian cuisine is a blend of Mediterranean cuisine and desert dweller&#x27;s culinary traditions. Its distinctive spicy fieriness comes from neighbouring Mediterranean countries and the many civilizations who have ruled Tunisian land: Phoenician, Roman, Arab, Turkish, French, and the native Berber people. Tunisian food uses a variety of ingredients and in different ways. The main dish that is served in Tunisia is Couscous, made of minuscule grains that are cooked and usually served with meat and vegetables. In cooking they also use a variety of flavors such as: olive oil, aniseed, coriander, cumin, caraway, cinnamon, saffron, mint, orange blossom, and rose water.

Many of the cooking styles and utensils began to take shape when the ancient tribes were nomads. Nomadic people were limited in their cooking by what locally made pots and pans they could carry with them. A tagine is the name of a conical-lidded pot, and today a dish cooked in this pot is also called a tagine.

Like all countries in the Mediterranean basin, Tunisia offers a &quot;sun cuisine&quot;, based mainly on olive oil, spices, tomatoes, seafood (a wide range of fish) and meat from rearing (lamb).

===Ingredients===

Unlike other North African cuisine, Tunisian food is quite spicy. A popular condiment and ingredient which is used extensively Tunisian cooking, harissa is a hot red pepper sauce made of red chili peppers and garlic, flavoured with coriander, cumin, olive oil and often tomatoes. There is an old wives&#x27; tale that says a husband can judge his wife&#x27;s affections by the amount of hot peppers she uses when preparing his food. If the food becomes bland then a man may believe that his wife no longer loves him. However, when the food is prepared for guests the hot peppers are often toned down to suit the possibly more delicate palate of the visitor. Like harissa or chili peppers, the tomato is also an ingredient that cannot be separated from the cuisine of Tunisia. Tuna, eggs, olives and various varieties of pasta, cereals, herbs and spices are also ingredients which are featured prominently in Tunisian cooking.

Tabil, pronounced &quot;table&quot;, is a word in Tunisian Arabic meaning &quot;seasoning&quot; and refers to a particular Tunisian spice mix, although earlier it meant ground coriander. Paula Wolfert makes the plausible claim that tabil is one of the spice mixes brought to Tunisia by Muslims expelled from Andalusia in 1492 after the fall of Granada. Today tabil, closely associated with the cooking of Tunisia, features garlic, cayenne pepper, caraway and coriander seeds pounded in a mortar and then dried in the sun and is often used in cooking beef or veal.

Thanks to its long coastline and numerous fishing ports, Tunisia can serve an abundant, varied and exceptionally fresh supply of fish in its restaurants. Many diners will be content to have their fish simply grilled and served filleted or sliced with lemon juice and a little olive oil. Fish can also be baked, fried in olive oil, stuffed, seasoned with cumin (kamoun). Squid, cuttlefish, and octopus are often served in hot crispy batter with slices of lemon, as a cooked salad or stuffed and served with couscous.

==Sports==

Football (European style) is the most popular sport in Tunisia. The Ligue Professionelle 1 has 14 teams that compete against one another for a trophy, also a chance to qualify for the Champions league of the African Cup of Nations. The Tunisian national football team won the African Cup of Nations in the year 2004.

However, sports like volleyball (nine national team championship wins in Africa) and handball (ten national team championship wins in Africa) are also among the sports most represented. Handball is the second most popular sport in Tunisia. In 2005, Tunisia held the 2005 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship and won fourth place in the competition. Other notable sports include rugby union, martial arts (taekwondo, judo, and karate), athletics, and tennis. Other major sports like cycling are less represented in contrast, because of lack of infrastructure and equipment but competitors still compete in the Tour de Tunisia.

The Tunisian sports year is punctuated by major competitions such as the championships in football, handball, volleyball, and basketball. The country also organizes international competitions. Thus, the first edition of the FIFA World Cup Under-20 was held in Tunisia in 1977, the final stages of the African Cup of Nations in 1965, 1994, and 2004, and the last edition was won by the national team.

In May 2007, the country had 1,673 registered sports clubs whose main assets are in football (250) and taekwondo (206). Then come karate and its derivatives (166), wheelchair sports (140), handball (85), athletics (80), judo (66) kung fu (60), kickboxing (59), basketball (48), bowls (47), table tennis (45), volleyball (40) boxing (37), swimming (31), and tennis (30).

==Cultural policy==
The political culture of Tunisia is governed by the Ministry of Culture and Heritage Preservation, directed by Abderraouf El Basti. This department, created on December 11, 1961, is, according to the decree n ° 2005-1707 of June 6, 2005, &quot;responsible, under the general policy of the state to run national choices in the fields of culture and heritage preservation and establish plans and programs to promote these areas &quot;.

In 1999, the budget allocated to 0.6% to culture and reached 1.25% in 2009 and is set to reach 1.5% in 2010. 50% of this increase is linked to a policy of decentralization of culture through the promotion in the areas of cultural institutions such as houses of culture, cultural committees and associations. During 2007, seven libraries were established and 30 public libraries managed. Ten houses of culture were under construction, half completed in 2008, and another 40 houses are under maintenance. The year 2008 was also proclaimed &quot;national year of translation&quot;.

However, while Kairouan&#x27;s ambition is to become the &quot;capital of Islamic culture&quot; in 2009, MPs criticize some of the poor quality of artistic productions. Some regret the delay in the excavation of sites such as Salakta or El Haouaria and criticize the dilapidated state of some buildings, particularly that of Borj Zouara and Bab Saadoun. Moreover, the Tunisian museums should, according to some, be the subject of more attention, notably by addressing the problem of low attendance caused by the high cost of tickets.

== See also ==
* Art and politics in post-2011 Tunisia
* List of Tunisian artists

==References==
;Sources
* 
* 
* Jean Muzi, &quot;15 contes de Tunisie&quot;, éd. Flammarion (Castor Poche), Paris, 2003
* Anne-Sophie Tiberghien, &quot;Tunisie. Au fil des proverbes&quot;, éd. Anako, Fontenay-sous-Bois, 2003

== Further reading ==

==External links==

* Information about events and festivals in Tunisia 
* Arfaoui, Jamel. &quot;Tunisia Celebrates Muslim New Year.&quot; Magharebia.
* Gordon, Raymond G. &quot;Languages of Tunisia.&quot; Ethnologue. 2005. 
* Keating, Michael J. &quot;On the Oasis of Douz: Tunisia’S International Sahara Festival.&quot; Washington Report. 2005.
* &quot;A Passion for Creativity.&quot; Middle East 304 (2000): 2. Academic Search Premier. EBSCO. University of Minnesota, Duluth. 
* &quot;Tunisia Demographics Profile 2007.&quot; Index Mundi. 
* Kjeilen, Tore. &quot;Tunisia: Religions &amp; Peoples.&quot; LookLex Encyclopedia. 1996. 
* &quot;Tunisia: Location, Population, Religion, Membership, Currency.&quot; Arabic German Consulting. Arabic German Consulting.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="0" end="7" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="9" end="16" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="92" end="104" title="Multiculturalism" label="multi-ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q900419" start="113" end="128" title="History of Tunisia" label="Ancient Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="370" end="382" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="412" end="417" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441071" start="419" end="433" title="Roman Africans" label="Roman Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="436" end="442" title="Vandals" label="Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="444" end="450" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="452" end="461" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="463" end="467" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="469" end="476" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="478" end="485" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="491" end="497" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="521" end="528" title="Berber people" label="Amazigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="567" end="574" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922873" start="676" end="688" title="Mare Nostrum" label="Mare Nostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q900419" start="695" end="713" title="history of Tunisia" label="history of Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="820" end="841" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthaginian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="847" end="859" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="946" end="965" title="El Djem#Amphitheatre" label="El-Jem Amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1017" end="1025" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1052" end="1071" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1080" end="1085" title=":Category:World Heritage Sites in Tunisia" label="eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078441" start="1179" end="1195" title="Christianity in Africa" label="Church of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="1206" end="1222" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Islamic conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="1283" end="1294" title="Kairouan" label="Al-Qayrawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1394" end="1408" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="1443" end="1448" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="1452" end="1460" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1616" end="1635" title="Protectorate#Protectorate" label="French Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1714" end="1720" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429003" start="1893" end="1898" title="Bardo Museum" label="Bardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q877391" start="1926" end="1939" title="Sidi Bou Said" label="Sidi Bou Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106527" start="1947" end="1962" title="medina of Tunis" label="medina of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="2950" end="2957" title="dolmens" label="dolmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911912" start="2963" end="2972" title="Bou Salem" label="Bou Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="2977" end="2990" title="rock carvings" label="rock carvings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="3007" end="3013" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="3241" end="3250" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3253" end="3258" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q32378" start="3687" end="3693" title="Dougga" label="Dougga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3791" end="3799" title="Greece" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967945" start="4245" end="4259" title="Thuburbo Majus" label="Thuburbo Majus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4261" end="4268" title="Gigthis" label="Gigthis"/>
<link wikidata="Q291012" start="4290" end="4296" title="El Jem" label="El Jem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="4716" end="4722" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q27241" start="5172" end="5179" title="Kélibia" label="Kélibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="5262" end="5270" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="5504" end="5513" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291779" start="5796" end="5810" title="Zitouna Mosque" label="Zitouna Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609224" start="5841" end="5863" title="Great Mosque of Mahdia" label="Great Mosque of Mahdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255269" start="5872" end="5896" title="Great Mosque of Kairouan" label="Great Mosque of Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6181" end="6192" title="Ibn Zaïtoun" label="Ibn Zaïtoun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6194" end="6206" title="Ibn Al Abhar" label="Ibn Al Abhar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6208" end="6220" title="Ibn Al Gafsi" label="Ibn Al Gafsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147436" start="6225" end="6234" title="Ibn Arafa" label="Ibn Arafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="6260" end="6271" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q335543" start="6292" end="6311" title="Aboul-Qacem Echebbi" label="Aboul-Qacem Echebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030270" start="6490" end="6508" title="Sidi Mahrez Mosque" label="Sidi Mahrez Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="6555" end="6569" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001465" start="6584" end="6590" title="Zaouia" label="Zaouia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="6930" end="6936" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46959" start="6959" end="6978" title="Tunisian revolution" label="Tunisian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208362" start="7034" end="7071" title="art and politics in post-2011 Tunisia" label="art and politics in post-2011 Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56240" start="7115" end="7130" title="Tunisian Arabic" label="Tunisian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="7167" end="7173" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="7175" end="7202" title="Lingua franca" label="Mediterranean Lingua Franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q56570" start="7207" end="7212" title="Sened (language)" label="Sened"/>
<link wikidata="Q204487" start="7818" end="7841" title="Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali" label="Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q162789" start="8015" end="8030" title="flag of Tunisia" label="flag of Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488888" start="8114" end="8122" title="crescent" label="crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q379860" start="8132" end="8149" title="five-pointed star" label="five-pointed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285546" start="8155" end="8167" title="Bey of Tunis" label="Bey of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q749874" start="8168" end="8191" title="Al-Husayn II ibn Mahmud" label="Al-Husayn II ibn Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q238440" start="8229" end="8247" title="Battle of Navarino" label="Battle of Navarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899891" start="8370" end="8389" title="Beylik of Tunis" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="8437" end="8456" title="Republic of Tunisia" label="Republic of Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907209" start="8651" end="8663" title="Ottoman flag" label="Ottoman flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8738" end="8752" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q82014" start="9529" end="9536" title="jasmine" label="jasmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="10118" end="10124" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="10136" end="10143" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="10170" end="10177" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="10199" end="10206" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020115" start="10397" end="10405" title="evil eye" label="evil eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="10453" end="10461" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q877405" start="10529" end="10534" title="Tanit" label="Tanit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="10582" end="10595" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="10596" end="10602" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="10649" end="10665" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Ancient Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q877405" start="10724" end="10729" title="Tanit" label="Tanit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358324" start="10811" end="10822" title="Omek Tannou" label="Omek Tannou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683340" start="10854" end="10869" title="Tanit d&amp;#x27;or" label="Tanit d&amp;#x27;or"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="10921" end="10926" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="11638" end="11643" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="11751" end="11763" title="Sunni Muslim" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="11772" end="11778" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="12585" end="12590" title="Koran" label="Koran"/>
<link wikidata="Q692022" start="12733" end="12740" title="Ennahda" label="Ennahda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12846" end="12861" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="12863" end="12867" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="12869" end="12883" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="12889" end="12900" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020115" start="13356" end="13364" title="evil eye" label="evil eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="13589" end="13606" title="Official language" label="Official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56240" start="13619" end="13634" title="Tunisian Arabic" label="Tunisian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="13838" end="13844" title="Berber languages" label="berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="13849" end="13854" title="Punic language" label="punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="13855" end="13865" title="Stratum (linguistics)" label="substratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13989" end="13995" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="13997" end="14004" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="14006" end="14013" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="14015" end="14022" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="14027" end="14033" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317502" start="14383" end="14390" title="Chenini" label="Chenini"/>
<link wikidata="Q311889" start="14392" end="14399" title="Douiret" label="Douiret"/>
<link wikidata="Q338512" start="14401" end="14408" title="Matmata, Tunisia" label="Matmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="14465" end="14471" title="Djerba" label="Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q725609" start="15137" end="15151" title="Charles Pasqua" label="Charles Pasqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="15689" end="15695" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15717" end="15723" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="16220" end="16226" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="16324" end="16331" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="16820" end="16831" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="16836" end="16842" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983656" start="16905" end="16919" title="Sadiki College" label="Sadiki College"/>
<link wikidata="Q643348" start="17202" end="17217" title="Habib Bourguiba" label="Habib Bourguiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="18945" end="18966" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="20478" end="20484" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q46325" start="20493" end="20497" title="Sfax" label="Sfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="20506" end="20514" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215661" start="20523" end="20528" title="Gabès" label="Gabès"/>
<link wikidata="Q466006" start="20537" end="20542" title="Gafsa" label="Gafsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208715" start="20551" end="20559" title="Monastir, Tunisia" label="Monastir"/>
<link wikidata="Q27064" start="20571" end="20579" title="Jendouba" label="Jendouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842894" start="20944" end="20980" title="American Cooperative School of Tunis" label="American Cooperative School of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153301" start="20986" end="21018" title="International School of Carthage" label="International School of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26258697" start="21024" end="21061" title="British International School of Tunis" label="British International School of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546437" start="21813" end="21838" title="Paris Dauphine University" label="Paris Dauphine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429003" start="22917" end="22938" title="Bardo National Museum (Tunis)" label="Bardo National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="23194" end="23200" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="23205" end="23217" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23223" end="23254" title="Archaeological Museum of Sousse" label="Archaeological Museum of Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="23545" end="23556" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107354" start="23574" end="23581" title="Raqqada" label="Raqqada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="23697" end="23703" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204373" start="24479" end="24486" title="Makthar" label="Makthar"/>
<link wikidata="Q166523" start="24488" end="24493" title="Utica, Tunisia" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="24495" end="24503" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q208715" start="24508" end="24516" title="Monastir, Tunisia" label="Monastir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015945" start="24745" end="24756" title="Dar Hussein" label="Dar Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="25362" end="25367" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="25369" end="25374" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="25376" end="25382" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="25428" end="25437" title="Arabesque (Islamic art)" label="Arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429003" start="25859" end="25871" title="Bardo Museum" label="Bardo Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="25875" end="25880" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q467895" start="25957" end="25977" title="Mohammed Abdel Wahab" label="Mohammed Abdel Wahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="26230" end="26235" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="26240" end="26246" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="26308" end="26317" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="26347" end="26361" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="26383" end="26391" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q936552" start="26504" end="26510" title="Music of Tunisia" label="Malouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280105" start="26535" end="26539" title="Nuba" label="Nuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="26779" end="26788" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="26905" end="26911" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="26913" end="26916" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q904646" start="26921" end="26926" title="Qanun (instrument)" label="Kanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="26944" end="26951" title="darbuka" label="darbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q123526" start="27026" end="27033" title="mezoued" label="mezoued"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098694" start="27035" end="27040" title="gasba" label="gasba"/>
<link wikidata="Q230471" start="27049" end="27054" title="zurna" label="zurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212127" start="27401" end="27413" title="The Rachidia" label="The Rachidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416886" start="27885" end="27896" title="Radio Tunis" label="Radio Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="28755" end="28765" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="28767" end="28774" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="28776" end="28782" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="28787" end="28791" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28848" end="28861" title="Hedi Habbouba" label="Hedi Habbouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029103" start="28863" end="28874" title="Saber Rebaï" label="Saber Rebaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q957007" start="28876" end="28890" title="Dhafer Youssef" label="Dhafer Youssef"/>
<link wikidata="Q765191" start="28892" end="28910" title="Belgacem Bouguenna" label="Belgacem Bouguenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490439" start="28912" end="28930" title="Sonia M&amp;#x27;barek" label="Sonia M&amp;#x27;barek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395632" start="28935" end="28941" title="Latifa (singer)" label="Latifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q544546" start="28975" end="28989" title="Salah El Mahdi" label="Salah El Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q548428" start="28991" end="29004" title="Anouar Brahem" label="Anouar Brahem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29006" end="29017" title="Zied Gharsa" label="Zied Gharsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259988" start="29022" end="29036" title="Lotfi Bouchnak" label="Lotfi Bouchnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="29421" end="29437" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Lumière brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="29484" end="29489" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29974" end="29985" title="Omar Khlifi" label="Omar Khlifi"/>
<link wikidata="Q226528" start="30019" end="30029" title="35mm movie film" label="35 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545738" start="30054" end="30076" title="Carthage Film Festival" label="Carthage Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487676" start="30423" end="30501" title="Société Anonyme Tunisienne de Production et d&amp;#x27;Expansion Cinématographique" label="Société Anonyme Tunisienne de Production et d&amp;#x27;Expansion Cinématographique"/>
<link wikidata="Q962765" start="30730" end="30745" title="Tarak Ben Ammar" label="Tarak Ben Ammar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30759" end="30775" title="Wasila Bourguiba" label="Wasila Bourguiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q208715" start="30858" end="30866" title="Monastir, Tunisia" label="Monastir"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="30923" end="30937" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673923" start="30951" end="30958" title="Pirates (1986 film)" label="Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="30969" end="30986" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q470572" start="31000" end="31017" title="Jesus of Nazareth (miniseries)" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="31049" end="31061" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="31224" end="31233" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="31258" end="31271" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q188726" start="31289" end="31306" title="Anthony Minghella" label="Anthony Minghella"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="31323" end="31337" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q63026" start="31351" end="31370" title="The English Patient (film)" label="The English Patient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092707" start="31735" end="31750" title="Ferid Boughedir" label="Ferid Boughedir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230487" start="32674" end="32689" title="Les Ambassadeurs (film)" label="The Ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044849" start="32728" end="32740" title="Naceur Ktari" label="Naceur Ktari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32774" end="32784" title="Maghrebins" label="Maghrebins"/>
<link wikidata="Q502053" start="32955" end="32990" title="Locarno International Film Festival" label="Locarno International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="33090" end="33110" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746780" start="33195" end="33217" title="The Silences of Palace" label="The Silences of Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q431848" start="33273" end="33287" title="Moufida Tlatli" label="Moufida Tlatli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552939" start="33591" end="33604" title="VHS Kahloucha" label="VHS Kahloucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="34172" end="34187" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q389736" start="34189" end="34203" title="Pauline Carton" label="Pauline Carton"/>
<link wikidata="Q150662" start="34205" end="34219" title="Gérard Philipe" label="Gérard Philipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q168359" start="34224" end="34235" title="Jean Marais" label="Jean Marais"/>
<link wikidata="Q643348" start="34281" end="34296" title="Habib Bourguiba" label="Habib Bourguiba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34626" end="34638" title="Aly Ben Ayed" label="Aly Ben Ayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="34664" end="34676" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q507856" start="34754" end="34768" title="Habib Boularès" label="Habib Boularès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318511" start="35011" end="35024" title="Mohamed Driss" label="Mohamed Driss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527893" start="35103" end="35128" title="National Theatre of Tunisia" label="Tunisian National Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="37209" end="37221" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="37386" end="37394" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="37774" end="37785" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="38244" end="38250" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="38773" end="38784" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="38890" end="38896" title="human pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="39328" end="39335" title="darbuka" label="darbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q123526" start="39340" end="39347" title="mezoued" label="mezoued"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39846" end="39854" title="Stambali" label="Stambali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39902" end="39911" title="Sidi Saad" label="Sidi Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153888" start="40041" end="40047" title="Mornag" label="Mornag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571313" start="40996" end="41007" title="Yahia Turki" label="Yahia Turki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41222" end="41238" title="Pierre Boucherle" label="Pierre Boucherle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571313" start="41253" end="41264" title="Yahia Turki" label="Yahia Turki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820993" start="41266" end="41281" title="Abdelaziz Gorgi" label="Abdelaziz Gorgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915759" start="41283" end="41293" title="Moses Elias Levy" label="Moses Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843622" start="41295" end="41307" title="Ammar Farhat" label="Ammar Farhat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41312" end="41327" title="Jules Lellouche" label="Jules Lellouche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41673" end="41687" title="Amara Debbache" label="Amara Debbache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41689" end="41708" title="Jellal Ben Abdallah" label="Jellal Ben Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836146" start="41713" end="41726" title="Ali Ben Salem" label="Ali Ben Salem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41757" end="41771" title="Edgar Naccache" label="Edgar Naccache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41773" end="41783" title="Nello Levy" label="Nello Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144604" start="41788" end="41798" title="Hedi Turki" label="Hedi Turki"/>
<link wikidata="Q507856" start="42021" end="42035" title="Habib Boularès" label="Habib Boularès"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367328" start="42089" end="42103" title="Hatem El Mekki" label="Hatem El Mekki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027520" start="42108" end="42121" title="Zoubeir Turki" label="Zoubeir Turki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42206" end="42217" title="Sadok Gmech" label="Sadok Gmech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42267" end="42282" title="Moncef Ben Amor" label="Moncef Ben Amor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42302" end="42315" title="Youssef Rekik" label="Youssef Rekik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342335" start="42371" end="42383" title="Nja Mahdaoui" label="Nja Mahdaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q12227883" start="42740" end="42751" title="Ali Zenaïdi" label="Ali Zenaidi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43000" end="43019" title="Alexander Roubtzoff" label="Alexander Roubtzoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="43161" end="43175" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44007" start="43315" end="43324" title="Paul Klee" label="Paul Klee"/>
<link wikidata="Q33981" start="43329" end="43341" title="August Macke" label="August Macke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="43454" end="43460" title="cubist" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44091" end="44101" title="Douagi Ali" label="Douagi Ali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44200" end="44214" title="Khraief Bashir" label="Khraief Bashir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44375" end="44389" title="Moncef Ghachem" label="Moncef Ghachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318787" start="44391" end="44413" title="Mohamed Salah Ben Mrad" label="Mohamed Salah Ben Mrad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44418" end="44434" title="Mahmoud Messaadi" label="Mahmoud Messaadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335543" start="44536" end="44555" title="Aboul-Qacem Echebbi" label="Aboul-Qacem Echebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733225" start="44662" end="44674" title="Albert Memmi" label="Albert Memmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q308021" start="44814" end="44831" title="Abdelwahab Meddeb" label="Abdelwahab Meddeb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44833" end="44844" title="Bakri Tahar" label="Bakri Tahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943460" start="44846" end="44860" title="Mustapha Tlili" label="Mustapha Tlili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144896" start="44862" end="44871" title="Hele Beji" label="Hele Beji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44876" end="44888" title="Mellah Fawzi" label="Mellah Fawzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609353" start="44963" end="44984" title="national bibliography" label="national bibliography"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="45547" end="45562" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602" start="46639" end="46653" title="Tunisian dinar" label="Tunisian dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632763" start="47270" end="47293" title="Télévision Tunisienne 1" label="Télévision Tunisienne 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47298" end="47321" title="Télévision Tunisienne 2" label="Télévision Tunisienne 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47663" end="47680" title="Radio Mosaique FM" label="Radio Mosaique FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403303" start="47682" end="47692" title="Jawhara FM" label="Jawhara FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47694" end="47704" title="Zaytuna FM" label="Zaytuna FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745141" start="47706" end="47717" title="Hannibal TV" label="Hannibal TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q979854" start="47723" end="47732" title="Nessma TV" label="Nessma TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497159" start="48284" end="48311" title="Agence Tunis Afrique Presse" label="Agence Tunis Afrique Presse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48546" end="48577" title="Carthage International Festival" label="Carthage International Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545738" start="48730" end="48752" title="Carthage Film Festival" label="Carthage Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="48940" end="48947" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683340" start="49177" end="49192" title="Tanit d&amp;#x27;or" label="Tanit d&amp;#x27;or"/>
<link wikidata="Q877405" start="49243" end="49256" title="Tanit" label="lunar goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="49268" end="49276" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070655" start="49382" end="49418" title="International Festival of the Sahara" label="International Festival of the Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512718" start="49790" end="49811" title="Tabarka Jazz Festival" label="Tabarka Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16536149" start="49864" end="49882" title="Carnival of Awussu" label="Carnival of Awussu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721" start="49941" end="49953" title="July 24" label="24th of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q638569" start="49996" end="50003" title="fanfare" label="fanfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q215864" start="50177" end="50186" title="heat wave" label="heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q793201" start="50227" end="50242" title="Berber calendar" label="Berber calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="50265" end="50270" title="Pagan" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613658" start="50278" end="50288" title="Neptunalia" label="Neptunalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954" start="50323" end="50330" title="Neptune (mythology)" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="50338" end="50362" title="Roman province of Africa" label="Roman province of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="50390" end="50399" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="50461" end="50468" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358324" start="50471" end="50482" title="Omek Tannou" label="Omek Tannou"/>
<link wikidata="Q477738" start="50506" end="50525" title="rainmaking (ritual)" label="rainmaking festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="50551" end="50556" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="50561" end="50567" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q877405" start="50616" end="50621" title="Tanit" label="Tanit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="50657" end="50665" title="Sculpture" label="sculpted"/>
<link wikidata="Q168658" start="50729" end="50733" title="doll" label="doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="50817" end="50824" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="51193" end="51213" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="51218" end="51236" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="51305" end="51313" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="51501" end="51507" title="Djerba" label="Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q27155" start="51550" end="51553" title="El Kef" label="Kef"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="51603" end="51607" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208715" start="51968" end="51976" title="Monastir, Tunisia" label="Monastir"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="51978" end="51984" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972560" start="51988" end="51993" title="Lamta" label="Lamta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="52020" end="52039" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q189546" start="52144" end="52151" title="Bizerte" label="Bizerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618068" start="52156" end="52168" title="Ghar El Melh" label="Ghar El Melh"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="52197" end="52202" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52582" end="52596" title="Victor Valensi" label="Victor Valensi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52598" end="52609" title="Guy Raphael" label="Guy Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52611" end="52624" title="Henri Saladin" label="Henri Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52626" end="52638" title="Joss Ellenon" label="Joss Ellenon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52643" end="52663" title="Jean-Emile Resplandy" label="Jean-Emile Resplandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="52770" end="52783" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neo-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="52785" end="52792" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="52914" end="52922" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q466006" start="53009" end="53014" title="Gafsa" label="Gafsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q504661" start="53016" end="53022" title="Tozeur" label="Tozeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026298" start="53027" end="53032" title="Nefta" label="Nefta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53399" end="53407" title="Guellala" label="Guellala"/>
<link wikidata="Q867615" start="53503" end="53509" title="Nabeul" label="Nabeul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718752" start="53511" end="53518" title="Moknine" label="Moknine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509021" start="54318" end="54323" title="jebba" label="jebba"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="54536" end="54543" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="54593" end="54597" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="54599" end="54605" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="54607" end="54611" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="54616" end="54622" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q585358" start="54876" end="54881" title="kilim" label="kilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493784" start="55240" end="55247" title="Chemtou" label="Chemtou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55733" end="55742" title="kachabiya" label="kachabiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477698" start="56562" end="56569" title="sefseri" label="sefseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932927" start="57683" end="57689" title="Kaftan" label="Kaftan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="57697" end="57703" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q649022" start="57705" end="57712" title="brocade" label="brocade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="57716" end="57720" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q339535" start="57827" end="57835" title="Hammamet, Tunisia" label="Hammamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="58104" end="58109" title="hijab" label="hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19835346" start="58359" end="58391" title="jewellery of the Berber cultures" label="jewellery of the Berber cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="58459" end="58465" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="58718" end="58729" title="marionettes" label="marionettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q816793" start="58951" end="58957" title="bendir" label="bendir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="58959" end="58964" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q168658" start="58974" end="58978" title="doll" label="doll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60512" end="60520" title="karakouz" label="karakouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="60735" end="60742" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60746" end="60756" title="Halfaouine" label="Halfaouine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="61017" end="61026" title="Albanian people" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="61103" end="61109" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="61111" end="61123" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="61128" end="61138" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="61320" end="61327" title="Malta" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q643348" start="63279" end="63294" title="Habib Bourguiba" label="Habib Bourguiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q12230326" start="63336" end="63348" title="Fethia Mzali" label="Fethia Mzali"/>
<link wikidata="Q50285534" start="63385" end="63399" title="Souad Yaacoubi" label="Souad Yaacoubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="65415" end="65429" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="65649" end="65670" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="65855" end="65864" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="65867" end="65872" title="ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="65874" end="65878" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="65880" end="65887" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="65889" end="65895" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="65912" end="65925" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="66037" end="66045" title="Couscous" label="Couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="66188" end="66197" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q28692" start="66199" end="66206" title="aniseed" label="aniseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="66208" end="66217" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="66219" end="66224" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26811" start="66226" end="66233" title="caraway" label="caraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="66235" end="66243" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="66245" end="66252" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="66254" end="66258" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="66260" end="66266" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q865004" start="66500" end="66506" title="tagine" label="tagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q966327" start="66966" end="66973" title="harissa" label="harissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="67012" end="67024" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="67030" end="67036" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="67053" end="67062" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="67064" end="67069" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="67071" end="67080" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="67091" end="67097" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="67597" end="67601" title="Tuna" label="Tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="67603" end="67607" title="Egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="67609" end="67614" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="67641" end="67646" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="67648" end="67654" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512759" start="67748" end="67753" title="Tabil" label="Tabil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105011" start="67935" end="67948" title="Paula Wolfert" label="Paula Wolfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="68056" end="68065" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="68092" end="68099" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="68667" end="68672" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="68842" end="68850" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q794235" start="68910" end="68932" title="Tunisian Ligue Professionnelle 1" label="Ligue Professionelle 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="69050" end="69072" title="African Cup of Nations" label="African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q27971" start="69078" end="69109" title="Tunisian national football team" label="Tunisian national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="69181" end="69191" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="69245" end="69253" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q827377" start="69426" end="69469" title="2005 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2005 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="69540" end="69551" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="69567" end="69576" title="taekwondo" label="taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="69578" end="69582" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="69588" end="69594" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="69597" end="69606" title="sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="69612" end="69618" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="69644" end="69651" title="cycle sport" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69771" end="69786" title="Tour de Tunisia" label="Tour de Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="69915" end="69925" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="70013" end="70027" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="70090" end="70112" title="African Cup of Nations" label="African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="70420" end="70427" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="70434" end="70444" title="kickboxing" label="kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="70480" end="70492" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="70515" end="70521" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="70528" end="70536" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821273" start="70692" end="70711" title="Abderraouf El Basti" label="Abderraouf El Basti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208362" start="72148" end="72185" title="Art and politics in post-2011 Tunisia" label="Art and politics in post-2011 Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123488452" start="72188" end="72212" title="List of Tunisian artists" label="List of Tunisian artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498835" wikidata="Q7068708" url="?curid=498835" title="Nuffield Foundation">
<text>The Nuffield Foundation is a charitable trust established in 1943 by William Morris, Lord Nuffield, the founder of Morris Motors Ltd. It aims to improve social well-being by funding research and innovation projects in education and social policy, and building research capacity in science and social science. Its current chief executive is Gavin Kelly.

The Foundation&#x27;s income comes from the interest on its investments and it spends about £10 million on charitable activities each year. It is financially and politically independent and is governed by a board of trustees who meet four times a year.

The Foundation makes grants for research and innovation projects that aim to improve the design and operation of social policy, particularly in:

*Education 
*Welfare
*Justice

It has discontinued its Open Door programme, but remains committed to encouraging original and thought-provoking approaches to research that identify new questions and change the terms of the debate.

The Foundation also funds programmes designed to increase research capacity in science and social science. Each year it funds over 1,000 Nuffield Research Placements to give hands on research experience to 16- and 17-year-olds studying STEM subjects.

With the ESRC and HEFCE it funds Q-Step, a £19.5 million programme designed to promote a step-change in quantitative methods training for social science undergraduates in the UK.

The Foundation has contributed to healthcare and medical research. It has a separate fund for investing in rheumatic disease research. This was bequeathed by Captain Oliver Bird in 1948. Over the next 10 years the Oliver Bird Fund will dedicate up to £12.5m on research into musculoskeletal (MSK) conditions. It also has a small dedicated fund for strengthening relationships between the UK and other Commonwealth countries.

==Selected grants==

In 1951, the trust deed was amended to include &quot;the advancement of education&quot; as an objective of the foundation. This led to the Nuffield Science Teaching Project in the 1960s.

In 1960, the Foundation made a multi-year grant to Paintings in Hospitals for the purchase of paintings, and occasionally sculpture, in order to establish a permanent art collection for loan to hospitals in London.

In 2006, together with the Institute for Fiscal Studies the Nuffield Foundation funded a proposal for a revision of the British tax system. The research project was headed by Nobel laureate Sir James Mirrlees.

In 2015, the Nuffield Foundation funded Our World in Data, a free web-publication to share quantitative social science with the general public. This publication is used in teaching in many universities and in media coverage of the long-term perspective on global development.

In 2018, the Foundation established the Ada Lovelace Institute to research ethical questions raised by big data, algorithms and artificial intelligence.

In 2019, the Foundation launched a major review of inequalities chaired by Professor Sir Angus Deaton, and a £15m Strategic Fund for ambitious, interdisciplinary research projects that will address some of the most important challenges facing UK society and the public policy agenda in the next decade. Grants awarded through the Strategic Fund included:
*The Economy 2030 Inquiry: navigating a decade of change
*The skills imperative 2035: Essential skills for tomorrow&#x27;s workforce
*The Future of Work and Well-being: The Pissarides Review
*Data and voice to improve children&#x27;s lives

== See also ==
* Nuffield Council on Bioethics
* Nuffield Institute for Medical Research

==References==
==External links==
*Records relating to projects carried out with grants from the Nuffield Foundation at the National Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7068708" start="4" end="23" title="Nuffield Foundation" label="Nuffield Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335487" start="69" end="98" title="William Morris, 1st Viscount Nuffield" label="William Morris, Lord Nuffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q776997" start="115" end="132" title="Morris Motors" label="Morris Motors Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="1525" end="1542" title="rheumatic disease" label="rheumatic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993411" start="2004" end="2037" title="Nuffield Science Teaching Project" label="Nuffield Science Teaching Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748833" start="2104" end="2126" title="Paintings in Hospitals" label="Paintings in Hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15588566" start="2296" end="2324" title="Institute for Fiscal Studies" label="Institute for Fiscal Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176643" start="2463" end="2477" title="James Mirrlees" label="James Mirrlees"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="2520" end="2537" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="2885" end="2908" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q204078" start="3000" end="3012" title="Angus Deaton" label="Angus Deaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q912299" start="3524" end="3553" title="Nuffield Council on Bioethics" label="Nuffield Council on Bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3556" end="3595" title="Nuffield Institute for Medical Research" label="Nuffield Institute for Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122214" start="3721" end="3738" title="National Archives" label="National Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498836" wikidata="Q366506" url="?curid=498836" title="Dizzee Rascal">
<text>Dylan Kwabena Mills (born 18 September 1984), known professionally as Dizzee Rascal, is a British rapper and MC. He is often credited as a pioneer of British hip hop and grime music and was ranked by &quot;Complex&quot; as one of the greatest British rappers of all time. His work has also incorporated elements of UK garage, bassline and R&amp;B. Dizzee Rascal&#x27;s music is also often credited with bringing UK rap into the mainstream and became the country&#x27;s first rapper to achieve international recognition.

After signing with independent label XL Recordings in 2002, the rapper released his self-produced debut album &quot;Boy in da Corner&quot; in 2003. which received widespread critical acclaim and earned him the Mercury Prize in 2003, eventually being certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry. It is often regarded as the best British hip hop album of all time. It was followed up with the albums &quot;Showtime&quot; (2004) and &quot;Maths + English&quot; (2007), which were also critically praised and were certified gold, both peaking within the top ten of the UK Albums Chart. His next album, &quot;Tongue n&#x27; Cheek&quot; (2009) saw a departure from grime for a more pop-oriented sound. It boasted four number one singles for Dizzee Rascal on the UK Singles Chart, which were &quot;Dance wiv Me&quot;, &quot;Bonkers&quot;, &quot;Holiday&quot; and &quot;Dirtee Disco&quot; and went platinum the following year.

His fifth album, &quot;The Fifth&quot; (2013), continued his experimental commercial sound and although it received less favourable reviews than his previous albums, it still peaked in the top 10 of the UK Albums Chart. He returned to his grime roots with 2017&#x27;s &quot;Raskit&quot;, and has since released &quot;E3 AF&quot; in 2020 and &quot;Don&#x27;t Take It Personal&quot; in 2024. Throughout his career, Dizzee Rascal has worked with a number of notable artists including Arctic Monkeys, Calvin Harris, Florence + The Machine, Robbie Williams, Shakira, Ty Dolla Sign, UGK and will.i.am.

==Early life==
Dylan Kwabena Mills was born on 18 September 1984 in Bow, London. His Nigerian father died when Dizzee was young, and he was raised in Bow, in a single-parent family, by his Ghanaian mother Priscilla, about whom he says, &quot;I had issues as a kid. I was violent and disruptive. The way my mum helped was by finding me a different school every time I got kicked out, always fighting to keep me in the school system.&quot;

He attended a series of schools in east London, including Langdon Park School, and was expelled from four of them, including St Paul&#x27;s Way Community School. Reportedly, it was around this time that a teacher was the first to call him &quot;Rascal&quot;. Cagey about exactly what Rascal&#x27;s youthful &quot;madnesses&quot; entailed, in early interviews he mentioned fighting with teachers, stealing cars, and robbing pizza delivery men. In the fifth school, he was excluded from all classes except music. He also used to attend YATI (Young Actors Theatre Islington). One of his teachers at school was the comedian Shazia Mirza, who taught him science.

He began making music on the school&#x27;s computer, encouraged by his music teacher Joseph Robson, and during the summer holidays attended a music workshop organised by Tower Hamlets Summer University, of which he is now a patron. He was a childhood friend of footballer Danny Shittu, whom he described as &quot;almost like a big brother&quot;, and at whose house he made his first mixtapes and tracks. Unusually among his friends, he read the heavy metal magazine &quot;Kerrang!&quot; and was a fan of the grunge band Nirvana.

==Career==
===2000–2003: Early career===
Around the age of 14, Dizzee Rascal became an amateur drum and bass DJ, also rapping over tracks as customary in sound system culture, and making occasional appearances on local pirate radio stations. Aged sixteen, he self-produced his first single, &quot;I Luv U&quot;. In 2002, he jointly formed the Roll Deep Crew, a 13-piece garage collective, with former school friends. He also signed a solo deal with the record label XL.

During his early career, Rascal worked with his mentor Wiley to create the still-unreleased song &quot;We Ain&#x27;t Having It&quot; and rapped on some Sidewinder recordings. He made some instrumentals including &quot;Go&quot; and &quot;Ho&quot; and &quot;Streetfighter&quot;. Rascal had an ongoing feud, from late 2003, with fellow underground grime artist Crazy Titch, which began when a fight broke out between the pair during a set on a guest show on the pirate radio station Deja Vu FM. The set, which features many seminal early grime artists, was filmed, and has accumulated over a million views on YouTube and resulted in the two exchanging diss tracks.

After winning a Sidewinder Award for Best Newcomer MC in 2002, Dizzee was a judge on the Sky1 show &quot;Must Be The Music&quot;.

He also did a verse on the Roll Deep remix of &quot;Let&#x27;s Push Things Forward&quot; on the 2002 album &quot;Weak Become Heroes&quot; and 12&quot; single by The Streets.

===2003–2004: Breakthrough with &quot;Boy in da Corner&quot;===
On 26 May 2003, Dizzee officially released &quot;I Luv U&quot; as his debut single, intended to be from his upcoming debut studio album &quot;Boy in da Corner&quot;. The song instantly became a top forty hit in the UK, peaking at number 29 and marking his first appearance on the UK Singles Chart. Dizzee&#x27;s first solo album, &quot;Boy in da Corner&quot;, was released to universal critical acclaim in August 2003, entering the UK Top 40 at #40. The album would peak at #23. In the same week the album was released, whilst performing with Roll Deep Crew in Cyprus, Dizzee was stabbed six times. Many tabloids suggested that this event was connected to an apparent feud between Dizzee and garage act So Solid Crew, and his pinching Lisa Maffia&#x27;s buttocks. After Dizzee was hospitalised, So Solid Crew member &quot;Megaman&quot; – real name Dwayne Vincent – was questioned about the incident, but was released by Cypriot police.
Following the success of single &quot;I Luv U&quot; and the album, the second single from &quot;Boy in da Corner&quot; was &quot;Fix Up, Look Sharp&quot;. The single, released in August 2003, gave Dizzee his first UK Top 20 single and also became the biggest hit from his debut album. In September, Dizzee was awarded the prestigious Mercury Prize for the best album of 2003. He was the youngest person at 19 years old to do so and the second rapper, after Ms. Dynamite the previous year. The album was also chosen as the No. 1 album of the year by Planet Sound, and as one of the top 50 albums of the year by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;. His unique style, as &quot;words pour out at a high pitch and pace, as if syllables are the only thing that can hold back a scream&quot;, have given him a sound that hip hop heads can embrace as something new and original in the hip hop scene. Later in the year he collaborated with the Basement Jaxx on their third album, &quot;Kish Kash&quot; on the track &quot;Lucky Star&quot;. The track was released as a single in November 2003 and gave Dizzee his third top 30 hit. The third and final single, taken from his debut album, was &quot;Jus&#x27; a Rascal&quot;, which became his fourth top 30 success. The song was also featured in the film &quot;Kidulthood&quot; released in 2006.

&quot;Jezebel&quot; was not a single from the album, but was well received, gaining exposure and popularity on the underground scene. The song told the tale of a young London girl, who through years of going to parties, getting drunk, doing drugs and having sex earned herself the title Jezebel. He made his US concert debut on 7 February 2004 at Volume in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.

===2004–2007: &quot;Showtime&quot;===

In 2004, Dizzee Rascal won the NME Award for Innovation. His second album, &quot;Showtime&quot;, was released in September of the same year, eclipsing the peak of his debut album by entering the UK Albums Chart at #8. The first single from the album, released two weeks earlier in August 2004, was titled &quot;Stand Up Tall&quot;; it was written and produced by grime producer DJ Youngstar of Pulse-X. The title track was featured on the soundtrack for the first &quot;FIFA Street&quot; video game.

The second single &quot;Dream&quot;, another top 20 hit, was released in November 2004. It sampled (and used the chorus of) Captain Sensible&#x27;s song &quot;Happy Talk&quot;, originally from the makers of Rodgers and Hammerstein musical &quot;South Pacific&quot;. The &quot;Dream&quot; music video consisted of a mock 1950s style children&#x27;s marionette show depicting scenes corresponding to the lyrics about Dizzee&#x27;s youth: street culture, crime, single teenage mothers, pirate radio and garage clubs.

Later in 2004, Dizzee Rascal was part of Band Aid 20, a group of British musicians who re-recorded &quot;Do They Know It&#x27;s Christmas?&quot; He did not sing in the song; rather, he rapped two lines of it (&quot;Spare a thought this yuletide for the deprived, if the table was turned would you survive?&quot; and &quot;You ain&#x27;t gotta feel guilt just selfless, give a little help to the helpless&quot;). Dizzee Rascal was the first person to add to the song since the original was released; this would mark the first time that Dizzee reached the number one spot in the UK Singles Chart, albeit as part of the ensemble.

In 2004, Dizzee Rascal made an international endorsement deal with urban brand Eckō Unltd. and designed his own shoe with Nike in 2005.

In March 2005, the double A-side single &quot;Off 2 Work&quot; / &quot;Graftin&#x27;&quot; was released. &quot;Graftin&#x27;&quot; was the third and final single from the &quot;Showtime&quot; album, whilst &quot;Off 2 Work&quot; was a new track that did not appear on either of his albums. The accompanying music video featured Rascal in various ordinary workplace situations (as a policeman, a fast food vendor, a businessman, etc.) and as Prime Minister, announcing his engagement to Cherie Blair. It would prove to be Dizzee&#x27;s lowest charting single to date, peaking outside the Top 40 at #44.

===2007–2009: &quot;Maths + English&quot;===
Dizzee&#x27;s third album, &quot;Maths + English&quot;, was released on 4 June 2007. He stated in an interview before the album&#x27;s release that &quot;Maths&quot; refers to producing, in terms of beats, deals and money and &quot;English&quot; to writing lyrics. The first single off this album, &quot;Sirens&quot;, was released on 21 May.

The album was one of the 12 nominees for the 2007 Mercury Prize, which ultimately went to Klaxons&#x27; album &quot;Myths of the Near Future&quot;. During the year, Dizzee worked with cross-genre artist Beck on a remix of the song &quot;Hell Yes&quot;, and provided guest vocals on an Arctic Monkeys track, the B-Side to their single &quot;Brianstorm&quot; named &quot;Temptation Greets You Like Your Naughty Friend&quot;. Dizzee&#x27;s version of the same song was featured as &quot;Temptation&quot; on his third album.

The official US album was released on 29 April 2008; it contained two tracks not on the European release, but it did not include the track &quot;Pussyole&#x27;&quot;. It was Dizzee&#x27;s first album to be released under the Definitive Jux label.

In 2008, Rascal recorded a song for suicide charity CALM; the song &quot;Dean&quot; was about a friend of Dizzee&#x27;s who took his own life. In December of that year, he was arrested following an alleged incident involving a baseball bat in southeast London. He was released on bail to return to a police station later in December.

===2009–2012: &quot;Tongue n&#x27; Cheek&quot;===

Dizzee Rascal released his fourth studio album, &quot;Tongue n&#x27; Cheek,&quot; on 21 September 2009. It included his four number-one hits &quot;Dance wiv Me&quot;, &quot;Bonkers (with Armand Van Helden), &quot;Holiday&quot; and &quot;Dirtee Disco&quot;. Its release was announced on &quot;Friday Night with Jonathan Ross&quot;, where Dizzee Rascal revealed some details about the album, including track information and production. In a collaboration track with Chase &amp; Status titled &quot;Heavy&quot;, Dizzee Rascal said, &quot;Grime had a little time without me still no grime without me, No life without me, no Risky Roadz, no Grime Daily&quot; seemingly seeking to create the impression that grime had petered out since he left the scene. On 23 May 2008, Calvin Harris, whom he collaborated with on the number-one hit &quot;Dance Wiv Me&quot;, revealed on his Twitter that he was producing a Dizzee track; at the Evolution Festival in Newcastle, and when on tour supporting The Prodigy, he confirmed that two new singles called &quot;Road Rage&quot; and &quot;Dirtee Cash&quot;, both of which featured on the album, would be released. &quot;Dirtee Cash&quot; peaked at No. 10 and Road Rage was never released as a single.

At the 30th annual Brit Awards, Dizzee Rascal won the award for Best British Male. He later performed a mash-up entitled &quot;You Got the Dirtee Love&quot; with Florence and the Machine. This collaboration was released as a charity single the following day and peaked at number 2 in the UK charts.

On 31 May 2010 Dizzee re-released the album &quot;Tongue n&#x27; Cheek&quot; with a few new tracks including &quot;Dirtee Disco&quot;, which was released on 24 May 2010. The track went to number 1 on the UK Singles Chart.

In August 2010, it was revealed that he was to collaborate with Colombian popstar Shakira on the English version of &quot;Loca&quot;, the lead single of her album &quot;Sale el Sol&quot;. He stated that &quot;I know it sounds a bit mad now, but you&#x27;ll see it and see what&#x27;s going on, it&#x27;s me doing something different man, on a merengue tip&quot;. On the week of 14 October 2010, Dizzee made his first appearance on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 after the song peaked number 32.

On 6 February 2011, it was announced Dizzee would support the Red Hot Chili Peppers at their Knebworth House show in the summer.

===2012–2017: &quot;DirteeTV.com&quot; and &quot;The Fifth&quot;===
On New Year&#x27;s Day 2011, Dizzee Rascal released &quot;DirteeTV.com&quot; alongside the Newham Generals, D Double E and Footsie. The 25-track mixtape was released as a free download, and included features from fellow rappers JME, Kano, Scrufizzer, Example, Rapid, Chronik, Hyper and Smurfie Syco. The mixtape featured new and old tracks by Dizzee Rascal.

In 2012 he was also expected to have a collaboration with Snoop Dogg on either his new album or Snoop Dogg&#x27;s new album &quot;Reincarnated&quot;. His first collaboration with DJ Fresh, &quot;The Power&quot; was the third single from Fresh&#x27;s third studio album, released in September 2012. Dizzee performed during the opening ceremony of the 2012 London Olympics.

On Calvin Harris&#x27;s third studio album, &quot;18 Months&quot;, Dizzee Rascal paired up with Harris and Dillon Francis to create the track &quot;Here 2 China&quot;. Dizzee Rascal&#x27;s album &quot;The Fifth&quot; was released in 2013. The lead single was &quot;Goin&#x27; Crazy&quot; featuring Robbie Williams.

===2016–present: &quot;Raskit&quot;, &quot;E3 AF&quot;, and &quot;Don&#x27;t Take It Personal&quot;===

In June 2016, Dizzee Rascal collaborated with Calvin Harris for the third time on the single &quot;Hype&quot;, which reached number 34 on the UK charts. A year later, he released the single &quot;Space&quot; with a livestreamed teaser trailer and announced his sixth studio album, titled &quot;Raskit&quot;, which was released on 21 July 2017, peaking at number 10 on the UK albums chart. Later that year, he collaborated with French rapper Orelsan on the song &quot;Zone&quot; (also featuring Nekfeu).

Dizzee Rascal released an EP titled &quot;Don&#x27;t Gas Me&quot; in September 2018. The EP also marked the first time Dizzee and Skepta worked on a track together, releasing Money Right which peaked at number 68 on the UK singles chart. He also began appearing in Ladbrokes adverts on television, with &quot;Bonkers&quot; playing in the background.

In August 2020 Dizzee Rascal announced his seventh studio album, titled &quot;E3 AF&quot;, which was then released on 30 October 2020. The album peaked at number 13 on the UK albums chart. In November 2023, he released a single titled &quot;How Did I Get So Calm&quot; from his forthcoming eighth studio album &quot;Don&#x27;t Take It Personal&quot;, which released on 9 February 2024.

==Music and style==
When starting to make music in his teenage years, Dizzee Rascal &quot;learned to rap fast&quot; over drum and bass tracks with 170-180 bpm, in contrast to the slower tempos of UK Garage. He also recalls being influenced by crunk (Three 6 Mafia, Lil Jon), grunge music, Black Sabbath and by Timbaland&#x27;s work around that time.

Dizzee Rascal once told author Ben Thompson in an interview with &quot;The Observer&quot; magazine that &quot;everything I do is for the music – I want to master it like Bruce Lee mastered martial arts&quot;.

Dizzee Rascal worked closely with his mentor Wiley, who created one of the first grime tracks, called &quot;Eskimo&quot;. In 2005, music critic Sasha Frere-Jones observed that despite Dizzee&#x27;s large mainstream exposure, grime still was not having a commercial breakthrough in the US, although it was &quot;becoming familiar&quot;. His DJ, DJ Semtex, said in 2004, &quot;the biggest conflict I have is with major labels because they still don&#x27;t get it&quot;. Andy Bennett and Jon Stratton highlight in the book &quot;Britpop and the English Music Tradition&quot; (2010) how Dizzee Rascal alongside Sway and M.I.A. created music that explored new soundscapes with new technologies, with lyrics expressing anger at Britain&#x27;s &quot;racialized&quot; subordination of minority groups and that the innovation that generates new musical forms like grime and dubstep that are, inevitably, politically engaged. The chart success of grime-influenced artists like him is heralded as a signal in the way that white Britons are adapting to a new multicultural and plural musical mix in contrast to previous bands.

==Other interests==
===Dirtee Stank===
The first white label release of &quot;I Luv U&quot; was made on Rascal&#x27;s own label, Dirtee Stank, released when he was 16, although both of his albums and their subsequent singles have been released under XL Recordings. It was not until 30 September 2005, that Dizzee Rascal &#x27;revived&#x27; the label and made his first signings, Klass A and Newham Generals. 

The label was formed and is owned by Dizzee Rascal, and is co-run by Dizzee&#x27;s manager, Cage, label manager, Laurence Ezra, tour manager Paddy Stewart and executive producer Teriy Keys. According to Cage, Dirtee Stank exists to promote gifted artists with &quot;social problems&quot; that might scare off other labels. &quot;People who, through the conditions they live in, might not be stable.&quot; 

The single &quot;Dance Wiv Me&quot;, featuring Calvin Harris and Chrome, was released through the label on 7 July 2008; the track became Jo Whiley&#x27;s Pet Sound for the Week beginning 2 June 2008, thus gaining a large amount of radio airtime. The single charted at Number 1 on download sales alone, a week before its physical release. Dizzee&#x27;s next two singles, &quot;Bonkers&quot; and &quot;Holiday&quot;, were also released under the record label, and these two again charted at Number 1. Dizzee then released his 4th album on the label (Tongue N&#x27; Cheek) which along with three number ones spawned the top 10 hit Dirtee Cash.

As of August 2011, the Newham Generals (D Double E &amp; Footsie), Smurfie Syco and Pepper are signed to the label. In 2014, Merky ACE was added to the Dirtee Stank line up.

===Political views===
During the 2008 US presidential elections, Dizzee gave a live interview to &quot;Newsnight&quot; presenter Jeremy Paxman, in which he described Barack Obama as &quot;an immediate symbol of unity&quot;. Addressed by Paxman as &quot;Mr Rascal&quot; at one point, he said he felt that hip-hop played an important part in encouraging young voters and humorously suggested that he could well one day become prime minister.

==Personal life==
In March 2005, Dizzee Rascal was arrested for allegedly carrying a section five firearm after a search during a car stop in east London; he was found to be in possession of pepper spray. The driver of the car was also arrested after being found in possession of pepper spray, an ASP baton and cannabis.

In February 2008, Dizzee Rascal&#x27;s ex-girlfriend, model Kaya Bousquet, whom he had dated for two years, died in a high-speed crash on the M1 motorway. Later that year in December he was arrested and held on suspicion of possessing an offensive weapon after allegedly approaching a motorist with a baseball bat in a road rage incident at Sevenoaks Way, Orpington.

Dizzee Rascal said in 2010 that he planned not to use drugs or alcohol at all in the future. He told &quot;The Independent&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m not having any alcohol. No weed. I&#x27;m not doing anything – except some boxing to release energy.&quot; In 2011, however, when asked what his favourite drink was during an interview with &quot;GQ&quot;, he answered &quot;Do I drink [alcohol] now? To be honest with you, the whole living clean vibe didn&#x27;t last long. My biggest mistake was probably saying it in an interview, to be fair. I tried living mad clean – but I like partying as much as anyone else.&quot;

In November 2013, Rascal received an honorary Doctorate of the Arts from the University of East London.
He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2020 Birthday Honours for services to music.

On 7 March 2022, Dizzee Rascal was convicted of assaulting his former partner Cassandra Jones, with whom he has a daughter and a son, at a property in Streatham on 8 June 2021, after a &#x27;chaotic argument&#x27;. Upon leaving court, he knocked a camera from a Press Association photographer&#x27;s hands and threw it across the street. He received a community order, which included a 24-week curfew, as well as a restraining order prohibiting him from contacting Jones for a period of 12 months. An appeal against his conviction was dismissed in January 2023.

==Discography==

* &quot;Boy in da Corner&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Showtime&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Maths + English&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Tongue n&#x27; Cheek&quot; (2009)
* &quot;The Fifth&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Raskit&quot; (2017)
* &quot;E3 AF&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Take It Personal&quot; (2024)

==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*Sounds Like London: 100 Years of Black Music in the Capital, 2013. (Contributor)

==External links==
*
*Dizzee Rascal News at the XL Recordings home page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366506" start="0" end="19" title="Dizzee Rascal" label="Dylan Kwabena Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q366506" start="70" end="83" title="Dizzee Rascal" label="Dizzee Rascal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109" end="111" title="Rapping#Emcees" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q469343" start="150" end="165" title="British hip hop" label="British hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166726" start="170" end="181" title="grime (music genre)" label="grime music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156550" start="206" end="213" title="Complex Networks" label="Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165777" start="315" end="324" title="UK garage" label="UK garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846346" start="326" end="334" title="bassline (music genre)" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="339" end="346" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="558" end="571" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q252406" start="637" end="653" title="Boy in da Corner" label="Boy in da Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="731" end="744" title="Mercury Prize" label="Mercury Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="781" end="789" title="Music recording certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="797" end="826" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959779" start="937" end="945" title="Showtime (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851839" start="969" end="984" title="Maths + English" label="Maths + English"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1098" end="1113" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993051" start="1137" end="1157" title="Tongue n&amp;#x27; Cheek" label="Tongue n&amp;#x27; Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1289" end="1305" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013359" start="1324" end="1336" title="Dance wiv Me" label="Dance wiv Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642173" start="1350" end="1357" title="Bonkers (song)" label="Bonkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q605628" start="1371" end="1378" title="Holiday (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499222" start="1395" end="1407" title="Dirtee Disco" label="Dirtee Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992131" start="1476" end="1485" title="The Fifth (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="The Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1656" end="1671" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645665" start="1727" end="1733" title="Raskit" label="Raskit"/>
<link wikidata="Q102046225" start="1770" end="1775" title="E3 AF" label="E3 AF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231821" start="1800" end="1827" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Take It Personal (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Take It Personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170599" start="1934" end="1948" title="Arctic Monkeys" label="Arctic Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="1950" end="1963" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q217360" start="1965" end="1987" title="Florence + The Machine" label="Florence + The Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="1989" end="2004" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="2006" end="2013" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859785" start="2015" end="2028" title="Ty Dolla Sign" label="Ty Dolla Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153351" start="2030" end="2033" title="UGK" label="UGK"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="2038" end="2047" title="will.i.am" label="will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q122607" start="2118" end="2121" title="Bow, London" label="Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="2135" end="2143" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122607" start="2200" end="2203" title="Bow, London" label="Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307583" start="2239" end="2247" title="Ghanaian" label="Ghanaian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220704" start="2524" end="2535" title="east London" label="east London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485818" start="2547" end="2566" title="Langdon Park School" label="Langdon Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595180" start="2614" end="2649" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Way Trust School" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Way Community School"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="3050" end="3059" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967528" start="3109" end="3121" title="Shazia Mirza" label="Shazia Mirza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829680" start="3318" end="3349" title="Tower Hamlets Summer University" label="Tower Hamlets Summer University"/>
<link wikidata="Q314731" start="3420" end="3432" title="Danny Shittu" label="Danny Shittu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="3620" end="3628" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="3668" end="3675" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="3773" end="3786" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q389435" start="3832" end="3844" title="Sound system (Jamaican)" label="sound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="3897" end="3909" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790332" start="3975" end="3982" title="I Luv U (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="I Luv U"/>
<link wikidata="Q913194" start="4021" end="4035" title="Roll Deep Crew" label="Roll Deep Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="4131" end="4143" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="4144" end="4146" title="XL Recordings" label="XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q936479" start="4204" end="4209" title="Wiley (rapper)" label="Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183259" start="4507" end="4518" title="Crazy Titch" label="Crazy Titch"/>
<link wikidata="Q499042" start="4798" end="4809" title="Diss (music)" label="diss tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q909662" start="4901" end="4905" title="Sky1" label="Sky1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370325" start="4917" end="4934" title="Must Be The Music (TV series)" label="Must Be The Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977931" start="5056" end="5074" title="Weak Become Heroes" label="Weak Become Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316029" start="5104" end="5115" title="The Streets" label="The Streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790332" start="5231" end="5238" title="I Luv U (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="I Luv U"/>
<link wikidata="Q252406" start="5324" end="5340" title="Boy in da Corner" label="Boy in da Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="5462" end="5478" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q252406" start="5518" end="5534" title="Boy in da Corner" label="Boy in da Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="5617" end="5623" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668351" start="5885" end="5898" title="So Solid Crew" label="So Solid Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558227" start="5917" end="5928" title="Lisa Maffia" label="Lisa Maffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746295" start="6247" end="6265" title="Fix Up, Look Sharp" label="Fix Up, Look Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="6335" end="6341" title="Top 20" label="Top 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="6452" end="6465" title="Mercury Prize" label="Mercury Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q440834" start="6575" end="6587" title="Ms. Dynamite" label="Ms. Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201174" start="6667" end="6679" title="Planet Sound" label="Planet Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6734" end="6747" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q544018" start="7042" end="7055" title="Basement Jaxx" label="Basement Jaxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416493" start="7084" end="7093" title="Kish Kash" label="Kish Kash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811454" start="7293" end="7311" title="Jus&amp;#x27; a Rascal" label="Jus&amp;#x27; a Rascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353419" start="7404" end="7414" title="Kidulthood" label="Kidulthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q721295" start="7727" end="7734" title="Jezebel (Bible)" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="7797" end="7809" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="7811" end="7819" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="7892" end="7916" title="NME Awards" label="NME Award for Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959779" start="7942" end="7950" title="Showtime (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="8056" end="8071" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q612273" start="8331" end="8342" title="FIFA Street (2005 video game)" label="FIFA Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715193" start="8386" end="8391" title="Dream (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035151" start="8486" end="8502" title="Captain Sensible" label="Captain Sensible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="8569" end="8592" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="8607" end="8620" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="8710" end="8720" title="marionette" label="marionette"/>
<link wikidata="Q806231" start="8918" end="8929" title="Band Aid (band)" label="Band Aid 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188494" start="8982" end="9015" title="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Christmas?" label="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Christmas?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="9431" end="9441" title="Number one hit record" label="number one"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="9454" end="9470" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281935" start="9584" end="9595" title="Eckō Unltd." label="Eckō Unltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="9627" end="9631" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="9661" end="9674" title="double A-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="10083" end="10097" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q174214" start="10128" end="10140" title="Cherie Blair" label="Cherie Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851839" start="10323" end="10338" title="Maths + English" label="Maths + English"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="10683" end="10696" title="Mercury Prize" label="Mercury Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q840882" start="10723" end="10730" title="Klaxons" label="Klaxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333627" start="10749" end="10773" title="Myths of the Near Future (album)" label="Myths of the Near Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="10836" end="10840" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878623" start="10870" end="10878" title="Hell Yes (EP)" label="Hell Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170599" start="10918" end="10932" title="Arctic Monkeys" label="Arctic Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322360" start="10973" end="10983" title="Brianstorm" label="Brianstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182699" start="11380" end="11394" title="Definitive Jux" label="Definitive Jux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027741" start="11455" end="11459" title="Campaign Against Living Miserably" label="CALM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993051" start="11843" end="11863" title="Tongue n&amp;#x27; Cheek" label="Tongue n&amp;#x27; Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013359" start="11936" end="11948" title="Dance wiv Me" label="Dance wiv Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642173" start="11962" end="11969" title="Bonkers (song)" label="Bonkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q437559" start="11976" end="11993" title="Armand Van Helden" label="Armand Van Helden"/>
<link wikidata="Q605628" start="12002" end="12009" title="Holiday (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499222" start="12026" end="12038" title="Dirtee Disco" label="Dirtee Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503548" start="12081" end="12112" title="Friday Night with Jonathan Ross" label="Friday Night with Jonathan Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067983" start="12253" end="12271" title="Chase &amp;amp; Status" label="Chase &amp;amp; Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845972" start="12425" end="12436" title="GRM Daily" label="Grime Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="12554" end="12567" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418613" start="12712" end="12730" title="Evolution Festival" label="Evolution Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="12734" end="12743" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="12773" end="12784" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709189" start="12859" end="12870" title="Dirtee Cash" label="Dirtee Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="13041" end="13052" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757886" start="13149" end="13172" title="You Got the Dirtee Love" label="You Got the Dirtee Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q217360" start="13184" end="13208" title="Florence and the Machine" label="Florence and the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499222" start="13437" end="13449" title="Dirtee Disco" label="Dirtee Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="13526" end="13542" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="13609" end="13617" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="13627" end="13634" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415322" start="13667" end="13671" title="Loca (Shakira song)" label="Loca"/>
<link wikidata="Q763207" start="13714" end="13725" title="Sale el Sol" label="Sale el Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="13989" end="13998" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="14005" end="14012" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702451" start="14531" end="14543" title="Smurfie Syco" label="Smurfie Syco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932229" start="14734" end="14746" title="Reincarnated (album)" label="Reincarnated"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="14783" end="14791" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757908" start="14799" end="14808" title="The Power (DJ Fresh song)" label="The Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="14930" end="14946" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="14954" end="14974" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="14980" end="14993" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q204494" start="15027" end="15036" title="18 Months" label="18 Months"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276931" start="15084" end="15098" title="Dillon Francis" label="Dillon Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992131" start="15178" end="15187" title="The Fifth (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="The Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560109" start="15242" end="15258" title="Goin&amp;#x27; Crazy (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="Goin&amp;#x27; Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="15275" end="15290" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212355" start="15496" end="15500" title="Hype (song)" label="Hype"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645665" start="15691" end="15697" title="Raskit" label="Raskit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813374" start="15838" end="15845" title="Orelsan" label="Orelsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19897862" start="15891" end="15897" title="Nekfeu" label="Nekfeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799875" start="16166" end="16175" title="Ladbrokes Coral" label="Ladbrokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q102046225" start="16330" end="16335" title="E3 AF" label="E3 AF"/>
<link wikidata="Q936573" start="16882" end="16887" title="crunk" label="crunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027165" start="16889" end="16902" title="Three 6 Mafia" label="Three 6 Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q294449" start="16904" end="16911" title="Lil Jon" label="Lil Jon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="16928" end="16941" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="16949" end="16958" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="17055" end="17088" title="The Observer" label="&amp;quot;The Observer&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="17160" end="17169" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q936479" start="17245" end="17250" title="Wiley (rapper)" label="Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001642" start="17308" end="17314" title="Wiley discography" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425084" start="17344" end="17361" title="Sasha Frere-Jones" label="Sasha Frere-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372231" start="17807" end="17811" title="Sway (British musician)" label="Sway"/>
<link wikidata="Q204019" start="17816" end="17822" title="M.I.A. (artist)" label="M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="18065" end="18072" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="18566" end="18579" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018138" start="18707" end="18722" title="Newham Generals" label="Newham Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013359" start="19150" end="19162" title="Dance Wiv Me" label="Dance Wiv Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="19180" end="19193" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q133698" start="19270" end="19279" title="Jo Whiley" label="Jo Whiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642173" start="19509" end="19516" title="Bonkers (song)" label="Bonkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q605628" start="19533" end="19540" title="Holiday (Dizzee Rascal song)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709189" start="19761" end="19772" title="Dirtee Cash" label="Dirtee Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702451" start="19842" end="19854" title="Teriy Keys" label="Smurfie Syco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585366" start="19900" end="19909" title="Merky ACE" label="Merky ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="19983" end="20013" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 US presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q25869" start="20053" end="20062" title="Newsnight" label="Newsnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942003" start="20079" end="20092" title="Jeremy Paxman" label="Jeremy Paxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="20116" end="20128" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451697" start="20476" end="20488" title="Firearms Act 1968" label="section five"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962263" start="20688" end="20697" title="ASP baton" label="ASP baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="20855" end="20866" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q123977" start="21069" end="21078" title="Orpington" label="Orpington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="21188" end="21203" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="21422" end="21424" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345942" start="21776" end="21801" title="University of East London" label="University of East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="21820" end="21861" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96134180" start="21875" end="21896" title="2020 Birthday Honours" label="2020 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="21969" end="21998" title="Domestic violence" label="assaulting his former partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q252406" start="22509" end="22525" title="Boy in da Corner" label="Boy in da Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959779" start="22547" end="22555" title="Showtime (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851839" start="22577" end="22592" title="Maths + English" label="Maths + English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993051" start="22614" end="22634" title="Tongue n&amp;#x27; Cheek" label="Tongue n&amp;#x27; Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992131" start="22656" end="22665" title="The Fifth (Dizzee Rascal album)" label="The Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645665" start="22687" end="22693" title="Raskit" label="Raskit"/>
<link wikidata="Q102046225" start="22715" end="22720" title="E3 AF" label="E3 AF"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22844" end="22903" title="Sounds Like London: 100 Years of Black Music in the Capital" label="Sounds Like London: 100 Years of Black Music in the Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123947" start="22974" end="22987" title="XL Recordings" label="XL Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498837" wikidata="Q73990" url="?curid=498837" title="Adolphe-Théodore Brongniart">
<text>Adolphe-Théodore Brongniart () FRS FRSE FGS (14 January 1801 – 18 February 1876) was a French botanist. He was the son of the geologist Alexandre Brongniart and grandson of the architect, Alexandre-Théodore Brongniart. Brongniart&#x27;s pioneering work on the relationships between extinct and existing plants has earned him the title of father of paleobotany. His major work on plant fossils was his &#x27; (1828–37). He wrote his dissertation on the Buckthorn family ([[Rhamnaceae]]), an extant family of [[flowering plant]]s, and worked at the [[Muséum national d&#x27;Histoire naturelle]] in Paris until his death. In 1851, he was elected a foreign member of the [[Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences]]. This botanist is denoted by the [[List of botanists by author abbreviation|author abbreviation]]Brongn. when citing a botanical name.

==Brongniart&#x27;s works==
Brongniart was an indefatigable investigator and a prolific writer of books and memoirs. As early as 1822, he published a paper on the classification and distribution of fossil plants. This was followed by several papers chiefly bearing upon the relation between extinct and existing forms - a line of research which culminated in the publication of the &#x27; (&quot;History of fossil plants&quot;), which has earned for him the title of &quot;father of paleobotany.&quot; This classification arranged fossil plants with their nearest living allies; it formed the basis of much subsequent work in paleobotany. It is of especial botanical interest, because, in accordance with Robert Brown&#x27;s discoveries of the fundamental difference between Gymnosperms and Angiosperms, the Cycadeae and Coniferae were placed in the new group the gymnosperms. In Brongniart&#x27;s &#x27; attention was also directed to the succession of forms in the various geological periods, with the important result that in the Palaeozoic period the Pteridophyta are found to predominate; in the Mesozoic, the Gymnosperms; in the Cenozoic, the Angiosperms, a result subsequently more fully stated in his &quot;&quot;. But the &quot;Histoire&quot; itself was not completed; the publication of successive parts proceeded regularly from 1828 to 1837, when the first volume was completed, but after that only three parts of the second volume appeared. Apart from his more comprehensive works, his most important palaeontological contributions are perhaps his observations on the structure of the treelike lycopodiopsid, &quot;Sigillaria&quot;, an extinct plant related to the living club mosses, and his researches (almost the last he undertook) on fossil seeds, of which a full account was published posthumously in 1880.

==Other pursuits==
He was active in many branches of botany, including anatomy and the taxonomy of seed-producing plants. Among his achievements in this direction, the most notable is the treatise &quot;&quot; (&quot;On the generation and development of the spermatophyte embryo&quot;), which is remarkable for the first account of any value of the development and structure of pollen, along with the confirmation of Giovanni Battista Amici&#x27;s 1823 discovery of the pollen-tube, the confirmation of Robert Brown&#x27;s views as to the structure of the unimpregnated ovule (with the introduction of the term &quot;sac embryonnaire&quot;, or embryo sac), showing how nearly Brongniart anticipated Amici&#x27;s subsequent (1846) discovery of the entrance of the pollen-tube into the micropyle, fertilizing the female cell, which then develops into the embryo.

Of his anatomical works, those of the greatest value are probably the &quot; (&quot;Research on the structure and function of leaves&quot;), and the &#x27; (&quot;New research on the epidermis&quot;), in which, among other important observations, the discovery of the cuticle is recorded; and, further, the &#x27; (&quot;Research on the organization of cycad stems&quot;), giving the results of the first investigation of the anatomy of those plants.

His systematic work is represented by a large number of papers and monographs, many of which relate to the flora of New Caledonia; and by his &quot;&quot; (1843), a catalogue of the plants in cultivation at the French National Museum of Natural History; it is a landmark in the history of classification in that it forms the starting-point of the classification system, modified successively by Alexander Braun, August W. Eichler and Adolf Engler, which was not superseded until the development of DNA research.

In addition to his scientific and professorial labours, Brongniart held various important official posts in connection with the department of education, and interested himself greatly in agricultural and horticultural matters. With Jean Victoire Audouin and Jean-Baptiste Dumas, his future brothers-in-law, Brongniart founded the &quot;Annales des Sciences Naturelles&quot;, a peer-reviewed journal, in 1824. He also founded the Société Botanique de France in 1854, and was its first president. 

Brongniart died in Paris in 1872 and is buried in Division 20 of the &quot;Cimetière du Père Lachaise&quot;.


==References==
*Books by and about Brongniart on WorldCat.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q73990" start="0" end="27" title="Adolphe-Théodore Brongniart" label="Adolphe-Théodore Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="31" end="34" title="Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="35" end="39" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="94" end="102" title="botany" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q442937" start="136" end="156" title="Alexandre Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342645" start="188" end="217" title="Alexandre-Théodore Brongniart" label="Alexandre-Théodore Brongniart"/>
<link wikidata="Q192694" start="348" end="359" title="paleobotany" label="paleobotany"/>
<link wikidata="Q73990" start="401" end="802" title="Adolphe-Théodore Brongniart" label="&amp;#x27; (1828–37). He wrote his dissertation on the Buckthorn family ([[Rhamnaceae]]), an extant family of [[flowering plant]]s, and worked at the [[Muséum national d&amp;#x27;Histoire naturelle]] in Paris until his death. In 1851, he was elected a foreign member of the [[Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences]]. This botanist is denoted by the [[List of botanists by author abbreviation|author abbreviation]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q669585" start="815" end="821" title="Author citation (botany)" label="citing"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="824" end="838" title="botanical name" label="botanical name"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="1546" end="1558" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="1616" end="1626" title="Gymnosperm" label="Gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="1632" end="1642" title="flowering plant" label="Angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="1649" end="1657" title="Cycadopsida" label="Cycadeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="1662" end="1671" title="Pinopsida" label="Coniferae"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="1874" end="1884" title="Palaeozoic" label="Palaeozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="1896" end="1908" title="Fern" label="Pteridophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="1942" end="1950" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="1976" end="1984" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149748" start="2447" end="2460" title="lycopodiopsid" label="lycopodiopsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233645" start="2468" end="2478" title="Sigillaria" label="Sigillaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q624488" start="2525" end="2536" title="Lycopodium" label="club mosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="2765" end="2786" title="Spermatophyte" label="seed-producing plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="3044" end="3050" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178412" start="3083" end="3106" title="Giovanni Battista Amici" label="Giovanni Battista Amici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429464" start="3136" end="3147" title="Pollen tube" label="pollen-tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="3169" end="3188" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Robert Brown&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="3236" end="3241" title="ovule" label="ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="3450" end="3459" title="Ovule" label="micropyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="3519" end="3525" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146493" start="3796" end="3803" title="Plant cuticle" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="3881" end="3886" title="cycad" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="4087" end="4092" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="4096" end="4109" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q838691" start="4191" end="4232" title="National Museum of Natural History (France)" label="French National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q62855" start="4375" end="4390" title="Alexander Braun" label="Alexander Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q62142" start="4392" end="4409" title="August W. Eichler" label="August W. Eichler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60718" start="4414" end="4426" title="Adolf Engler" label="Adolf Engler"/>
<link wikidata="Q727762" start="4725" end="4746" title="Jean Victoire Audouin" label="Jean Victoire Audouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164824" start="4751" end="4770" title="Jean-Baptiste Dumas" label="Jean-Baptiste Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506427" start="4922" end="4949" title="Société Botanique de France" label="Société Botanique de France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498838" wikidata="Q1489082" url="?curid=498838" title="Symbols of death">
<text>Symbols of death are the motifs, images and concepts associated with death throughout different cultures, religions and societies.

== Images ==
Various images are used traditionally to symbolize death; these rank from blunt depictions of cadavers and their parts to more allusive suggestions that time is fleeting and all men are mortals.

The human skull is an obvious and frequent symbol of death, found in many cultures and religious traditions. Human skeletons and sometimes non-human animal skeletons and skulls can also be used as blunt images of death; the traditional figure of the Grim Reaper – a black-hooded skeleton with a scythe – is one use of such symbolism. Within the Grim Reaper itself, the skeleton represents the decayed body whereas the robe symbolizes those worn by religious people conducting funeral services. The skull and crossbones motif (☠) has been used among Europeans as a symbol of both piracy and poison. The skull is also important as it remains the only &quot;recognizable&quot; aspect of a person once they have died.

Decayed cadavers can also be used to depict death; in medieval Europe, they were often featured in artistic depictions of the &quot;danse macabre&quot;, or in cadaver tombs which depicted the living and decomposed body of the person entombed. Coffins also serve as blunt reminders of mortality. Europeans were also seen to use coffins and cemeteries to symbolize the wealth and status of the person who has died, serving as a reminder to the living and the deceased as well.
Less blunt symbols of death frequently allude to the passage of time and the fragility of life, and can be described as &quot;memento mori&quot;; that is, an artistic or symbolic reminder of the inevitability of death. Clocks, hourglasses, sundials, and other timepieces both call to mind that time is passing. Similarly, a candle both marks the passage of time, and bears witness that it will eventually burn itself out as well as a symbol of hope of salvation. These sorts of symbols were often incorporated into &quot;vanitas&quot; paintings, a variety of early still life.

Certain animals such as crows, cats, owls, moths, vultures and bats are associated with death; some because they feed on carrion, others because they are nocturnal. Along with death, vultures can also represent transformation and renewal.

== Religious symbols ==
Religious symbols of death and depictions of the afterlife will vary with the religion practiced by the people who use them.

Tombs, tombstones, and other items of funeral architecture are obvious candidates for symbols of death. In ancient Egypt, the gods Osiris and Ptah were typically depicted as mummies; these gods governed the Egyptian afterlife. In Christianity, the Christian cross is frequently used on graves, and is meant to call to mind the crucifixion of Jesus. Some Christians also erect temporary crosses along public highways as memorials for those who died in accidents. In Buddhism, the symbol of a wheel represents the perpetual cycle of death and rebirth that happens in samsara. The symbol of a grave or tomb, especially one in a picturesque or unusual location, can be used to represent death, as in Nicolas Poussin&#x27;s famous painting &quot;Et in Arcadia ego&quot;.

Images of life in the afterlife are also symbols of death. Here, again, the ancient Egyptians produced detailed pictorial representations of the life enjoyed by the dead. In Christian folk religion, the spirits of the dead are often depicted as winged angels or angel-like creatures, dwelling among the clouds; this imagery of the afterlife is frequently used in comic depictions of life after death. In the Islamic view of the Afterlife, death is symbolised by a black and white ram which in turn will be slain to symbolise the &quot;Death of Death&quot;.

The Banshee also symbolizes the coming of death in Irish Mythology. This is typically represented by an older woman who is seen sobbing to symbolize the suffering of a person before their death.

== Colours ==

Black is the color of mourning in many European cultures. Black clothing is typically worn at funerals to show mourning for the death of the person. In East Asia, white is similarly associated with mourning; it represents the purity and perfection of the deceased person&#x27;s spirit. Hindus similarly also wear white during mourning and funerals. During the Victorian era, purple and grey were considered to be mourning colors in addition to black. Furthermore, in Revelation 6 in The Bible, Death is one of the four horsemen; and he rides a pale horse.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* An analysis of symbols of Death on the tombstones of the Knights of the Order of St John at the St John&#x27;s Co-Cathedral at Valletta, Malta, as appearing in Dane Munro, &#x27;Memento Mori, a companion to the most beautiful floor in the world&#x27; (Malta, 2005), 2 vols. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1489082" start="0" end="16" title="Symbols of death" label="Symbols of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="69" end="74" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q48422" start="239" end="246" title="cadaver" label="cadaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="272" end="280" title="allusion" label="allusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="345" end="356" title="human skull" label="human skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q9621" start="450" end="464" title="Human skeleton" label="Human skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="497" end="505" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161936" start="587" end="602" title="Personifications of death" label="the Grim Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="636" end="642" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033187" start="839" end="859" title="skull and crossbones" label="skull and crossbones"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="920" end="926" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="931" end="937" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="1056" end="1063" title="Decomposition" label="Decayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q473450" start="1188" end="1201" title="danse macabre" label="danse macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567423" start="1215" end="1227" title="cadaver tomb" label="cadaver tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q184418" start="1299" end="1305" title="Coffin" label="Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="1595" end="1599" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="1621" end="1625" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q273383" start="1657" end="1669" title="memento mori" label="memento mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="1750" end="1755" title="Clock" label="Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q179904" start="1758" end="1767" title="hourglass" label="hourglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="1771" end="1778" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="1855" end="1861" title="candle" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q733095" start="2052" end="2059" title="vanitas" label="vanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="2096" end="2106" title="still life" label="still life"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="2133" end="2137" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="2140" end="2143" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="2146" end="2149" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="2152" end="2156" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="2159" end="2166" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="2172" end="2175" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="2451" end="2459" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q381885" start="2499" end="2503" title="Tomb" label="Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q203443" start="2506" end="2515" title="grave stone" label="tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="2537" end="2544" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2614" end="2619" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2625" end="2628" title="god" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="2630" end="2636" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q146321" start="2641" end="2645" title="Ptah" label="Ptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="2673" end="2680" title="mummy" label="mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="2715" end="2724" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2729" end="2741" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="2747" end="2762" title="Christian cross" label="Christian cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q173387" start="2785" end="2791" title="Grave (burial)" label="graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="2826" end="2837" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2841" end="2846" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="2906" end="2913" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2964" end="2972" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="2990" end="2995" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="3195" end="3210" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15805858" start="3240" end="3257" title="Et in Arcadia ego (Poussin)" label="Et in Arcadia ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068640" start="3450" end="3463" title="folk religion" label="folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="3511" end="3515" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="3518" end="3523" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="3629" end="3634" title="comedy" label="comic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3714" end="3724" title="Qiyamah#Personification in Qiyâmah" label="symbolised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="3746" end="3749" title="sheep" label="ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q273112" start="3828" end="3835" title="Banshee" label="Banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="4035" end="4040" title="Black" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="4048" end="4053" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q750652" start="4057" end="4065" title="mourning" label="mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4074" end="4080" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="4187" end="4196" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="4198" end="4203" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4217" end="4241" title="Mourning#East Asia" label="associated with mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667687" start="4374" end="4382" title="Antyesti" label="funerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="4395" end="4408" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257809" start="4410" end="4416" title="purple" label="purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q42519" start="4421" end="4425" title="grey" label="grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="4479" end="4484" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4518" end="4527" title="The Bible" label="The Bible"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498842" wikidata="Q222786" url="?curid=498842" title="2S1 Gvozdika">
<text>The 2S1 &quot;Gvozdika&quot; (, &quot;Carnation&quot;) is a Soviet self-propelled howitzer introduced in 1972 and is in service in Russia and other countries . It is based on the MT-LBu multi-purpose chassis, mounting a 122 mm 2A18 howitzer. &quot;2S1&quot; is its GRAU designation. An alternative Russian designation is SAU-122, but in the Russian Army it is commonly known as &quot;Gvozdika&quot;. The 2S1 is fully amphibious with very little preparation, and once afloat is propelled by its tracks. A variety of track widths are available to allow the 2S1 to operate in snow or swamp conditions. It is NBC protected and has infrared night-vision capability.

The 2S1 was developed in Kharkiv, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. It has seven road wheels on each side; the running gear can be fitted with different widths of track to match terrain. The interior is separated into a driver&#x27;s compartment on the left, an engine compartment on the right and a fighting compartment to the rear. Within the fighting compartment the commander sits on the left, the loader on the right and the gunner to the front. The all-welded turret is located above the fighting compartment. The 2S1 uses a 122 mm howitzer based on the towed D-30 howitzer. The gun is equipped with a power rammer, a double-baffle muzzle brake and a fume extractor. It is capable of firing HE (high explosive), leaflet, HE/RAP, armor-piercing HE, flechette and chemical rounds.

== Production history ==
The first prototype was ready in 1958. The 2S1 entered service with the Soviet Army in the early 1970s and was first seen in public at a Polish Army parade in 1974. The vehicle was deployed in large numbers (72 per tank division, 36 per motorized rifle division). It was designated the M1974 by the U.S. Army and manufactured in Soviet, Polish and Bulgarian state factories.

== Variants ==

=== Iran ===
* Raad-1 (&#x27;Thunder&#x27;) – Iranian variant based on the hull of the Boragh APC.

=== Myanmar ===
* 2S1U – In March 2019, a Ukrainian company, the Great Export Import Company, and the Myanmar military have signed a joint-venture agreement to build a plant capable of manufacturing armored personnel carriers (APCs) and self-propelled howitzers. The types of APCs that will be made in the plant are said to be eight-wheeled BTR-4Us while the howitzers will be 2S1Us, which are based on the MT-LBu multipurpose chassis.

=== Poland ===
The 2S1 Gvozdika, and other related vehicles such as the MT-LB and Opal, were produced in Poland by Huta Stalowa Wola under the name 2S1 Goździk.
* 2S1M &quot;Goździk&quot; – Version with special amphibious kit that increases the vehicle&#x27;s amphibious capabilities.
* 2S1T &quot;Goździk&quot; – Version with a TOPAZ digital fire control system from WB Electronics. The system consists of a FONET-IP digital intercom system, new digital radio, military GPS receiver, military computer and dedicated software. The same system is used on other Polish Armed Forces artillery systems like the AHS Krab, Dana-T and WR-40 Langusta.

=== Romania ===
* OAPR model 89 (&quot;Obuzierul autopropulsat românesc, model 89&quot;) – Romanian variant combining the 2S1 Gvozdika&#x27;s turret and a modified version of the MLI-84&#x27;s chassis. Designed around 1978, it was produced between 1987 and 1992. Also, it is simply known as &quot;Model 89&quot;.

=== Russia ===

* 2S34 Khosta – Modernisation of the 2S1 with the 122 mm 2A31 gun replaced by the 120 mm 2A80-1 gun-mortar. Further improvements include a new Malakhit fire control system, a battlefield observation system and the ability to fire the Kitolov-2M guided ammunition. One unit, the 21st Guards Motor Rifle Brigade in Totskoye, is currently being equipped with the system.

=== Serbia ===
* 2S1 modernized - The modernization is being carried out on the basis of the 122 mm towed howitzer of the Serbian modernization program. Project &quot;SORA 122mm&quot; and NORA B-52. Where the truck platform was abandoned, which was used by the prototype version of the &quot;SORA 122mm&quot; system in favor of a much better, crawler platform 2S1 Gvozdika system. The action was made possible by two new projectiles and an increased range of about 40% from . A new ballistic computer and fire control system make it much faster to prepare for action. There is also a new inertial navigation system, GPRS, as well as the possibility of action, multiple projectiles in one point, MRSI. Thus, it was achieved that with one 2S1 Gvozdika system, in the system of MRSI action in one point, 6 projectiles can be fired in one minute; the modernized 2S1 Gvozdika is much improved. For better defense, a turret with a 12.7 mm machine gun was added. In 2021, the first modernized 2S1 Gvozdika system battery was inducted into service with the Serbian Army.

=== Soviet Union ===
*2S15 Norov – A prototype tank destroyer equipped with a radar-based fire control system and a 100 mm gun.
* UR-77 Meteorit – Mine clearing vehicle with launcher for mine-clearing line charges.

=== Ukraine ===
* Kevlar-E – Infantry fighting vehicle based on the 2S1 platform, equipped with Shturm remote weapon station and room for 6 passengers in addition to the 3 crew. The original V8 diesel engine has been replaced with a diesel engine produced by Caterpillar, Cummins or Deutz, increasing the maximum road speed to . The vehicle is amphibious and has air conditioning, a fire detection and suppression system, an NBC system, navigation system, and night-vision equipment. The variant was first introduced in April 2018. The prototype has been fighting in the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

* On January 21, 2025, the Danish Ministry of Defense quietly added the 2S1 Gvozdika 122mm self-propelled howitzer to its list of military donations to Ukraine. The quantity remains unspecified, and the origin of these systems has not been disclosed.

=== Vietnam ===
* PTH-01/122 – Locally made version of 2S1 Gvozdika, currently undergone testing.

== Operators ==



===Current operators===
* – 140 as of 2024
* − 9+ as of 2024
* – 9 as of 2024
* − 68 as of 2024
* – 125 as of 2024
* – 48 as of 2024
* – 10 as of 2024
* − 3 as of 2024
* − 6 as of 2024
* – 8 as of 2024
* – 32 as of 2024
* – 74 as of 2024
* − 20 as of 2024
* − Used in Syria
* − 60+ 2S1 and Raad-1 as of 2024
* – 60 as of 2024
* − Unknown number operated by the Peshmerga
* − 18 as of 2024
* − Used by the Libyan National Army
* – 206 as of 2024
* − 6 2S1 and 34 Model 89 as of 2024
* – 130 used by the Ground Forces, 85 used by the Naval Infantry, plus an unknown amount operated by the 1st Army Corps, 2nd Army Corps, and border guards. Estimated to have 1,800 in storage as of 2024
* – 67 as of 2024
* 
* − 3 as of 2024
* – 40 as of 2024 
* – 125+ used by the Ground Forces, Marines and Airborne Assault Troops as of 2024
* – 6 as of 2024
* − 18 as of 2024
* 
* − 12 as of 2024

=== Former operators ===

* – 91 in 1999
* – 230 in 1989. Passed on to successor states
* – 300 in 1989. Phased out in 1990 after German reunification
* – Unknown number operational prior to the 2003 invasion of Iraq
* − 130 in 2004
* − 24 in 2004
* – 8 in 1999
* – 3,200 used by the Ground Forces and 90 by the Naval Infantry in 1989. Passed on to successor states
* – Passed on to successor states

== Combat history ==
* Afghanistan – Soviet–Afghan War
* Chechnya (Russia) – First Chechen War (1994–1996), Second Chechen War (1999 to 2000)
* Iraq – Iran–Iraq War, Gulf War, Iraq War
* Yugoslavia – Yugoslav Wars
* Georgia – Russo-Georgian War
* Libya – First Libyan Civil War, Second Libyan Civil War
* Nagorno-Karabakh - Second Nagorno-Karabakh War
* Syria – Syrian Civil War
* Ukraine – Russo-Ukrainian War

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* List of artillery
* List of AFVs

==Bibliography==
*
*

== References ==
== External links ==
* FAS.org
* Armscontrol.ru
* Huta Stalowa Wola – Polish manufacturer
* Arsenal Co. – Bulgarian manufacturer of 2A31(2S1)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222786" start="4" end="22" title="2S1 Gvozdika" label="2S1 &amp;quot;Gvozdika"/>
<link wikidata="Q158984" start="38" end="47" title="Dianthus caryophyllus" label="Carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="67" end="90" title="Self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q452185" start="179" end="185" title="MT-LBu" label="MT-LBu"/>
<link wikidata="Q172739" start="220" end="231" title="122 mm howitzer 2A18 (D-30)" label="122 mm 2A18"/>
<link wikidata="Q431942" start="265" end="269" title="GRAU" label="GRAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="417" end="427" title="Amphibious vehicle" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="605" end="608" title="CBRN defense" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="687" end="694" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="696" end="731" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840773" start="1303" end="1315" title="muzzle brake" label="muzzle brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133085" start="1322" end="1336" title="fume extractor" label="fume extractor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1383" end="1390" title="Cluster bomb#Leaflet dispensing" label="leaflet"/>
<link wikidata="Q841739" start="1392" end="1398" title="Rocket Assisted Projectile" label="HE/RAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726474" start="1419" end="1428" title="flechette" label="flechette"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="1548" end="1559" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q248989" start="1613" end="1624" title="Polish Army" label="Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="1696" end="1704" title="division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="1729" end="1737" title="division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q893302" start="1955" end="1961" title="Boragh" label="Boragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q167292" start="2477" end="2482" title="MT-LB" label="MT-LB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335081" start="2487" end="2491" title="Opal (armoured personnel carrier)" label="Opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899048" start="2520" end="2537" title="Huta Stalowa Wola" label="Huta Stalowa Wola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9369319" start="2773" end="2787" title="WB Electronics" label="WB Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q389052" start="3012" end="3020" title="AHS Krab" label="AHS Krab"/>
<link wikidata="Q900779" start="3022" end="3026" title="152mm SpGH DANA" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q847136" start="3033" end="3047" title="WR-40 Langusta" label="WR-40 Langusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034639" start="3229" end="3235" title="MLI-84" label="MLI-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q222786" start="3382" end="3393" title="2S34 Khosta" label="2S34 Khosta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3437" end="3441" title="2A31" label="2A31"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3469" end="3475" title="2A80-1" label="2A80-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="3476" end="3486" title="gun-mortar" label="gun-mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="3532" end="3551" title="fire control system" label="fire control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q50808022" start="3614" end="3624" title="Kitolov-2M" label="Kitolov-2M"/>
<link wikidata="Q25630228" start="3658" end="3689" title="21st Guards Motor Rifle Brigade" label="21st Guards Motor Rifle Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024266" start="3693" end="3701" title="Totskoye" label="Totskoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030623" start="4835" end="4845" title="2S15 Norov" label="2S15 Norov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468361" start="4943" end="4957" title="UR-77 Meteorit" label="UR-77 Meteorit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864043" start="5000" end="5025" title="mine-clearing line charge" label="mine-clearing line charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="5058" end="5083" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="Infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406909" start="5132" end="5153" title="remote weapon station" label="remote weapon station"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="5288" end="5299" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173476" start="5301" end="5308" title="Cummins" label="Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q533617" start="5312" end="5317" title="Deutz AG" label="Deutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="5454" end="5457" title="CBRN defense" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="5600" end="5627" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5657" end="5683" title="Danish Ministry of Defense" label="Danish Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q932728" start="6361" end="6370" title="Peshmerga" label="Peshmerga"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="6405" end="6425" title="Libyan National Army" label="Libyan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q85987101" start="6587" end="6601" title="1st Army Corps (Russia)" label="1st Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q120280856" start="6603" end="6617" title="2nd Army Corps (Russia)" label="2nd Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q682152" start="6762" end="6775" title="Ukrainian Ground Forces" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986952" start="6777" end="6784" title="Ukrainian Marine Corps" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878417" start="6789" end="6812" title="Ukrainian Air Assault Forces" label="Airborne Assault Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="7076" end="7097" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="7305" end="7316" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="7319" end="7336" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="7339" end="7347" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="7359" end="7376" title="First Chechen War" label="First Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="7390" end="7408" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7426" end="7430" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="7433" end="7446" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="7448" end="7456" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="7458" end="7466" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="7469" end="7479" title="SFRY" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="7482" end="7495" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="7498" end="7505" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="7508" end="7526" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="Russo-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="7529" end="7534" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="7537" end="7559" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="First Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="7561" end="7584" title="Second Libyan Civil War" label="Second Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954835" start="7587" end="7603" title="Nagorno-Karabakh conflict" label="Nagorno-Karabakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659280" start="7606" end="7633" title="Second Nagorno-Karabakh War" label="Second Nagorno-Karabakh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="7636" end="7641" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="7644" end="7660" title="Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="7663" end="7670" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="7673" end="7692" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272708" start="7720" end="7737" title="List of artillery" label="List of artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945441" start="7740" end="7752" title="List of AFVs" label="List of AFVs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498850" wikidata="Q2406633" url="?curid=498850" title="Broken beat">
<text>Broken beat (sometimes referred to as &quot;bruk&quot;) is an electronic dance music genre that emerged in the late 1990s and is characterized by syncopated beats and frenetic, choppy rhythms, often alongside female vocals and elements inspired by 1970s jazz-funk. It has been heavily influenced by styles such as house, drum and bass, hip hop, techno, acid jazz, and R&amp;B. The eclectic style generally avoided rigid four-on-the-floor rhythms and could make use of samplers, analogue synths, and live instrumentation.

==History==
Broken beat first appeared in the late 1990s and was pioneered by Bugz in the Attic, IG Culture, and the release of the 4hero album &quot;Two Pages&quot; was influential on the emerging sound and scene. John Bush from AllMusic called it &quot;about as fusion-soaked as it gets.&quot; Appearing in the western parts of London, the genre is also referred to as &quot;West London&quot;, mainly because Goya Music&#x27;s offices were in London&#x27;s Ladbroke Grove, W11, as were most of the participating artists&#x27; studios.

Bugz in the Attic&#x27;s Neon Phusion, Mark Force, Afronaut and IG Culture are credited with kick-starting the scene with numerous releases under various monikers, and the New Sector Movements releases for People Music. The sound created combined a variety of music styles including funk, soul, and hip-hop. The transition was to a more abstract form of drum and bass. Many artists that started releasing through 4hero&#x27;s Reinforced label are now considered pioneers of broken beat. Simultaneously, established techno artists like Carl Craig and Stacey Pullen experimented with the music they were making, trying to add jazz elements and breaks to their sound. As the music is still based on classic Detroit techno and usually has a harder sound, it is sometimes referred to as &quot;broken techno&quot;. This eclectic mixture was picked up by the Detroit and jazz-affiliated UK techno producers Kirk Degiorgio or As One and Ian O&#x27;Brien, who tried to form it into a more soulful variation which further influenced the development of the broken beat genre.

==Influences==
Broken beat draws from 1970s jazz-funk and has been influenced by artists such as Lonnie Liston Smith, the Mizell Brothers (producers for Donald Byrd, Bobbi Humphrey and Johnny Hammond in the mid-1970s), Herbie Hancock, George Duke, and others. One might also hear in broken beat, echos of disco, 1980s contemporary R&amp;B and funk (Shalamar, Prince), early electronica (Kraftwerk), hip hop (&quot;Planet Rock&quot;), 1980s new wave (Depeche Mode, New Order), drum and bass, house and techno.

==Scene==
Regular nights that play this genre of music include Co-op, held at Velvet Rooms, and then a few years later moving on to Plastic People, a famous club located in London, for a number of years before re-launching at East Village - both in Shoreditch. In 2008, Afronaut and Bruce Q (Liquid Fusion) teamed up for monthly Co-op sessions which was launched at Concrete in Birmingham. Liquid Fusion ran every Sunday at the Living Room first (2000-2002) then onto Zinc (2002-2008). It had a following of several hundred weekly. Another night was Inspiration Information, previously at Notting Hill Arts Club which then went on to be at East Village in Shoreditch.

In March 2023, DJ Cengiz introduced Bruk Therapy Nights, an event series held initially at Grow Hackney Wick in East London. The initiative aims to cultivate a vibrant fusion of Soul, Jazz, House, and Future Beats, with a particular emphasis on the enthralling realm of Bruk/Broken Beats. These dynamic nights receive steadfast support from members of Selectors Assemble, a collective of DJ/producers dedicated to bolstering projects affiliated with CoOp Presents and Dance Regular labels. Their collaborative efforts spotlight the abundant talent within London&#x27;s Bruk/Broken Beat movement, fostering an atmosphere of musical exploration and community engagement.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2406633" start="0" end="11" title="Broken beat" label="Broken beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406633" start="44" end="48" title="Broken beat" label="bruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="62" end="84" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="146" end="162" title="Syncopation" label="syncopated beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q38656" start="254" end="263" title="jazz-funk" label="jazz-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="314" end="319" title="house music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="321" end="334" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="336" end="343" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="345" end="351" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q221772" start="353" end="362" title="acid jazz" label="acid jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="368" end="375" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029197" start="420" end="437" title="four-on-the-floor" label="four-on-the-floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002589" start="600" end="617" title="Bugz in the Attic" label="Bugz in the Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971066" start="619" end="629" title="IG Culture" label="IG Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="654" end="659" title="4hero" label="4hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704807" start="672" end="681" title="Two Pages" label="Two Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="852" end="858" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030864" start="981" end="995" title="Ladbroke Grove" label="Ladbroke Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958518" start="997" end="1000" title="W postcode area" label="W11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002589" start="1060" end="1077" title="Bugz in the Attic" label="Bugz in the Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971066" start="1124" end="1134" title="IG Culture" label="IG Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="1473" end="1478" title="4hero" label="4hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="1575" end="1581" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q962197" start="1595" end="1605" title="Carl Craig" label="Carl Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495427" start="1610" end="1623" title="Stacey Pullen" label="Stacey Pullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1684" end="1688" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q984341" start="1960" end="1974" title="Kirk Degiorgio" label="Kirk Degiorgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q984341" start="1978" end="1984" title="Kirk Degiorgio" label="As One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379957" start="1989" end="2005" title="Ian O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Ian O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q38656" start="2170" end="2179" title="jazz-funk" label="jazz-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242553" start="2223" end="2242" title="Lonnie Liston Smith" label="Lonnie Liston Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884615" start="2244" end="2263" title="the Mizell Brothers" label="the Mizell Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362764" start="2279" end="2290" title="Donald Byrd" label="Donald Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q529243" start="2292" end="2306" title="Bobbi Humphrey" label="Bobbi Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q322489" start="2311" end="2325" title="Johnny &amp;quot;Hammond&amp;quot; Smith" label="Johnny Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="2345" end="2359" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q536322" start="2361" end="2372" title="George Duke" label="George Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="2431" end="2436" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="2444" end="2464" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="contemporary R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="2469" end="2473" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329167" start="2475" end="2483" title="Shalamar" label="Shalamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="2485" end="2491" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="2500" end="2511" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="2513" end="2522" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="2525" end="2532" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391429" start="2540" end="2551" title="Planet Rock (song)" label="Planet Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="2566" end="2574" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="2576" end="2588" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="2590" end="2599" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063569" start="3225" end="3247" title="Notting Hill Arts Club" label="Notting Hill Arts Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="3483" end="3487" title="Soul music" label="Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3489" end="3493" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="3495" end="3500" title="House music" label="House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498851" wikidata="Q1785397" url="?curid=498851" title="RSA Factoring Challenge">
<text>The RSA Factoring Challenge was a challenge put forward by RSA Laboratories on March 18, 1991 to encourage research into computational number theory and the practical difficulty of factoring large integers and cracking RSA keys used in cryptography. They published a list of semiprimes (numbers with exactly two prime factors) known as the RSA numbers, with a cash prize for the successful factorization of some of them. The smallest of them, a 100-decimal digit number called RSA-100 was factored by April 1, 1991. Many of the bigger numbers have still not been factored and are expected to remain unfactored for quite some time, however advances in quantum computers make this prediction uncertain due to Shor&#x27;s algorithm.

In 2001, RSA Laboratories expanded the factoring challenge and offered prizes ranging from $10,000 to $200,000 for factoring numbers from 576 bits up to 2048 bits.

The RSA Factoring Challenges ended in 2007. RSA Laboratories stated: &quot;Now that the industry has a considerably more advanced understanding of the cryptanalytic strength of common symmetric-key and public-key algorithms, these challenges are no longer active.&quot; When the challenge ended in 2007, only RSA-576 and RSA-640 had been factored from the 2001 challenge numbers.

The factoring challenge was intended to track the cutting edge in integer factorization. A primary application is for choosing the key length of the RSA public-key encryption scheme. Progress in this challenge should give an insight into which key sizes are still safe and for how long. As RSA Laboratories is a provider of RSA-based products, the challenge was used by them as an incentive for the academic community to attack the core of their solutions — in order to prove its strength.

The RSA numbers were generated on a computer with no network connection of any kind. The computer&#x27;s hard drive was subsequently destroyed so that no record would exist, anywhere, of the solution to the factoring challenge.

The first RSA numbers generated, RSA-100 to RSA-500 and RSA-617, were labeled according to their number of decimal digits; the other RSA numbers (beginning with RSA-576) were generated later and labelled according to their number of binary digits. The numbers in the table below are listed in increasing order despite this shift from decimal to binary.

==The mathematics==
RSA Laboratories states that: for each RSA number &quot;n&quot;, there exist prime numbers &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; such that
:&quot;n&quot; = &quot;p&quot; × &quot;q&quot;.

The problem is to find these two primes, given only &quot;n&quot;.

==The prizes and records==
The following table gives an overview over all RSA numbers. Note that the RSA Factoring Challenge ended in 2007 and no further prizes will be awarded for factoring the higher numbers.
:&quot;The challenge numbers in white lines are part of the original challenge and are expressed in base 10, while the challenge numbers in yellow lines are part of the 2001 expansion and are expressed in base 2&quot;


==See also==
* RSA numbers, decimal expansions of the numbers and known factorizations
* LCS35
* The Magic Words are Squeamish Ossifrage, the solution found in 1993 to another RSA challenge posed in 1977
* RSA Secret-Key Challenge
* Integer factorization records

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1785397" start="4" end="27" title="RSA Factoring Challenge" label="RSA Factoring Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061730" start="59" end="75" title="RSA Laboratories" label="RSA Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646614" start="121" end="148" title="computational number theory" label="computational number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="181" end="190" title="Factorization" label="factoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="197" end="204" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="219" end="222" title="RSA (algorithm)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="236" end="248" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q765289" start="275" end="284" title="semiprime" label="semiprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="312" end="324" title="prime factor" label="prime factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072840" start="340" end="351" title="RSA numbers" label="RSA numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072840" start="477" end="484" title="RSA-100" label="RSA-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="651" end="667" title="quantum computer" label="quantum computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q940334" start="707" end="728" title="Shor&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Shor&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="1080" end="1093" title="Symmetric key algorithm" label="symmetric-key"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="1098" end="1118" title="Public key algorithm" label="public-key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="1343" end="1364" title="integer factorization" label="integer factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557574" start="1408" end="1418" title="key length" label="key length"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="1426" end="1429" title="RSA (algorithm)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="1430" end="1451" title="public-key encryption" label="public-key encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557574" start="1521" end="1529" title="key size" label="key size"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="2104" end="2111" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="2230" end="2236" title="binary numeral system" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="2448" end="2460" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="2932" end="2939" title="base 10" label="base 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="3037" end="3043" title="base 2" label="base 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072840" start="3067" end="3078" title="RSA numbers" label="RSA numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457446" start="3141" end="3146" title="LCS35" label="LCS35"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749482" start="3149" end="3188" title="The Magic Words are Squeamish Ossifrage" label="The Magic Words are Squeamish Ossifrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990952" start="3258" end="3282" title="RSA Secret-Key Challenge" label="RSA Secret-Key Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392938" start="3285" end="3314" title="Integer factorization records" label="Integer factorization records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498852" wikidata="Q182545" url="?curid=498852" title="Stylistic device">
<text>In literature and writing, stylistic devices are a variety of techniques used to give an auxiliary meaning, idea, or feeling.

== Figurative language ==
A figure of speech is any way of saying something other than the ordinary way. Figurative language is language using figures of speech.

===Simile===
The easiest stylistic device to identify is a simile, signaled by the use of the words &quot;like&quot; or &quot;as&quot;. A simile is a comparison used to attract the reader&#x27;s attention and describe something in descriptive terms.
:Example: &quot;From up here on the fourteenth floor, my brother Charley looks &quot;like&quot; an insect scurrying among other insects.&quot; (from &quot;Sweet Potato Pie,&quot; Eugenia Collier)
:Example: The beast had eyes as big &quot;as&quot; baseballs and teeth as long &quot;as&quot; knives.
:Example: She put her hand to the boy&#x27;s head, which was steaming &quot;like&quot; a hot train.

===Metaphor===
A metaphor is a comparison that does not use the words &quot;like&quot; or &quot;as&quot;. Metaphors can span over multiple sentences.

Example: &quot;That boy is like a machine.&quot; is a simile but &quot;That boy is a machine!&quot; is a metaphor.

===Synecdoche===
Synecdoche occurs when a part of something is used to refer to the whole. Many examples of synecdoche are idioms, common to the language.
:Example: Workers can be referred to as &#x27;pairs of hands&#x27;, and a vehicle as one&#x27;s &#x27;wheels&#x27;.

===Metonymy===
Metonymy is similar to synecdoche, but instead of a part representing the whole, a related object or part of a related object is used to represent the whole. Often it is used to represent the whole of an abstract idea.
:Example: The phrase &quot;The king&#x27;s guns were aimed at the enemy,&quot; using &#x27;guns&#x27; to represent infantry.
:Example: The word &#x27;crown&#x27; may be used metonymically to refer to the king or queen, and at times to the law of the land.

===Personification===

Giving human or animal characteristics to inanimate objects.

:Example: The sun smiled down on the travelers. (the sun does not smile, humans smile)

===Apostrophe===

Similar to &#x27;personification&#x27; but direct. The speaker addresses someone absent or dead, or addresses an inanimate or abstract object as if it were human.

===Charactonym===
This is when the name of a character has a symbolic meaning. For example, in Dickens&#x27; &quot;Great Expectations&quot;, Miss Havisham has a sham or lives a life full of pretense. In Hawthorne&#x27;s &quot;The Scarlet Letter&quot;, Rev. Dimmesdale metaphorically fades away (dims) as the novel progresses, while Chillingworth has a cold (chilled) heart.

===Symbol===
A symbol may be an object, a person, a situation, an action, a word, or an idea that has literal meaning in the story as well as an alternative identity that represents something else. It is used as an expressive way to depict an idea. The symbol generally conveys an emotional response far beyond what the word, idea, or image itself dictates.
:Example: A heart standing for love. (One might say &quot;It broke my heart&quot; rather than &quot;I was really upset&quot;)
:Example: A sunrise portraying new hope. (&quot;All their fears melted in the face of the newly risen sun.&quot;)

===Allegory===
An allegory is a story that has a second meaning, usually by endowing characters, objects or events with symbolic significance. The entire story functions symbolically; often a pattern relates each literal item to a corresponding abstract idea or principle. Although the surface story may have its interest, the author&#x27;s major interest is in the ulterior meaning.

===Imagery===

This is when the author invokes sensory details. Often, this is simply to draw a reader more deeply into a story by helping the reader visualize what is being described. However, imagery may also symbolize important ideas in a story.

For example, in Saki&#x27;s &quot;The Interlopers&quot;, two men engaged in a generational feud become trapped beneath a fallen tree in a storm: &quot;Ulrich von Gradwitz found himself stretched on the ground, one arm numb beneath him and the other held almost as helplessly in a tight tangle of forked branches, while both legs were pinned beneath the fallen mass.&quot; Readers can not only visualize the scene but may infer from it that it is the feud that has trapped him. Note also the diction used within the imagery: words like &quot;forked&quot; and &quot;fallen&quot; imply a kind of hell that he is trapped in.

===Motif===

When a word, phrase, image, or idea is repeated throughout a work or several works of literature.

For example, in Ray Bradbury&#x27;s short story, &quot;There Will Come Soft Rains&quot;, he describes a futuristic &quot;smart house&quot; in a post-nuclear-war time. All life is dead except for one dog, which dies in the course of the story. However, Bradbury mentions mice, snakes, robins, swallows, giraffes, antelopes, and many other animals in the course of the story. This animal motif establishes a contrast between the past, when life was flourishing, and the story&#x27;s present when all life is dead.

Motifs may also be used to establish mood (as the blood motif in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth&quot;), for foreshadowing (as when Mary Shelley, in &quot;Frankenstein&quot;, mentions the moon almost every time the creature is about to appear), to support the theme (as when, in Sophocles&#x27; drama &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;, the motif of prophecy strengthens the theme of the irresistibility of the gods), or for other purposes.

===Paradox===
In literary terminology, a paradox is an apparent contradiction that is nevertheless somehow true. Paradox can take the form of an oxymoron, overstatement or understatement. Paradox can blend into irony.

== Sound techniques ==

===Rhyme===

The repetition of identical or similar sounds, usually accented vowel sounds and succeeding consonant sounds at the end of words, and often at the ends of lines of prose or poetry.

For example, in the following lines from a poem by A. E. Housman, the last words of both lines rhyme with each other.
: Loveliest of trees, the cherry now
: Is hung with bloom along the bough

===Alliteration===

Alliteration is the repetition of consonant sounds at the beginning of words.
:&quot;Example:&quot; &quot;...many a man is making friends with death/ Even as I speak, for lack of love alone.&quot; (Edna St. Vincent Millay&#x27;s &quot;Sonnet 30&quot;).

Alliteration is used by an author to create emphasis, to add beauty to the writing style, and occasionally to aid in shaping the mood. It is also used to create a rhythm and musical effect on the reader&#x27;s mind as well.

===Assonance===

Similar to alliteration, in which vowel sounds are repeated. They are usually in the middle of a word.
:&quot;Example:&quot; &quot;batter that mattered&quot;, &quot;the blue bulging plug.&quot;

===Consonance===

Similar to alliteration, but the consonants are at the ends of words.

:&quot;Example:&quot; &quot;odds and ends&quot;, &quot;short and sweet&quot;.

===Rhythm===
It is most important in poetry, but also used in prose for emphasis and aesthetic gain.

&quot;Example:&quot; The fallibly irrevocable cat met its intrinsic match in the oppositional form of a dog.

===Onomatopoeia===

This includes words that sound like their meaning or imitations of sounds.

&quot;Example:&quot; &quot;The bees were buzzing&quot;

== Structure ==

===Formal structure===
Formal structure refers to the forms of a text. In the first place, a text is either a novel, a drama, a poem, or some other &quot;form&quot; of literature. However, this term can also refer to the length of lines, stanzas, or cantos in poems, as well as sentences, paragraphs, or chapters in prose. Furthermore, such visible structures as dialogue versus narration are also considered part of formal structure.

===Storyline and plot===
The storyline is the chronological account of events that follow each other in the narrative. The plot includes the storyline, and is more; it includes how elements in the story interact to create complexity, intrigue, and surprise. The plot is often created by having separate threads of storyline interact at critical times and in unpredictable ways, creating unexpected twists and turns in the overall storyline.

===Plot structure===
Plot structure refers to the configuration of a plot in terms of its exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, and resolution/denouement. For example, Dickens&#x27; novel &quot;Great Expectations&quot; is noted for having only a single page of exposition before the rising action begins, while &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; by J. R. R. Tolkien has an unusually lengthy falling action. The plot can also be structured by the use of devices such as flashbacks, framing, and epistolary elements.

====Flashback====
A flashback (which is one of the most easily recognized utilization of plot structure) is a scene in writing which occurs outside of the current timeline, before the events that are occurring in the story. It is used to explain plot elements, give background and context to a scene, or explain characteristics of characters or events.

For instance, one chapter may be at present in a character&#x27;s life, and then the next chapter might be the character&#x27;s life years ago. The second chapter gives meaning to the first, as it explains other events the character experienced and thus puts present events in context. In Khaled Hosseini&#x27;s &quot;The Kite Runner&quot;, the first short chapter occurs in the narrative&#x27;s real-time; most of the remainder of the book is a flashback.

====Frame story====
When there is a lengthy flashback comprising more than half of the text, a frame story is the portion outside the flashback. For example, Mary Shelley&#x27;s &quot;Frankenstein&quot; uses the adventures of a sea captain as a frame story for the famous tale of the scientist and his creation. Occasionally, an author will have an unfinished frame, such as in Henry James&#x27;s &quot;The Turn of the Screw&quot;. The lack of a finishing frame in this story has the effect of leaving the reader disoriented, adding to the disturbing mood of the story.

===Foreshadowing===

This is when the author drops clues about what is to come in a story, which builds tension and the reader&#x27;s suspense throughout the book.
:Example: The boy kissed his mother and warmly embraced her, oblivious to the fact that this was the last time he would ever see her.

===Allusion===
Allusion is a reference to something from history or literature.

== Irony ==
===Verbal irony===
This is the simplest form of irony, in which the speaker says the opposite of what he or she intends. There are several forms, including euphemism, understatement, sarcasm, and some forms of humor.

===Situational irony===
This is when the author creates a surprise that is the exact opposite of what the reader would expect, often creating humor or an eerie feeling. For example, in Steinbeck&#x27;s novel &quot;The Pearl&quot;, the reader may think that Kino and Juana would become happy and successful after discovering the &quot;Pearl of the World&quot;, with all its value. However, their lives change dramatically for the worse after discovering it.

Similarly, in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;, the title character almost kills King Claudius at one point, but resists because Claudius is praying and therefore may go to heaven. As Hamlet wants Claudius to go to hell, he waits. A few moments later, after Hamlet leaves the stage, Claudius reveals to the audience that he doesn&#x27;t mean his prayers (&quot;words without thoughts never to heaven go&quot;), so Hamlet should have killed him after all.

A way to remember the name of this term is that it describes an &quot;ironic situation&quot;.

===Dramatic irony===
Dramatic Irony is when the reader knows something important about the story that one or more characters in the story do not know. For example, in William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, the drama of Act V comes from the fact that the audience knows Juliet is alive, but Romeo thinks she&#x27;s dead. If the audience had thought, like Romeo, that she was dead, the scene would not have had anywhere near the same power.

Likewise, in Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s &quot;The Tell-Tale Heart&quot;, the energy at the end of the story comes from the fact that we know the narrator killed the old man, while the guests are oblivious. If we were as oblivious as the guests, there would be virtually no point in the story.

The way to remember the name is that dramatic irony adds to the &quot;drama&quot; of the story.

See Irony for a more detailed discussion, and definitions of other forms of irony.

== Register ==

===Diction===
Diction is the choice of specific words to communicate not only meaning, but emotion as well. Authors writing their texts consider not only a word&#x27;s denotation but also its connotation. For example, a person may be described as stubborn or tenacious, both of which have the same basic meaning but are opposite in terms of their emotional background (the first is an insult, while the second is a compliment). Similarly, a bargain-seeker may be described as either thrifty (compliment) or stingy (insult). An author&#x27;s diction is extremely important in discovering the narrator&#x27;s tone, or attitude.

===Syntax===

Sentences can be long or short, written in the active voice or passive voice, composed as simple, compound, complex, or compound-complex. They may also include such techniques as inversion or such structures as appositive phrases, verbal phrases (gerund, participle, and infinitive), and subordinate clauses (noun, adjective, and adverb). These tools can be highly effective in achieving an author&#x27;s purpose.

Example: The ghetto was ruled by neither German nor Jew; it was ruled by delusion. (from &quot;Night&quot;, by Elie Wiesel)

In this sentence, Wiesel uses two parallel independent clauses written in the passive voice. The first clause establishes suspense about who rules the ghetto, and then the first few words of the second clause set up the reader with the expectation of an answer, which is metaphorically revealed only in the final word of the sentence.

===Voice===
In grammar, there are two voices: active and passive. These terms can be applied to whole sentences or verbs.
Verbs also have tense, aspect and mode.
There are three tenses: past, present, and future.
There are two main aspects: perfect and progressive. Some grammarians refer to aspects as tenses, but this is not strictly correct, as the perfect and progressive aspects convey information other than time.
There are many modes (also called moods). Some important ones are: declarative, affirmative, negative, emphatic, conditional, imperative, interrogative and subjunctive. 

===Tone===
Tone expresses the writer&#x27;s or speaker&#x27;s attitude toward the subject, the reader, or herself or himself.

== See also ==
*Rhetorical device
* Hypotyposis

==References==
===Bibliography===


== External links ==
* Lexique des figures de style de l&#x27;Office québécois de la langue française</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="3" end="13" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="18" end="25" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89" end="98" title=":wikt:auxiliary" label="auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690215" start="155" end="171" title="figure of speech" label="figure of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q199714" start="349" end="355" title="simile" label="simile"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="956" end="964" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="1223" end="1233" title="Synecdoche" label="Synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="1493" end="1501" title="Metonymy" label="Metonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="3316" end="3324" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3949" end="3988" title="Saki#&amp;quot;The Interlopers&amp;quot;" label="Saki&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;The Interlopers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="5270" end="5277" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="5653" end="5660" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q363948" start="5676" end="5689" title="contradiction" label="contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="5757" end="5765" title="oxymoron" label="oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="5823" end="5828" title="irony" label="irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132681" start="6091" end="6097" title="Loveliest of trees, the cherry now" label="a poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q351410" start="6101" end="6114" title="A. E. Housman" label="A. E. Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="6263" end="6275" title="Alliteration" label="Alliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="7613" end="7618" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="7622" end="7627" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="7631" end="7635" title="poem" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756348" start="7741" end="7747" title="stanza" label="stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022340" start="7753" end="7758" title="canto" label="canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="8562" end="8575" title="Charles Dickens" label="Dickens&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q219552" start="8588" end="8606" title="Great Expectations" label="Great Expectations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="8711" end="8732" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="8742" end="8758" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="8929" end="8938" title="flashback (narrative)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q193116" start="9552" end="9567" title="Khaled Hosseini" label="Khaled Hosseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="9816" end="9827" title="frame story" label="frame story"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="9879" end="9891" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="10099" end="10110" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="10606" end="10614" title="Allusion" label="Allusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="10840" end="10849" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939210" start="10851" end="10865" title="understatement" label="understatement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191035" start="10867" end="10874" title="sarcasm" label="sarcasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="12083" end="12102" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="12116" end="12132" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="12387" end="12402" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="12765" end="12770" title="Irony" label="Irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225396" start="12875" end="12882" title="Diction" label="Diction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317831" start="13549" end="13561" title="active voice" label="active voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194697" start="13565" end="13578" title="passive voice" label="passive voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q592503" start="14012" end="14017" title="Night (memoir)" label="Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391" start="14028" end="14039" title="Elie Wiesel" label="Elie Wiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391" start="14060" end="14066" title="Elie Wiesel" label="Wiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="14393" end="14400" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="14416" end="14422" title="Voice (grammar)" label="voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366327" start="14980" end="14984" title="Tone (literature)" label="Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762471" start="15112" end="15129" title="Rhetorical device" label="Rhetorical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641487" start="15132" end="15143" title="Hypotyposis" label="Hypotyposis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498853" wikidata="Q5574831" url="?curid=498853" title="Go Home Productions">
<text>Go Home Productions (also known as GHP) is the alter ego of Mark Vidler, a producer/remixer/DJ based in Northampton (and formerly Watford), England. GHP has produced well over 200 mash-ups since May 2002, many of which have been played on both national and independent radio stations around the world. He was born on 4 May 1967 in Barnet, Middlesex, England.

==Career==
GHP creations have been heard regularly on Xfm London&#x27;s &quot;The Remix&quot; and &quot;The Rinse&quot; radio shows, and are heavily played on the New York City area station WFMU. A 30-minute Go Home Productions &quot;Superchunk&quot; mix was aired on Xfm in May 2003 to critical acclaim, and was voted &quot;Superchunk of the year&quot;. GHP has also been nominated for Best Studio Session on XFM alongside the likes of The Darkness, Muse, Kings of Leon and Blur. GHP&#x27;s WFMU Re:Mixology set was broadcast as part of a series that included the legendary mixer Steinski. Go Home Productions has worked with MTV Mash on their weekly bootleg video show and had five tracks on rotation across Europe in 2004. In the same year, Emap&#x27;s QTV also broadcast a selection of 8 GHP tracks across their network.

GHP&#x27;s 2005 mix &quot;Rapture Riders&quot; (Blondie vs The Doors) was not only approved by both bands, but has been re-remixed using the original studio tracks, and officially released both as a single and as a track on Blondie&#x27;s 2005 album &quot;Greatest Hits: Sound &amp; Vision&quot;. It reached #1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; US Hot Dance Club Play chart in May 2006, and charted in the top 40 of multiple worldwide singles charts, with continual play on numerous MTV channels; the (Blondie vs The Doors) video was directed by audiovisual artists Addictive TV who created a video mash-up of the two tracks.

Another mash-up that has received approval of the original artists involved is &quot;Ray of Gob&quot; which superimposes the vocals from Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Ray of Light&quot; onto clips from several songs by the Sex Pistols (including &quot;Pretty Vacant&quot;, &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; and &quot;Anarchy in the U.K.&quot;).

Many Go Home Productions tracks were included in the 2007 mash-up compilation &quot;Mashed&quot;, which featured previous hit tracks including &quot;Rapture Riders&quot; and &quot;Notorious Trick&quot; - a mixed version of Kelis and Duran Duran. The album also included two tracks by Loo &amp; Placido, most notably the chart hit &quot;Horny as a Dandy&quot;, featuring The Dandy Warhols and Mousse T.

Turning his skills to AV, for over 10 years Vidler has been one half of project Addictive TV with fellow artist Graham Daniels.

As of August 2024, Vidler&#x27;s website has been offline and the domain name has been offered for sale.

==References==
== Further reading==

===Articles===
* Lawrence, Dale (4 December 2002). &quot;Two Boots&quot;. &quot;The Village Voice&quot;. Page 67.
* Ratliff, Ben (11 May 2003). &quot;MUSIC: PLAYLIST; Um, Beyoncé, Meeting Jimi Isn&#x27;t Such a Good Idea&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* Acid Ted (30 October 2012). &quot;Bootleg rollercoaster ride; Happy people, happy memories–Go Home Productions Interview, Pts. 1&quot; and 2&quot;. WordPress.

===Books===
* Goeghegan, Michael W. (2007). &quot;Podcast Solutions: The Complete Guide to Audio and Video Podcasting&quot;. New York: Apress. Page 37. .
* Sinnreich, Aram (2010). &quot;Mashed up: Music, Technology, and the Rise of Configurable Culture&quot;. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 98, 113, 119, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130, 133, 143, 144, 153, 163, 173, 174,176,188,191. .

==External links==
* Mark Vidler on YouTube
* Mark Vidler at AllMusic
* Orchestra of Samples website
* Addictive TV
* Addictive TV&#x27;s Facebook page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5574831" start="0" end="19" title="Go Home Productions" label="Go Home Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574831" start="35" end="38" title="Go Home Productions" label="GHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574831" start="60" end="71" title="Go Home Productions" label="Mark Vidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="84" end="91" title="remixer" label="remixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="104" end="115" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="130" end="137" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q48445" start="180" end="188" title="bastard pop" label="mash-ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="339" end="348" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="350" end="357" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072562" start="414" end="424" title="Xfm London" label="Xfm London"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="523" end="536" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434878" start="550" end="554" title="WFMU" label="WFMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072562" start="770" end="773" title="XFM" label="XFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q421794" start="797" end="809" title="The Darkness (band)" label="The Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="811" end="815" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192486" start="817" end="830" title="Kings of Leon" label="Kings of Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="835" end="839" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299721" start="941" end="949" title="Double Dee and Steinski" label="Steinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="987" end="990" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310500" start="1104" end="1108" title="Emap" label="Emap"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="1234" end="1241" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="1245" end="1254" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156536" start="1442" end="1475" title="Greatest Hits (2005 Blondie album)" label="Greatest Hits: Sound &amp;amp; Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1510" end="1519" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="1683" end="1690" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="1694" end="1703" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681131" start="1747" end="1759" title="Addictive TV" label="Addictive TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="1945" end="1952" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="2022" end="2033" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603413" start="2051" end="2064" title="Pretty Vacant" label="Pretty Vacant"/>
<link wikidata="Q685575" start="2078" end="2096" title="God Save the Queen (Sex Pistols song)" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q486421" start="2113" end="2132" title="Anarchy in the U.K." label="Anarchy in the U.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q6783095" start="2226" end="2232" title="Mashed (album)" label="Mashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q294979" start="2365" end="2370" title="Kelis" label="Kelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="2375" end="2386" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q178661" start="2512" end="2529" title="The Dandy Warhols" label="The Dandy Warhols"/>
<link wikidata="Q521051" start="2534" end="2542" title="Mousse T" label="Mousse T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681131" start="2625" end="2637" title="Addictive TV" label="Addictive TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13166" start="3227" end="3236" title="WordPress" label="WordPress"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="3672" end="3679" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3697" end="3705" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498854" wikidata="Q1576959" url="?curid=498854" title="List of Prague Metro stations">
<text>The following is a list of [[Prague Metro]] stations, ordered alphabetically. Names in parentheses denote former station names from before 1990. The accessibility of the station for persons with impaired mobility and important places nearby are also given.

==Lines==

The green Line A connects the center with the northwest and east of the city. It is long and has 17 stations. Travel time (from terminal to terminal) is about 20 minutes.

The yellow Line B is the longest; it goes from the southwest outskirts through the center and continues to the northeast of the city. It is long and has 24 stations. Travel time (from end to end) is about 45 minutes.

The red Line C is the oldest and shallowest, going from the north to the south-east. It is long and has 20 stations. Travel time is about 35 minutes.

==Stations==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1576959" start="19" end="52" title="List of Prague Metro stations" label="list of [[Prague Metro]] stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292805" start="279" end="285" title="Line A (Prague Metro)" label="Line A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460442" start="452" end="458" title="Line B (Prague Metro)" label="Line B"/>
<link wikidata="Q168571" start="667" end="673" title="Line C (Prague Metro)" label="Line C"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498857" wikidata="Q269558" url="?curid=498857" title="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology">
<text>The Swiss Federal Institutes of Technology are two institutes of higher education in Switzerland (part of the ETH Domain):

* Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)
* Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich (ETHZ)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q664875" start="110" end="120" title="ETH Domain" label="ETH Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q262760" start="126" end="175" title="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne" label="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="185" end="232" title="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich" label="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498864" wikidata="Q1129286" url="?curid=498864" title="Człuchów County">
<text>Człuchów County (, ) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Pomeranian Voivodeship, northern Poland. It came into being on January 1, 1999, as a result of the Polish local government reforms passed in 1998. Its administrative seat and largest town is Człuchów, which lies south-west of the regional capital Gdańsk. The county also contains the towns of Czarne, lying west of Człuchów, and Debrzno, south-west of Człuchów.

The county covers an area of . As of 2019 its total population is 56,225, out of which the population of Człuchów is 13,649, that of Czarne is 5,932, that of Debrzno is 5,096, and the rural population is 30,924.
&lt;br&gt;

&quot;Człuchów County on a map of the counties of Pomeranian Voivodeship&quot;

Człuchów County is bordered by Bytów County to the north, Chojnice County to the east, Sępólno County to the south, Złotów County to the south-west and Szczecinek County to the west.

== Administrative division ==
The county is subdivided into seven gminas (one urban, two urban-rural and four rural). These are listed in the following table, in descending order of population.

== County affiliation ==
In the years 1945–1999, the area of the Człuchów county exceptionally frequently changed its administrative affiliation:

* 1945-1946 was subordinated to Bydgoszcz
* 1946-1950 was subordinated to Szczecin
* 1950-1975 was subordinated to Koszalin
* 1975-1998 was subordinated to Słupsk
* from 1999 was subordinated to Gdańsk

==External links==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1129286" start="0" end="15" title="Człuchów County" label="Człuchów County"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="83" end="89" title="powiat" label="powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="94" end="116" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="127" end="133" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q855451" start="193" end="224" title="Polish local government reforms" label="Polish local government reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q640469" start="285" end="293" title="Człuchów" label="Człuchów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="341" end="347" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015157" start="387" end="393" title="Czarne" label="Czarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q990837" start="423" end="430" title="Debrzno" label="Debrzno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138169" start="792" end="804" title="Bytów County" label="Bytów County"/>
<link wikidata="Q572754" start="819" end="834" title="Chojnice County" label="Chojnice County"/>
<link wikidata="Q597774" start="848" end="862" title="Sępólno County" label="Sępólno County"/>
<link wikidata="Q133272" start="877" end="890" title="Złotów County" label="Złotów County"/>
<link wikidata="Q558408" start="913" end="930" title="Szczecinek County" label="Szczecinek County"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="1011" end="1016" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="1319" end="1328" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="1361" end="1369" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="1402" end="1410" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="1443" end="1449" title="Słupsk" label="Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1482" end="1488" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498873" wikidata="Q4095280" url="?curid=498873" title="Bocień">
<text>Bocień is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chełmża, within Toruń County, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-central Poland. It lies approximately north-east of Chełmża and north of Toruń.

Bocień was the location of the German concentration camp Bottschin, a subcamp of the Stutthof concentration camp.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4095280" start="0" end="6" title="Bocień" label="Bocień"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461605" start="54" end="67" title="Gmina Chełmża" label="Gmina Chełmża"/>
<link wikidata="Q650180" start="76" end="88" title="Toruń County" label="Toruń County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54153" start="90" end="121" title="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q850688" start="184" end="191" title="Chełmża" label="Chełmża"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="205" end="210" title="Toruń" label="Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="244" end="250" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095280" start="270" end="279" title="Bocień" label="Bottschin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="298" end="325" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498875" wikidata="Q1682032" url="?curid=498875" title="Great Plains skink">
<text>The Great Plains skink (Plestiodon obsoletus) is a species of lizard endemic to North America.

==Description==
The Great Plains skink, together with the broad-headed skink, is the largest skink of the genus &quot;Plestiodon&quot;. It reaches a length of 9 to 13 cm from snout to vent (SVL) or up to nearly 34 cm total length (including the tail).

This lizard is light gray or beige in color; its dorsal scales have black or dark brown edges. The scales on the sides run diagonally. The belly is yellow. Juveniles are black with white sports on the lips and the head and have a blue or bluish tail.

==Geographic range==
The Great Plains skink is very common on the Great Plains, ranging from southeastern Wyoming and Nebraska (and also Fremont County, Iowa) southward to eastern Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, and into Mexico.

==Habitat==
This skink lives in open plains habitat or the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains, in areas near water, e.g. irrigation ditches. In southeastern Colorado, it occurs in elevation up to about 1900 m (7200 ft); in northern Colorado, only at elevations below about 1400 m (4500 ft).

==Reproduction==
The mating season of the Great Plains skink is in April or May. The female lays between 5 and 32 eggs (on the average about 12) in early summer, which she guards until they hatch in late summer.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Baird, S.F., and C.F. Girard. 1852. Characteristics of some New Reptiles in the Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. Second Part. &quot;Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia&quot; 6: 125-129. (&quot;Plestiodon obsoletum&quot;, p. 129.)
*Behler, J.L., and F.W. King. 1979. &quot;The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Reptiles and Amphibians&quot;. Knopf. New York. 743 pp. . (&quot;Eumeces obsoletus&quot;, p. 575 + Plate 432.)
*Boulenger, G.A. 1887. &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume III. Lacertidæ, Gerrhosauridæ, Scincidæ...&quot; Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers.) London. xii + 575 pp. + Plates I. XL. (&quot;Eumeces obsoletus&quot;, p. 374.)
*Conant, R. 1975. &quot;A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians of Eastern and Central North America, Second Edition&quot;. Houghton Mifflin. Boston. xviii + 429 pp. (hardcover), (paperback). (&quot;Eumeces obsoletus&quot;, p. 125, Figure 28 + Plate 19 + Map 79.)
*Smith, H.M., and E.D. Brodie Jr. 1982. &quot;Reptiles of North America: A Guide to Field Identification&quot;. Golden Press. New York. 240 pp. . (&quot;Eumeces obsoletus&quot;, pp. 80–81.)
*Stebbins, R.C. 2003. &quot;A Field Guide to Western Reptiles and Amphibians, Third Edition&quot;. The Peterson Field Guide Series ®. Houghton Mifflin. Boston and New York. xiii + 533 pp. . (&quot;Eumeces obsoletus&quot;, pp. 310–311 + Plate 36 + Map 109.)

== External links ==
* Great Plains Skink, on Reptiles and Amphibians of Iowa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1682032" start="4" end="22" title="Great Plains skink" label="Great Plains skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="51" end="58" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="62" end="68" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="69" end="76" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="80" end="93" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697347" start="154" end="172" title="Broad-headed Skink" label="broad-headed skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q272206" start="189" end="194" title="skink" label="skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q772082" start="214" end="224" title="Plestiodon" label="Plestiodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="354" end="360" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="667" end="679" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="707" end="714" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="719" end="727" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q486123" start="738" end="758" title="Fremont County, Iowa" label="Fremont County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="781" end="788" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="802" end="807" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="818" end="824" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="871" end="878" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="894" end="903" title="foothills" label="foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="911" end="926" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14049" start="1374" end="1385" title="Spencer Fullerton Baird" label="Baird, S.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q94016" start="1391" end="1402" title="Charles Frédéric Girard" label="C.F. Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243542" start="1610" end="1622" title="John L. Behler" label="Behler, J.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="1813" end="1828" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger, G.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2161670" start="2141" end="2151" title="Roger Conant (herpetologist)" label="Conant, R."/>
<link wikidata="Q3138893" start="2406" end="2417" title="Hobart Muir Smith" label="Smith, H.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q3434882" start="2596" end="2610" title="Robert C. Stebbins" label="Stebbins, R.C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498877" wikidata="Q650180" url="?curid=498877" title="Toruń County">
<text>Toruń County () is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, north-central Poland. It was created on January 1, 1999, as a result of the Polish local government reforms passed in 1998. Its administrative seat is the city of Toruń, although the city is not part of the county (it constitutes a separate city county). The only town in Toruń County is Chełmża, which lies nineteen kilometers (twelve miles) north of Toruń.

The county covers an area of . As of 2019 its total population is 107,641, out of which the population of Chełmża is 14,503 and the rural population is 93,138.

==Neighboring counties==
Apart from the city of Toruń, Toruń County is also bordered by Chełmno County to the north, Wąbrzeźno County to the north-east, Golub-Dobrzyń County and Lipno County to the east, Aleksandrów County to the south, Inowrocław County to the south-west, and the city of Bydgoszcz and Bydgoszcz County to the west.

==Administrative division==
The county is subdivided into nine gminas (one urban and eight rural). These are listed in the following table, in descending order of population.

==References==

&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650180" start="0" end="12" title="Toruń County" label="Toruń County"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="78" end="84" title="powiat" label="powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54153" start="89" end="120" title="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="136" end="142" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q855451" start="198" end="229" title="Polish local government reforms" label="Polish local government reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="285" end="290" title="Toruń" label="Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q850688" start="410" end="417" title="Chełmża" label="Chełmża"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="691" end="696" title="Toruń" label="Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q772520" start="731" end="745" title="Chełmno County" label="Chełmno County"/>
<link wikidata="Q774738" start="760" end="776" title="Wąbrzeźno County" label="Wąbrzeźno County"/>
<link wikidata="Q772782" start="796" end="816" title="Golub-Dobrzyń County" label="Golub-Dobrzyń County"/>
<link wikidata="Q773421" start="821" end="833" title="Lipno County" label="Lipno County"/>
<link wikidata="Q750491" start="847" end="865" title="Aleksandrów County" label="Aleksandrów County"/>
<link wikidata="Q773314" start="880" end="897" title="Inowrocław County" label="Inowrocław County"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="933" end="942" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q750576" start="947" end="963" title="Bydgoszcz County" label="Bydgoszcz County"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="1041" end="1046" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498883" wikidata="Q5104934" url="?curid=498883" title="Chorab">
<text>Chorab is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Łysomice, within Toruń County, Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-central Poland.

During the Second World War it was the location of a subcamp of Stutthof concentration camp.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5104934" start="0" end="6" title="Chorab" label="Chorab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086362" start="54" end="68" title="Gmina Łysomice" label="Gmina Łysomice"/>
<link wikidata="Q650180" start="77" end="89" title="Toruń County" label="Toruń County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54153" start="91" end="122" title="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="161" end="177" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="214" end="241" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498885" wikidata="Q1401130" url="?curid=498885" title="The Bonfire of the Vanities">
<text>The Bonfire of the Vanities is a 1987 novel by Tom Wolfe. The story is a drama about ambition, racism, social class, politics, and greed in 1980s New York City, and centers on three main characters: WASP bond trader Sherman McCoy, Jewish assistant district attorney Larry Kramer, and British expatriate journalist Peter Fallow.

The novel was originally conceived as a serial in the style of Charles Dickens&#x27; writings: it ran in 27 installments in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; starting in 1984. Wolfe heavily revised it before it was published in book form. The novel was a bestseller and a commercial success, even in comparison with Wolfe&#x27;s other books. It has often been called the quintessential novel of the 1980s, and in 1990 was adapted into the critically and commercially unsuccessful film of the same name by Brian De Palma.

==Title==
The book is named for the historical bonfire of the vanities, which happened in 1497 in Florence, Italy, when the city was under the sway of the Dominican priest Girolamo Savonarola, who ordered the burning of objects that church authorities considered sinful, such as cosmetics, mirrors, books, and art.

==Historical background==
Wolfe intended his novel to capture the essence of New York City in the 1980s.

Beneath Wall Street&#x27;s success, the city was a hotbed of racial and cultural tension. The city was polarized by several high-profile incidents of racism, particularly the murders—in white neighborhoods—of two black men: Willie Turks, who was murdered in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn in 1982, and Michael Griffith who was killed in Howard Beach, Queens, in 1986. In another episode that received much attention from the news media, Bernhard Goetz became something of a folk-hero in the city for shooting a group of young black men who tried to rob him in the subway in 1984.

Burton B. Roberts, a Bronx judge known for his no-nonsense, imperious handling of cases in his courtroom, was the model for the character of Myron Kovitsky in the book.

==Writing and publication==
Wolfe began researching the novel by observing cases at the Manhattan Criminal Court and shadowing members of the Bronx homicide squad. To overcome a case of writer&#x27;s block, Wolfe wrote to Jann Wenner, editor of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, to propose an idea drawn from Charles Dickens and Thackeray. These Victorian writers, whom Wolfe viewed as his models, had often written their novels in serial installments. Wenner offered Wolfe around $200,000 to serialize his work. The deadline pressure gave him the motivation he had hoped for, and from July 1984 to August 1985 each biweekly issue of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; contained a new installment. Wolfe was not happy with his &quot;very public first draft,&quot; and thoroughly revised his work. Even Sherman McCoy, the central character of the novel, changed—originally a writer, in the book version he is cast as a bond salesman. (Wolfe came up with the revised occupation after spending a day on the government-bond desk of Salomon Brothers, with many of the traders who later founded the notorious hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management.) Wolfe researched and revised for two years. &quot;The Bonfire of the Vanities&quot; appeared in 1987. The book was a commercial and critical success, spending weeks on bestseller lists and earning praise from much of the literary establishment on which Wolfe had long heaped scorn.

==Plot summary==
Sherman McCoy is a successful New York City bond trader. His $3 million Park Avenue co-op apartment, combined with his wife&#x27;s extravagances and other expenses required to keep up appearances are depleting his great income, or as McCoy calls it, a &quot;hemorrhaging of money.&quot; McCoy&#x27;s secure life as a self-regarded &quot;Master of The Universe&quot; on Wall Street is gradually destroyed when he and his mistress, Maria Ruskin, accidentally enter the Bronx at night while they are driving back to Manhattan from Kennedy Airport. Finding the ramp back to the highway blocked by trash cans and a tire, McCoy exits the car to clear the way. Approached by two black men whom they perceive as predators, McCoy and Ruskin flee. After Ruskin takes the wheel of the car to race away, it fishtails, apparently striking one of the two would-be assailants—a &quot;skinny boy.&quot;

Peter Fallow, a has-been, alcoholic journalist for the tabloid &quot;City Light&quot;, is given the opportunity of a lifetime when he is persuaded to write a series of articles about Henry Lamb, a black youth who has said he has been the victim of a hit and run by a wealthy white driver. Fallow cynically tolerates the manipulations of Reverend Bacon, a Harlem religious and political leader who sees the hospitalized youth as a projects success story gone wrong. Fallow&#x27;s articles on the matter ignite protests and media coverage of the Lamb case.

Up for re-election and accused of foot-dragging in the Lamb case, the media-obsessed Bronx County District Attorney Abe Weiss pushes for McCoy&#x27;s arrest. The evidence includes McCoy&#x27;s car (which matches the description of the vehicle involved in the alleged hit and run), plus McCoy&#x27;s evasive response to police questioning. The arrest all but ruins McCoy; distraction at work causes him to flub on finding an investor for a $600 million bond on which he had pegged all his hopes of paying the loan on his home and covering his family costs. While McCoy is reprimanded by his boss for failing to sell the bond, his lawyer, Tommy Killian, calls to tell him of his upcoming arrest, forcing him to admit his legal problems to his boss, who makes him take a leave of absence as a result. McCoy&#x27;s upper class friends ostracize him, and his wife leaves him and takes their daughter Campbell (McCoy&#x27;s only source of genuine family love) to live with his parents.

Hoping to impress his boss as well as a former juror, Shelly Thomas, Assistant District Attorney Larry Kramer prosecutes the case, opening with an unsuccessful bid to set McCoy&#x27;s bail at $250,000. Released on $10,000 bail, McCoy is besieged by demonstrators who are protesting outside his home.

Fallow hears a rumor that Maria Ruskin was at the wheel of McCoy&#x27;s car when it struck Lamb but has fled the country. Trying to uncover the truth, on the pretense of interviewing the rich and famous, Fallow meets with her husband, Arthur, at an expensive French restaurant. While recounting his life, Arthur has a fatal heart attack, as disturbed patrons and an annoyed maître d&#x27;hôtel look on. Maria is forced to return to the United States for his funeral, where McCoy confronts her about being &quot;the only witness.&quot; Fallow overhears that she, not McCoy, was driving.

Fallow&#x27;s write-up of the association between Sherman McCoy and Maria Ruskin prompts Assistant D.A. Kramer to offer her a deal: corroborate the other witness and receive immunity, or be treated as an accomplice. Ruskin recounts this to McCoy while he is wearing a wire. When a private investigator employed by Killian discovers a recording of a conversation that contradicts Ruskin&#x27;s statement to the grand jury—a recording that was obtained from an illegal voice-activated intercom device installed by the landlord of a rent-controlled apartment as a way to remove tenants—the judge assigned to the case declares her testimony &quot;tainted&quot; and dismisses the case.

Fallow later wins the Pulitzer Prize and marries the daughter of &quot;City Light&quot; owner Sir Gerald Steiner, while Ruskin has escaped prosecution and remarried. McCoy&#x27;s first trial ends in a hung jury, split along racial lines. Kramer is removed from the prosecution after it is revealed he was involved with Shelly Thomas in a sexual tryst at the apartment formerly used by Ruskin and McCoy. It is additionally revealed that McCoy has lost a civil trial to the Lamb family and, pending appeal, has a $12 million liability, which has resulted in the freezing of his assets. The all-but-forgotten Henry Lamb succumbs to his injuries from the accident; McCoy, penniless and estranged from his wife and daughter, awaits trial for vehicular manslaughter.

==Style and content==
&quot;Bonfire&quot; was Wolfe&#x27;s first novel. Wolfe&#x27;s prior works were mostly non-fiction journalistic articles and books. His earlier short stories appeared in his collection &quot;Mauve Gloves &amp; Madmen, Clutter &amp; Vine&quot;.

According to Wolfe, the characters are composites of many individuals and cultural observations. However, some characters were based on real people. Wolfe has acknowledged the character of Tommy Killian is based on New York lawyer Edward Hayes, to whom the book is dedicated. The character of the Reverend Bacon is considered by many to be based on the Reverends Al Sharpton and/or Jesse Jackson, who have both campaigned under the banner of eliminating racism.

In 2007, on the book&#x27;s 20th anniversary of publication, &quot;The New York Times&quot; published a retrospective on how the city had changed since Wolfe&#x27;s novel.

==Reception==
The book was a major bestseller, and also received strong reviews. &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised the book, saying it was &quot;a big, bitter, funny, craftily plotted book that grabs you by the lapels and won&#x27;t let go&quot;, but criticized its sometimes superficial characters, saying when &quot;the book is over, there is an odd aftertaste, not entirely pleasant.&quot;
However, &quot;National Review&quot; claimed &quot;No one has portrayed New York Society this accurately &amp; devastatingly since Edith Wharton.&quot;

Novelist Louis Auchincloss praised it as &quot;a marvelous book&quot;.

==Adaptations==

In 1990, &quot;Bonfire&quot; was adapted into a film starring Tom Hanks as Sherman McCoy, Kim Cattrall as his wife Judy, Melanie Griffith as his mistress Maria, and Bruce Willis as journalist (and narrator of the film) Peter Fallow. The screenplay was written by Michael Cristofer. Wolfe was paid $750,000 for the rights. The film was a commercial and critical flop.

An opera adaptation, &quot;The Bonfire of the Vanities: The Opera&quot;, with music by Stefania de Kenessey and libretto and direction by Michael Bergmann, premiered in New York City on October 9, 2015.

==See also==
* &quot;Wall Street&quot;, the 1987 Academy Award-winning film by Oliver Stone 
*&quot;Liar&#x27;s Poker&quot;
*&quot;Den of Thieves&quot;
*&quot;Barbarians at the Gate&quot;
*&quot;Billionaire Boys Club&quot;

==Footnotes==
==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="47" end="56" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Tom Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="199" end="203" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant" label="WASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424605" start="204" end="215" title="bond trader" label="bond trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="238" end="265" title="assistant district attorney" label="assistant district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="369" end="375" title="Serial (literature)" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="392" end="407" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="459" end="472" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q730473" start="801" end="822" title="The Bonfire of the Vanities (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q189526" start="826" end="840" title="Brian De Palma" label="Brian De Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q654622" start="890" end="913" title="bonfire of the vanities" label="bonfire of the vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="941" end="956" title="Florence, Italy" label="Florence, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="998" end="1007" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q164823" start="1015" end="1034" title="Girolamo Savonarola" label="Girolamo Savonarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1236" end="1249" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1489" end="1501" title="Willie Turks" label="Willie Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238884" start="1527" end="1536" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1548" end="1556" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830804" start="1570" end="1586" title="Michael Griffith (manslaughter victim)" label="Michael Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q58981" start="1605" end="1625" title="Howard Beach, Queens" label="Howard Beach, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q100520438" start="1705" end="1719" title="Bernhard Goetz" label="Bernhard Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000811" start="1849" end="1866" title="Burton B. Roberts" label="Burton B. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1870" end="1875" title="Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q519143" start="2241" end="2252" title="Jann Wenner" label="Jann Wenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="2358" end="2367" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034767" start="3031" end="3047" title="Salomon Brothers" label="Salomon Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140654" start="3117" end="3145" title="Long-Term Capital Management" label="Long-Term Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3478" end="3491" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424605" start="3497" end="3503" title="trader (finance)" label="trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="3520" end="3531" title="Park Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q562166" start="3532" end="3537" title="housing cooperative" label="co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3961" end="3970" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="3976" end="3991" title="Kennedy Airport" label="Kennedy Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455139" start="4243" end="4252" title="fishtailing" label="fishtails"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="4362" end="4371" title="alcoholic" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="4391" end="4398" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q386899" start="4586" end="4597" title="Hit and run (vehicular)" label="hit and run"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="4691" end="4697" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="4766" end="4774" title="public housing" label="projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204599" start="4977" end="5007" title="Bronx County District Attorney" label="Bronx County District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="5703" end="5714" title="upper class" label="upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="6057" end="6061" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634473" start="6548" end="6567" title="maître d&amp;#x27;hôtel" label="maître d&amp;#x27;hôtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317382" start="6935" end="6943" title="Immunity from prosecution" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="7029" end="7033" title="covert listening device" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="7095" end="7104" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="7171" end="7181" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192345" start="7404" end="7411" title="Fruit of the poisonous tree" label="tainted"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="7465" end="7479" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942652" start="7644" end="7653" title="hung jury" label="hung jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="7896" end="7907" title="civil trial" label="civil trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="7940" end="7946" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918620" start="8180" end="8202" title="vehicular manslaughter" label="vehicular manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794085" start="8418" end="8463" title="Mauve Gloves &amp;amp; Madmen, Clutter &amp;amp; Vine" label="Mauve Gloves &amp;amp; Madmen, Clutter &amp;amp; Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336114" start="8703" end="8715" title="Eddie Hayes (lawyer)" label="Edward Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q380433" start="8835" end="8846" title="Al Sharpton" label="Al Sharpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="8854" end="8867" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9195" end="9213" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="9521" end="9536" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q276032" start="9637" end="9650" title="Edith Wharton" label="Edith Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621598" start="9668" end="9685" title="Louis Auchincloss" label="Louis Auchincloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="9810" end="9819" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q209175" start="9838" end="9850" title="Kim Cattrall" label="Kim Cattrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q176455" start="9869" end="9885" title="Melanie Griffith" label="Melanie Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="9913" end="9925" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503452" start="10011" end="10028" title="Michael Cristofer" label="Michael Cristofer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10143" end="10181" title="The Bonfire of the Vanities: The Opera" label="The Bonfire of the Vanities: The Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="10228" end="10236" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828599" start="10254" end="10270" title="Michael Bergmann" label="Michael Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q332348" start="10341" end="10352" title="Wall Street (1987 film)" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="10369" end="10382" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="10399" end="10411" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386669" start="10420" end="10437" title="Liar&amp;#x27;s Poker" label="Liar&amp;#x27;s Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256514" start="10451" end="10465" title="Den of Thieves (Stewart book)" label="Den of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859461" start="10479" end="10501" title="Barbarians at the Gate" label="Barbarians at the Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q851755" start="10515" end="10536" title="Billionaire Boys Club (1987 film)" label="Billionaire Boys Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498890" wikidata="Q432105" url="?curid=498890" title="TD Garden">
<text>TD Garden (named the FleetCenter from opening until 2005 and TD Banknorth Garden until 2009) is a multi-purpose arena in Boston, Massachusetts, United States. It is located directly above the MBTA&#x27;s North Station, and replaced the original Boston Garden upon opening in 1995. It is the most visited sports and entertainment arena in New England, with nearly 3.5 million people visiting the arena each year.

TD Garden is the home arena for the Boston Bruins of the National Hockey League (NHL) and the Boston Celtics of the National Basketball Association (NBA). It is owned by food service and hospitality conglomerate Delaware North, whose CEO, Jeremy Jacobs, also owns the Bruins. It is the site of the annual Beanpot college hockey tournament, and hosts the annual Hockey East Championships. The arena has also hosted many major national sporting events including various rounds of the NCAA Division I men&#x27;s basketball tournament, NCAA Division I women&#x27;s basketball tournament, NCAA Division I Men&#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament, the 2014 United States Figure Skating Championships and the 2016 World Figure Skating Championships. In addition, TD Garden has hosted the 2021 Laver Cup, an international men&#x27;s tennis tournament.

Besides sporting events, the TD Garden has also served as a concert venue for numerous nationally touring acts in music and comedy.

The naming rights deal for the arena is scheduled to continue through June 2045, with TD Bank and Delaware North extending the agreement in January 2023.

==History==

===Planning===
As early as the late 1970s, the Bruins were looking for a new arena. The Boston Garden was approaching 50 years old at the time. The Jacobs family, who had bought the Bruins in 1975, was looking to build a 17,000-seat arena in suburban Boston after negotiations fell through with the city of Boston. The team nearly moved to Salem, New Hampshire around where the Mall at Rockingham Park is today. That fell through and the Bruins continued to play at Boston Garden. The Celtics, also looking for a new arena, considered moving to Revere.

In 1985, Boston Garden owner Delaware North was awarded the rights to construct a new arena by the Boston Redevelopment Authority and Mayor Raymond Flynn. However, poor economic conditions delayed the project.

On May 8, 1992, Delaware North announced that it had secured funding for a new arena in the form of $120 million worth of loans evenly split between Bank of Boston, Fleet Bank of Massachusetts and Shawmut National Corporation. That December, a bill approving construction of the new arena was killed in the Massachusetts Senate by Senate President William M. Bulger. Legislative leaders and Delaware North attempted to reach an agreement on plans for the new arena, but in February 1993 Bruins owner Jeremy Jacobs announced that he was backing out of the project as a result of the legislature&#x27;s demand that his company pay $3.5 million in &quot;linkage payments&quot;. Massachusetts governor Bill Weld lent strong support to a &quot;Chapter 15&quot; piece of legislation that included a &quot;Section 7&quot; that explicitly required Delaware North to &quot;administer, produce, promote and sponsor no less than three charitable events per year at the New Boston Garden&quot; and pay the proceeds from such events to the Metropolitan District Commission (MDC), today known as the state&#x27;s Department of Conservation and Recreation. Two weeks later, after a new series of negotiations, the two sides finally came to an agreement, and on February 26 the legislature passed a bill that allowed for construction of a new sports arena.

===Construction===
Construction began on April 29, 1993. Though the new arena was intended to be situated slightly north of the old facility, there were only nine inches (23 cm) of space between the two buildings when construction was completed. The site for the new arena occupied and eventually cost $160 million. Construction was completed in 27 months, including seven weeks of delay caused by heavy snowfall.

=== Opening ===
On the evening of September 29, 1995, a farewell event was held in the old Boston Garden hosted by WBZ-TV news personality Liz Walker and CBS national news anchor Dan Rather. Attendees included Bruins legends such as Bobby Orr and Phil Esposito as well as Celtics greats Larry Bird and Red Auerbach. The ceremony concluded with the release of thousands of balloons into the rafters to the music of the Boston Pops. The Boston Globe stated that &quot;all New England has lost a friend.&quot;

The following night, opening ceremonies were held at the FleetCenter, including performances by the Boston Pops, Walt Disney&#x27;s World on Ice, Olympic figure skaters Nancy Kerrigan and Paul Wylie, and musical acts James Taylor, Patti LaBelle and US3.

The Boston Bruins played their first game in the new arena on October 7, a 4–4 tie with the New York Islanders. The Boston Celtics lost their first game at the FleetCenter by a score of 101–100 to the Milwaukee Bucks on November 3.

===Naming===

TD Garden is named after its sponsor, TD Bank, a subsidiary of Canada&#x27;s Toronto-Dominion Bank. During the construction phase, the naming rights to the &quot;New Garden&quot; were sold to Boston-based Shawmut Bank, and the arena was originally slated to open as the Shawmut Center. However, just as the arena was being completed, Shawmut merged with Fleet Financial Group, forcing every seat in the arena, which had all been stamped with the Shawmut logo, to be replaced. The interior color scheme also had to be adjusted from Shawmut&#x27;s darker blue to Fleet&#x27;s marginally lighter blue.
The name of the arena was expected to change as a result of the April 1, 2004 merger of FleetBoston Financial with Bank of America. On January 5, 2005, Delaware North announced an agreement under which the bank made a payment to be released from the remaining six years on the naming rights agreement. The agreement left Delaware North free to sell the naming rights to another sponsor. On March 3, 2005, Maine-based TD Banknorth, a U.S. subsidiary of Toronto-Dominion Bank, announced its purchase of the naming rights for $6 million per year. The first major event to be held after the announcement was the 2005 Hockey East Men&#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament. On July 1, 2005, the facility was officially renamed the TD Banknorth Garden. Bill Ryan, the chairman and CEO of TD Banknorth and a passionate booster of Boston sports, had specifically pursued the naming rights for TD Banknorth to restore the &quot;Garden&quot; monicker to the North Station edifice.

In early 2005, while still searching for a long-term corporate sponsor, the FleetCenter conducted auctions on eBay to sell one-day naming rights. From February 10 to March 13, the FleetCenter sold the naming rights 30 different times. The net proceeds of $150,633.22 generated during the auction were donated to charities in the greater Boston area. The FleetCenter also made private arrangements with a few companies for one-day naming rights, and offered one-day rights in an employee raffle.
During the name auction, only twice were names reported to have been rejected. Kerry Konrad, a New York City lawyer and Yankees fan, won naming rights for March 1 with a bid of $2,300. He proposed the name &quot;Derek Jeter Center&quot; after the New York Yankees shortstop, a stab at fellow Harvard College alumnus and Boston Red Sox fan Jerry Rappaport Jr., with whom he had a 25-year-old rivalry. With the arena located in the home city of the Red Sox, the name did not sit well with the executives and was rejected. An agreement was reached in which Rappaport added $6,300 for a total bid of $8,600, representing the 86 years of the Curse of the Bambino, and named the arena &quot;New Boston Garden, Home of the Jimmy Fund Champions&quot;.
Fark.com founder Drew Curtis held a contest on his website to name the arena after he bought single-day rights. A user vote resulted in the name of &quot;Fark.com UFIA Center&quot;, but the name was rejected because of its inappropriate meaning. The name eventually selected by Curtis and company was &quot;Boston Garden&quot;.
*Including its present name, the TD Garden has had 33 different names.
*Celtics players dubbed it &quot;The Jungle&quot; during the team&#x27;s 2002 playoff run.

In April 2008, TD Banknorth became TD Bank, after a merger with Commerce Bancorp, a New Jersey–based bank. Owner Delaware North Companies announced on April 15, 2009, that the building would be renamed TD Garden in July 2009.

Delaware North and TD Bank announced the extension of the naming rights deal on January 12, 2023, with the rights now extending until June 30, 2045, which would keep the arena&#x27;s name stable for forty years. The same agreement also saw TD Bank extend their helmet advertising rights for the Bruins acquired at the start of the 2020–21 NHL season, until the end of the 2044–45 NHL season.

===Renovations===

Before the 2006–07 season, the TD Garden underwent a major overhaul, installing a new HD entertainment board, with video panels replacing the sideboard scrolling panels when the arena hosted the 2006 Women&#x27;s Final Four, and see-through shot clocks on the basket stancions, joining the FedExForum, Wells Fargo Center, State Farm Arena, Talking Stick Resort Arena, United Center, Rocket Arena, and the Spectrum (this was done before the NBA mandate was installed in 2011). In addition, a vintage siren, just as the original Boston Garden had used, was added to replace the end-of-period horn for hockey only, a feature of the Montreal Canadiens, the Bruins&#x27; arch-rivals, at the Montreal Forum (now the Pepsi Forum shopping centre) and the Centre Bell. In 2009, an LED energy efficient lighting system was added to the exterior of the building. The &quot;Boston Globe&quot; announced a $70 million project upgrade to TD Garden&#x27;s concourses and Legends Club restaurant, along with technology upgrades and the relocation of a retail shop. Construction occurred in two phases, summer 2014 and then summer 2015.

On January 25, 2013, during a Celtics vs. Knicks game at the Garden, television announcer Marv Albert accused the TD Garden production crew for being one of those arenas that &quot;constantly&quot; use false sound effects and artificial crowd noise to intensify the crowd reactions on nationally televised games (which is very similar to &quot;sweetening&quot; on television); however, the official Twitter account of the Boston Celtics stated that the Celtics have never partaken in the practice. Following their 2011 Stanley Cup Finals win, the Bruins changed their previous Stanley Cup banners to reflect the changes in the team&#x27;s main jersey logo through time during their past five Cup wins, as the logo adorns the 2011 Cup win&#x27;s banner.
Just before the 2018–19 series of pre-season NHL games began for the Bruins at TD Garden, the arena&#x27;s interior overhead lighting was switched to a new LED system which also includes color elements at appropriate times.

Before the 2021–22 NHL season, TD Garden underwent more renovations, adding a new center scoreboard/video screen, along with a new audio system. The new &quot;Hub Vision&quot; system is above 4K UHD resolution, and the main replay screen sizes are almost double of the old ones, at 18 feet by 32.5 feet wide. The unit also features auxiliary screens beneath to allow court/rinkside viewers to look at the board, which measure at 6.5 feet tall by 23 feet wide to cater to those sitting in the first few rows. Above the main boards, are 2 new ring displays. Each ring is 3.5 feet tall, and has a circumference of 179 feet. Hub Vision only has 2 rings above the main screens, unlike the old jumbotron with 2 at the top, and one at the bottom. TD Garden partnered with Clair Global Integration to add Cohesion Series CO10 loudspeakers to help improve the sound system.

This renovation was an extension of TD Garden&#x27;s Legendary Transformation, which was a $100 million investment from the Jeremy Jacobs family.

==Use==
Among the non-sporting events hosted by the Garden are concerts, shows, graduations, seminars, Disney on Ice, the circus, and commencement exercises for Northeastern University.

===Sports===

The arena is primarily the home venue for the NBA&#x27;s Boston Celtics and the NHL&#x27;s Boston Bruins. It has hosted the following events:

*NHL All-Star Game:
**1996: The Eastern Conference All-Stars defeated the Western Conference All-Stars 5–4. Bruins defenseman Ray Bourque won the game&#x27;s most valuable player honors.
*NBA Finals:
**2008: On June 17, 2008, the Celtics defeated the Los Angeles Lakers 131–92 in game 6 at home to clinch the franchise&#x27;s 17th NBA championship. It was their first championship since 1986.
**2010: The Celtics hosted games 3, 4 and 5 versus the Los Angeles Lakers. They eventually lost the series in seven games.
**2022: The Celtics hosted games 3, 4 and 6 versus the Golden State Warriors. The Warriors clinched the NBA championship in game 6, becoming the second visiting team to win the NBA championship in Boston after the Los Angeles Lakers accomplished this feat in 1985.
**2024: On June 17, 2024, the Celtics defeated the Dallas Mavericks 106–88 in game 5 at home to clinch the franchise&#x27;s 18th championship.
*Stanley Cup Finals:
**2011: The Bruins hosted games 3, 4 and 6 versus the Vancouver Canucks. They eventually won the series in seven games.
**2013: The Bruins hosted games 3, 4 and 6 versus the Chicago Blackhawks. The Blackhawks clinched the Stanley Cup in Game 6, winning their second Cup in four seasons.
**2019: The Bruins hosted games 1, 2, 5 and 7 versus the St. Louis Blues. The Blues clinched the franchise&#x27;s first Stanley Cup in Game 7.

While dominant in their previous arena, Boston Garden, the Celtics and Bruins were initially much less successful in their new home as both teams missed the playoffs numerous times and failed to make their league&#x27;s finals until 2008. Since then, the Celtics made four NBA Finals appearances and won two championships, while the Bruins made three Stanley Cup Finals appearances and won one championship.

Eddie Palladino is the public address announcer for Celtics games, while Steve Forni is the public address announcer for Bruins games. Jim Martin is the former PA announcer for the Bruins as he formerly served for them between 1992 and 2020. Ron Poster is the arena organist.

As the former Boston Garden had from 1954 through 1995 - and the still-standing Matthews Arena had for its start in 1952 - the TD Garden is the home of the annual Beanpot college hockey tournament between the Boston University Terriers, Boston College Eagles, Harvard University Crimson and Northeastern University Huskies. The facility has hosted the 2001 U.S. Figure Skating Championships, the 1996 and 2000 US Gymnastics Trials, and the 1998, 2004, 2015 and 2022 NCAA Men&#x27;s Frozen Four.

High school championships and tournaments for the Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association are annually hosted at the TD Garden. Events include ice hockey and basketball championships. The Super 8 is one of the popular events that fans and students attend.

The TD Garden, along with the Bell Centre in Montreal, will be a host venue for the NHL 4 Nations Face-Off, an international ice hockey tournament featuring national teams representing the United States, Canada, Sweden and Finland, which will be held from February 12 to 20, 2025.
TD Garden is one of two NBA arenas (along with Kia Center, home of the Orlando Magic) with parquet floors. The Celtics are best known for the tradition of the parquet floor from their Boston Garden years, originally built after World War II because of cost and the scarcity of lumber in that time. The original floor, first used in Boston Arena and later the Boston Garden, was brought over to the then-FleetCenter and remained there for four seasons. A newly refurbished parquet floor, featuring a combination of old and new sections, was then unveiled during the 1999–2000 season, before it was replaced with a new floor prior to the 2015–16 season. Since the 2007–08 season, a signature of long-time Celtics coach Red Auerbach was added to the floor, and prior to the 2022–23 season, Bill Russell&#x27;s jersey #6 was also added. The Celtics are also the only NBA team to use an oak floor, whereas the other 29 teams use maple floors. In 2023, the Celtics used an alternate court design specific for the NBA in-season tournament, which is a traditional maple floor painted mostly dark green except for the middle strip which is painted light brown. The free-throw lanes and center circle incorporated the NBA Cup trophy for the tournament. For the 2024 NBA Cup, the court used was based on the team&#x27;s &quot;Statement&quot; alternate uniform, this time incorporating a green gradient painted surface inspired by the iconic parquet floor.

A traditional floor was used in the 2006 NCAA Women&#x27;s Final Four, the 2009 NCAA Men&#x27;s East Regional and the 2018 NCAA Men&#x27;s East Regional (NCAA rules require a special NCAA-specification floor be used for all tournament games). While not yet confirmed, it is likely that the 2024 NCAA Men&#x27;s East Regional will also use a traditional floor. When the 2012 NCAA Men&#x27;s East Regional was held at TD Garden, a maple parquet floor was used with the same NCAA-specific design.

From March 28 to April 3, 2016, TD Garden hosted the 2016 World Figure Skating Championships.

In 2021, TD Garden hosted the 2021 Laver Cup in September. The Laver Cup is a men&#x27;s tennis tournament between teams from Europe and the rest of the world. It was held from 24 until 26 September with Team Europe winning the tournament for the fourth consecutive year.

In June 2024, the Celtics won their NBA-record 18th championship at TD Garden, beating the Dallas Mavericks and celebrating on the home floor.

TD Garden hosted its first WNBA game on August 20, 2024, when the Connecticut Sun played the Los Angeles Sparks. The WNBA returned to TD Garden on July 15, 2025 when the Connecticut Sun played the Indiana Fever.

===Boxing===
Ricky Hatton began his &quot;American dream&quot; here on May 13, 2006, stepping up to welterweight to fight WBA world champion Luis Collazo.

===Gymnastics===
On November 13, 2016, the arena hosted the Kellogg&#x27;s Tour of Gymnastics Champions.

===Mixed martial arts===
In August 2010, the TD Garden hosted &quot;UFC 118: Edgar vs. Penn 2&quot;, which was the first time that the UFC held an event in Boston. UFC president Dana White confirmed that the UFC would return to The Garden on August 17, 2013. The TD Garden hosted &quot;UFC Fight Night: Shogun vs. Sonnen&quot;, the launch of the new Fox Sports 1 cable channel, on August 17, 2013. This was the second UFC event to take place at the TD Garden. The UFC returned on January 18, 2015, for &quot;UFC Fight Night: McGregor vs. Siver&quot;, and again on January 17, 2016, for &quot;UFC Fight Night: Dillashaw vs. Cruz&quot;. On January 20, 2018, the TD Garden hosted &quot;UFC 220: Miocic vs. Ngannou&quot;. On October 18, 2019, the arena hosted &quot;UFC on ESPN: Reyes vs. Weidman&quot;. On August 19, 2023, the TD Garden hosted &quot;UFC 292: Sterling vs. O&#x27;Malley&quot;.

===Concerts===
===In film===
The TD Garden has been seen/mentioned in movies such as &quot;The Town&quot; (2010), &quot;Knight and Day&quot; (2010), &quot;Zookeeper&quot; (2011), &quot;What&#x27;s Your Number?&quot; (2011) and &quot;Ted&quot; (2012). Parts of the concert footage from the documentary film were filmed at TD Garden during Canadian singer Celine Dion’s 2008 shows of her Taking Chances World Tour.

===Other events===
Comedians such as Bill Burr, Denis Leary, Chris Rock and Louis C.K., among many others, have all performed at the TD Garden during their nationwide tours. Dane Cook did two sellout shows.

WWE professional wrestling events are held in the Garden, which frequently hosts its &quot;Raw&quot; and &quot;SmackDown&quot; shows. In addition, the arena has hosted several pay-per-views including WrestleMania XIV, Royal Rumble in 2003 and 2011, SummerSlam in 2006, Survivor Series in 2008, 2013 and 2022&#x27;s Survivor Series: WarGames (Which introduced the WarGames match to WWE&#x27;s main roster), Money in the Bank in 2014, in , Hell in a Cell in 2016, and Clash of Champions in 2017. In addition, rival promotion All Elite Wrestling (AEW) held their Blood &amp; Guts and Royal Rampage special episodes of &quot;Dynamite&quot; and &quot;Rampage&quot; respectively at the Garden in 2023, as well as Big Business, another special episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, in 2024.

From July 26 to 29, 2004, the TD Garden (then the FleetCenter) was the host of the 2004 Democratic National Convention, in which Massachusetts Senator John Kerry was nominated as the Democratic candidate for the 2004 presidential election. The convention was also famous for then Senator and future President Barack Obama&#x27;s keynote speech which began the speculation of his running for president in the 2008 presidential election.

==The Hub on Causeway==
In May 2013, Delaware North Companies and Boston Properties proposed plans to construct a multi-purpose 3 tower structure on the former site of the original Boston Garden. The complex would encompass , of which will be allotted for retail space and for commercial offices. It will also include 500 residential units, a 200-room hotel (CitizenM Boston North Station), and an 800-space underground parking garage. Construction began in late 2015. The project is being completed in three stages. The first stage is the podium that includes shopping, entertainment, dining, new access to the MBTA North Station Green Line and Orange Line, and a new entrance to the TD Garden and North Station. It also includes an expansion to the existing North Station Garage that sits underneath North Station and the TD Garden. The second phase includes two buildings built on top of the west side of the podium. One building will be apartments, the other a hotel. The third phase is an office building that will sit on top of the east side of the podium.

==Community fundraising controversy==
In the spring of 2017, a group of local teenagers from the Hyde Square Task Force group investigated the terms of TD Garden&#x27;s original development agreement, and concluded that its owners had never satisfied a legal requirement to host three fundraisers a year to benefit the agency that oversees Boston&#x27;s recreational facilities. By mid-August 2017, the Massachusetts governor at the time of the TD Garden&#x27;s original construction, Bill Weld, reminded Jeremy Jacobs about the deal he had made with the state&#x27;s government in 1993 concerning the agreement. As a result, in August 2017, the TD Garden agreed to pay the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation nearly $2 million.

==Features==

===Statue===
In May 2010, a bronze statue of Bruins defenseman Bobby Orr, in a flying pose celebrating &quot;The Goal&quot;, was unveiled outside the stadium.

===Museum===
Located in TD Garden is The Sports Museum (also known as &quot;The Sports Museum of New England&quot;). The museum&#x27;s exhibits focus on the history of various sports in the Boston area, including the Boston Bruins, the Boston Celtics, the New England Patriots, the Boston Red Sox and many more.

==Facilities==

Just as the Boston Garden was, the TD Garden is built on top of Boston&#x27;s North Station, a major transportation hub. The Commuter Rail waiting area becomes crowded during events due to this design: the fans shared a relatively small area with commuters and several fast food concessions. (There is a concourse on the second floor which is about the same size as the former main ground floor concourse, but this is utilized only as an entryway for the arena.) Work finished on the expanded North Station concourse in early 2007. A new, larger, railway concourse gives railway passengers a waiting area which does not interfere with patrons entering or leaving the Garden.

Connections to the Orange Line and Green Line are near the eastern entrance to the Garden. On January 6, 2019, the North Station pedestrian tunnel was completed which connects North Station to the MBTA, Green and Orange Line Stations. The entrance is located by the North Station East entrance. The Green Line ran on the Causeway Street Elevated in front of the building until a tunnel under it was opened in June 2004. The then-disused Elevated was used as a platform for security forces during the 2004 Democratic National Convention, then demolished slightly afterwards.

==See also==
*Matthews Arena, formerly Boston Arena, the Bruins&#x27; original home rink, built in 1910 and still in use
*List of indoor arenas by capacity
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="0" end="9" title="TD Garden" label="TD Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="21" end="32" title="TD Garden" label="FleetCenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="61" end="80" title="TD Garden" label="TD Banknorth Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="112" end="117" title="arena" label="arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="121" end="127" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="192" end="196" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q54454" start="204" end="217" title="North Station" label="North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="245" end="258" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="338" end="349" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="449" end="462" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="470" end="492" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="507" end="521" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="529" end="560" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253324" start="625" end="639" title="Delaware North" label="Delaware North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064054" start="652" end="665" title="Jeremy Jacobs" label="Jeremy Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876300" start="718" end="725" title="Beanpot (ice hockey)" label="Beanpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512985" start="774" end="785" title="Hockey East" label="Hockey East"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="895" end="943" title="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948738" start="945" end="995" title="NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969895" start="997" end="1045" title="NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630260" start="1051" end="1098" title="2014 U.S. Figure Skating Championships" label="2014 United States Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q13537346" start="1107" end="1146" title="2016 World Figure Skating Championships" label="2016 World Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q26694763" start="1191" end="1200" title="Laver Cup" label="Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588581" start="1310" end="1323" title="List of concerts at TD Garden" label="concert venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189307" start="1387" end="1400" title="naming rights" label="naming rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194832" start="1469" end="1476" title="Toronto-Dominion Bank" label="TD Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="1639" end="1652" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013102" start="1891" end="1911" title="Salem, New Hampshire" label="Salem, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743975" start="1929" end="1952" title="Mall at Rockingham Park" label="Mall at Rockingham Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="2096" end="2102" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253324" start="2134" end="2148" title="Delaware North" label="Delaware North"/>
<link wikidata="Q238817" start="2245" end="2258" title="Raymond Flynn" label="Raymond Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855883" start="2465" end="2479" title="BankBoston" label="Bank of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073513" start="2481" end="2508" title="FleetBoston Financial" label="Fleet Bank of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073513" start="2513" end="2541" title="FleetBoston Financial" label="Shawmut National Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="2623" end="2643" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241341" start="2647" end="2663" title="President of the Massachusetts Senate" label="Senate President"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014849" start="2664" end="2681" title="William M. Bulger" label="William M. Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064054" start="2816" end="2829" title="Jeremy Jacobs" label="Jeremy Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q720242" start="3014" end="3023" title="Bill Weld" label="Bill Weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543589" start="3415" end="3456" title="Department of Conservation and Recreation" label="Department of Conservation and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947559" start="4188" end="4194" title="WBZ-TV" label="WBZ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631985" start="4212" end="4222" title="Liz Walker (journalist)" label="Liz Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q733027" start="4252" end="4262" title="Dan Rather" label="Dan Rather"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="4306" end="4315" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="4320" end="4333" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q190152" start="4360" end="4370" title="Larry Bird" label="Larry Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q336581" start="4375" end="4387" title="Red Auerbach" label="Red Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="4491" end="4502" title="Boston Pops Orchestra" label="Boston Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030504" start="4694" end="4725" title="Disney on Ice" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s World on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q239988" start="4750" end="4764" title="Nancy Kerrigan" label="Nancy Kerrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360603" start="4769" end="4779" title="Paul Wylie" label="Paul Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="4798" end="4810" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31013" start="4812" end="4825" title="Patti LaBelle" label="Patti LaBelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755857" start="4830" end="4833" title="Us3" label="US3"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="4928" end="4946" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="5037" end="5052" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Milwaukee Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669891" start="5121" end="5128" title="TD Bank (United States)" label="TD Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194832" start="5160" end="5181" title="Toronto-Dominion Bank" label="Toronto-Dominion Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073513" start="5770" end="5791" title="FleetBoston Financial" label="FleetBoston Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="5797" end="5812" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189307" start="5959" end="5972" title="naming rights" label="naming rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669896" start="6099" end="6111" title="TD Banknorth" label="TD Banknorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240615" start="6290" end="6339" title="2005 Hockey East Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="2005 Hockey East Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910544" start="6484" end="6491" title="boosterism" label="booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="6754" end="6758" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761269" start="7131" end="7137" title="raffle" label="raffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="7259" end="7266" title="New York Yankees" label="Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="7386" end="7412" title="Derek Jeter" label="New York Yankees shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="7431" end="7446" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="7459" end="7473" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358166" start="7776" end="7796" title="Curse of the Bambino" label="Curse of the Bambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743282" start="7851" end="7865" title="the Jimmy Fund" label="the Jimmy Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918185" start="7883" end="7891" title="Fark" label="Fark.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307157" start="7900" end="7911" title="Drew Curtis" label="Drew Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8046" end="8050" title="Fark#Farkisms and clichés" label="UFIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669896" start="8389" end="8401" title="TD Banknorth" label="TD Banknorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669891" start="8409" end="8416" title="TD Bank (United States)" label="TD Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152409" start="8438" end="8454" title="Commerce Bancorp" label="Commerce Bancorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="9099" end="9101" title="High-definition video" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606663" start="9208" end="9236" title="2006 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2006 Women&amp;#x27;s Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q641212" start="9303" end="9313" title="FedExForum" label="FedExForum"/>
<link wikidata="Q818735" start="9315" end="9333" title="Wells Fargo Center (Philadelphia)" label="Wells Fargo Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123297" start="9335" end="9351" title="State Farm Arena (Atlanta)" label="State Farm Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538690" start="9353" end="9379" title="Talking Stick Resort Arena" label="Talking Stick Resort Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="9381" end="9394" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q387157" start="9396" end="9408" title="Rocket Arena" label="Rocket Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q983870" start="9418" end="9426" title="Spectrum Center (arena)" label="Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205234" start="9512" end="9517" title="siren (noisemaker)" label="siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="9540" end="9553" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="9642" end="9660" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978712" start="9666" end="9690" title="Bruins-Canadiens rivalry" label="Bruins&amp;#x27; arch-rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q367272" start="9699" end="9713" title="Montreal Forum" label="Montreal Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q522282" start="9760" end="9771" title="Bell Centre" label="Centre Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="9785" end="9788" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="9875" end="9887" title="The Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778062" start="10224" end="10235" title="Marv Albert" label="Marv Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852063" start="10360" end="10382" title="artificial crowd noise" label="artificial crowd noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655660" start="10478" end="10488" title="Sweetening (show business)" label="sweetening"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="10533" end="10540" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q686507" start="10648" end="10671" title="2011 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2011 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866776" start="10903" end="10910" title="2018–19 Boston Bruins season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="11123" end="11141" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q841163" start="11304" end="11310" title="Ultra-high-definition television" label="4K UHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064054" start="12102" end="12115" title="Jeremy Jacobs" label="Jeremy Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030504" start="12228" end="12241" title="Disney on Ice" label="Disney on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="12259" end="12271" title="Graduation" label="commencement"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="12286" end="12309" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="12372" end="12375" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="12383" end="12397" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="12406" end="12409" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="12417" end="12430" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="12470" end="12487" title="NHL All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q235407" start="12491" end="12495" title="1996 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="12501" end="12519" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="12543" end="12561" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q715566" start="12595" end="12606" title="Ray Bourque" label="Ray Bourque"/>
<link wikidata="Q842375" start="12657" end="12667" title="NBA Finals" label="NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036161" start="12671" end="12675" title="2008 NBA Finals" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837310" start="12720" end="12738" title="2007–08 Los Angeles Lakers season" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072479" start="12856" end="12860" title="1986 NBA Finals" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q644353" start="12864" end="12868" title="2010 NBA Finals" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837314" start="12917" end="12935" title="2009–10 Los Angeles Lakers season" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q112083544" start="12987" end="12991" title="2022 NBA Finals" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q107584180" start="13040" end="13061" title="2021–22 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837289" start="13199" end="13217" title="1984–85 Los Angeles Lakers season" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072478" start="13244" end="13248" title="1985 NBA Finals" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q126173660" start="13252" end="13256" title="2024 NBA Finals" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947108" start="13301" end="13317" title="2023–24 Dallas Mavericks season" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="13394" end="13412" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q686507" start="13416" end="13420" title="2011 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620031" start="13468" end="13485" title="2010–11 Vancouver Canucks season" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423220" start="13536" end="13540" title="2013 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627851" start="13588" end="13606" title="2012–13 Chicago Blackhawks season" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q63649190" start="13703" end="13707" title="2019 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866632" start="13758" end="13773" title="2018–19 St. Louis Blues season" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336380" start="14254" end="14269" title="Eddie Palladino" label="Eddie Palladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q106217548" start="14496" end="14506" title="Ron Poster" label="Ron Poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q919959" start="14611" end="14625" title="Matthews Arena" label="Matthews Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876300" start="14694" end="14701" title="Beanpot (ice hockey)" label="Beanpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518772" start="14740" end="14766" title="Boston University Terriers" label="Boston University Terriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046352" start="14768" end="14789" title="Boston College Eagles" label="Boston College Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="14791" end="14809" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573151" start="14810" end="14817" title="Harvard Crimson" label="Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="14822" end="14845" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058024" start="14846" end="14853" title="Northeastern Huskies" label="Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593822" start="14971" end="14975" title="1998 NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603092" start="14977" end="14981" title="2004 NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971080" start="14983" end="14987" title="2015 NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970560" start="14992" end="14996" title="2022 NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q254194" start="15013" end="15024" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Championship" label="Frozen Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784306" start="15077" end="15127" title="Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association" label="Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642312" start="15226" end="15233" title="MIAA Division 1A Boy&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Tournament" label="Super 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q522282" start="15325" end="15336" title="Bell Centre" label="Bell Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="15340" end="15348" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q125134058" start="15379" end="15401" title="NHL 4 Nations Face-Off" label="NHL 4 Nations Face-Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q481795" start="15623" end="15633" title="Kia Center" label="Kia Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q161337" start="15647" end="15660" title="Orlando Magic" label="Orlando Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838828" start="15667" end="15674" title="parquet" label="parquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q919959" start="15908" end="15920" title="Matthews Arena" label="Boston Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643004" start="16141" end="16157" title="1999–2000 Boston Celtics season" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020683" start="16212" end="16226" title="2015–16 Boston Celtics season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018115" start="16238" end="16252" title="2007–08 Boston Celtics season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q336581" start="16293" end="16305" title="Red Auerbach" label="Red Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q112724824" start="16347" end="16361" title="2022–23 Boston Celtics season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q242185" start="16363" end="16375" title="Bill Russell" label="Bill Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="16458" end="16461" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="16500" end="16505" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q120491192" start="16583" end="16607" title="2023 NBA in-season tournament" label="NBA in-season tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q127425001" start="16827" end="16839" title="2024 NBA Cup" label="2024 NBA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606663" start="17058" end="17091" title="2006 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2006 NCAA Women&amp;#x27;s Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948728" start="17097" end="17131" title="2009 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2009 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s East Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873408" start="17140" end="17174" title="2018 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2018 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s East Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q116986939" start="17312" end="17346" title="2024 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2024 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s East Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948731" start="17391" end="17425" title="2012 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2012 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s East Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q13537346" start="17570" end="17609" title="2016 World Figure Skating Championships" label="2016 World Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q26694763" start="17642" end="17656" title="2020 Laver Cup" label="2021 Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q26694763" start="17675" end="17684" title="Laver Cup" label="Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947108" start="17976" end="17992" title="2023–24 Dallas Mavericks season" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="18056" end="18060" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126243" start="18095" end="18110" title="Connecticut Sun" label="Connecticut Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329633" start="18122" end="18140" title="Los Angeles Sparks" label="Los Angeles Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631017" start="18226" end="18239" title="Indiana Fever" label="Indiana Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q116516" start="18255" end="18267" title="Ricky Hatton" label="Ricky Hatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="18364" end="18367" title="World Boxing Association" label="WBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700435" start="18383" end="18395" title="Luis Collazo" label="Luis Collazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704157" start="18572" end="18597" title="UFC 118" label="UFC 118: Edgar vs. Penn 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="18639" end="18642" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18790" end="18824" title="UFC Fight Night: Shogun vs. Sonnen" label="UFC Fight Night: Shogun vs. Sonnen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19012" end="19047" title="UFC Fight Night: McGregor vs. Siver" label="UFC Fight Night: McGregor vs. Siver"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19096" end="19131" title="UFC Fight Night: Dillashaw vs. Cruz" label="UFC Fight Night: Dillashaw vs. Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46942393" start="19187" end="19214" title="UFC 220" label="UFC 220: Miocic vs. Ngannou"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19266" end="19296" title="UFC on ESPN: Reyes vs. Weidman" label="UFC on ESPN: Reyes vs. Weidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q118434722" start="19351" end="19386" title="UFC 292" label="UFC 292: Sterling vs. O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q725539" start="19486" end="19494" title="The Town (2010 film)" label="The Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q679918" start="19515" end="19529" title="Knight and Day" label="Knight and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q477070" start="19550" end="19559" title="Zookeeper (film)" label="Zookeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q389548" start="19580" end="19604" title="What&amp;#x27;s Your Number?" label="What&amp;#x27;s Your Number?"/>
<link wikidata="Q641760" start="19628" end="19631" title="Ted (film)" label="Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="19749" end="19760" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q680319" start="19781" end="19806" title="Taking Chances World Tour" label="Taking Chances World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13412374" start="19846" end="19855" title="Bill Burr" label="Bill Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q310283" start="19857" end="19868" title="Denis Leary" label="Denis Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109" start="19870" end="19880" title="Chris Rock" label="Chris Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15079" start="19885" end="19895" title="Louis C.K." label="Louis C.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="20017" end="20020" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="20108" end="20111" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="20128" end="20137" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="20193" end="20205" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q50874" start="20217" end="20233" title="WrestleMania XIV" label="WrestleMania XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q36103" start="20235" end="20247" title="Royal Rumble" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q36735" start="20251" end="20255" title="Royal Rumble (2003)" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q36898" start="20260" end="20264" title="Royal Rumble (2011)" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q59284" start="20266" end="20276" title="WWE SummerSlam" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q59389" start="20280" end="20284" title="SummerSlam (2006)" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q59759" start="20286" end="20301" title="Survivor Series" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q80682" start="20305" end="20309" title="Survivor Series (2008)" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052637" start="20311" end="20315" title="Survivor Series (2013)" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20332" end="20357" title="Survivor Series: WarGames (2022)" label="Survivor Series: WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968353" start="20380" end="20394" title="WarGames match" label="WarGames match"/>
<link wikidata="Q59266" start="20423" end="20440" title="WWE Money in the Bank" label="Money in the Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363581" start="20444" end="20448" title="Money in the Bank (2014)" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774501" start="20455" end="20469" title="WWE Hell in a Cell" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q27031568" start="20473" end="20477" title="Hell in a Cell (2016)" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827075" start="20483" end="20501" title="WWE Clash of Champions" label="Clash of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q43377605" start="20505" end="20509" title="Clash of Champions (2017)" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="20540" end="20559" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q113023514" start="20577" end="20593" title="AEW Blood &amp;amp; Guts" label="Blood &amp;amp; Guts"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684241" start="20638" end="20646" title="AEW Dynamite" label="Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q107490608" start="20663" end="20670" title="AEW Rampage" label="Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q120066311" start="20707" end="20711" title="Blood &amp;amp; Guts (2023)" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q124841517" start="20724" end="20736" title="AEW Big Business" label="Big Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q359657" start="20880" end="20915" title="2004 Democratic National Convention" label="2004 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="20948" end="20958" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="21009" end="21035" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="21106" end="21118" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602699" start="21126" end="21140" title="2004 Democratic National Convention keynote speech" label="keynote speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="21205" end="21231" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253324" start="21271" end="21295" title="Delaware North Companies" label="Delaware North Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844439" start="21300" end="21317" title="Boston Properties" label="Boston Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="21415" end="21428" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q105255246" start="21593" end="21622" title="CitizenM Boston North Station" label="CitizenM Boston North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q720242" start="22783" end="22792" title="Bill Weld" label="Bill Weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803309" start="23090" end="23103" title="Statue of Bobby Orr" label="bronze statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="23125" end="23134" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23141" end="23185" title="1970 Stanley Cup Finals#&amp;quot;The Flight&amp;quot;" label="flying pose celebrating &amp;quot;The Goal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="23319" end="23330" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="23563" end="23576" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q54454" start="23629" end="23642" title="North Station" label="North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="23676" end="23689" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q152029" start="24246" end="24257" title="Orange Line (MBTA)" label="Orange Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q152061" start="24262" end="24272" title="Green Line (MBTA)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054651" start="24548" end="24572" title="Causeway Street Elevated" label="Causeway Street Elevated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185865" start="24732" end="24762" title="Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q919959" start="24816" end="24830" title="Matthews Arena" label="Matthews Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623991" start="24924" end="24957" title="List of indoor arenas by capacity" label="List of indoor arenas by capacity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498892" wikidata="Q726273" url="?curid=498892" title="Ashridge">
<text>Ashridge is a country estate and stately home in Hertfordshire, England. It is situated in the Chiltern Hills, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, about north of Berkhamsted and north west of London. The estate comprises of woodlands (known as Ashridge Forest), commons and chalk downland which supports a rich variety of wildlife.

Today, Ashridge is home to Hult Ashridge, Hult International Business School&#x27;s executive education programme, as it has been since 1959. The estate is currently owned by the National Trust.

==History==

===Ashridge Priory===

In mediæval times Ashridge was the location of Ashridge Priory, a college of the monastic order of Bonhommes founded in 1283 by Edmund, 2nd Earl of Cornwall, whose palace was at nearby Berkhamsted Castle. At the dissolution of the monasteries the priory was surrendered to the crown and King Henry VIII used it to house his children, namely Prince Edward and the Princesses Mary and Elizabeth. Eventually he bequeathed the property to his daughter Elizabeth. The priory church was demolished during the reign of Elizabeth I.

===The Egerton family===

In 1604 the estate became the property of Sir Thomas Egerton. Egerton&#x27;s son, John Egerton, was created 1st Earl of Bridgewater on 27 May 1617. In 1800, redevelopment of the estate as the Bridgewater residence was begun by Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater. The Duke demolished most of the Priory and after his death, the present house was constructed between 1808 and 1814 by John Egerton, 7th Earl of Bridgewater. The 3rd Duke of Bridgewater was buried in the Egerton family vault in Little Gaddesden Church, close to Ashridge.

In 1848 the estate passed to the Earls Brownlow, another strand of the Egerton family, and then in 1921 it was split, with the land passing to the National Trust, while the house and garden was acquired by speculators.

===Conservative Staff College===

In 1928 Urban Hanlon Broughton purchased the house as a gift for the Conservative Party intended to commemorate Bonar Law. In July 1929 Ashridge opened by Stanley Baldwin as a College under the governance of the Bonar Law Memorial Trust (BLMT). The BLMT was charged by its Founding Deed to pursue the following goals, namely

(a) honouring the memory of a great statesman, (b) the preservation of the house and grounds as an historic building, (c) to create an educational centre ... (d) to train lecturers, speakers and writers to further the study of the subjects outlined above (e) ... provide lectures and/or discussions on these subjects open to the public or for those who had paid fees to attend, (f) ... provide a supporting staff, (g) to allow boarding by those attending the lectures and discussions.

For the next fifteen years the college, the full title of which was the Bonar Law Memorial College, Ashridge was to act as a school for Conservative intellectuals creating, in their own words, &#x27;Conservative Fabians&#x27;, and as a &#x27;College of Citizenship&#x27; for &#x27;the general education of the electorate&#x27;. Associated with the College were regional or county circles or clubs, such the Ashridge Dining Club in London; their activities were reported by The Ashridge Journal. In 1954 its Deed of Foundation was changed by Act of Parliament, and Ashridge was &#x27;re-founded&#x27; as an educational charity. In 1959 it became a Management College, which it remains today.

===Hult International Business School===

In 1959 Ashridge College was re-launched to provide management training, and was named Ashridge Business School. In 2015, Ashridge Business School operationally merged with Hult International Business School, an American business school with campuses in seven cities around the world. As part of the merger, &quot;Ashridge Business School&quot; changed its name to Ashridge Executive Education, later Hult Ashridge.

==Estate==
===Ashridge House===

Prior to his death in the early 1800s, the 3rd Duke of Bridgewater had begun to demolish the Medieval Priory buildings in order to build a new country house. His successor, the 7th Earl of Bridgewater commissioned the architect James Wyatt to build his new home, Ashridge House. The foundation stone for the new house was laid by the 7th Earl&#x27;s wife, Charlotte Catherine Anne, Countess of Bridgewater, on 25 October 1808, the 48th anniversary of the accession of George III of Great Britain. The ceremony is commemorated by a brass plaque by the main entrance.

In 1813, part-way through the construction works, Wyatt died unexpectedly, and the building project was completed the following year by his nephew Jeffry Wyatt (later known as Sir Jeffry Wyatville). The present house is regarded as one of the finest examples of early Gothic Revival architecture and is now a Grade I listed building.

Ashridge house was built on the site of the 13th-Century priory building which had been demolished in 1800. Some parts of the old priory were incorporated into the house by James Wyatt, including the undercroft of the monastic refectory, featuring two aisles, seven bays and a rib-vaulted ceiling, which he repurposed as a beer cellar below the dining room and drawing room.

The mansion is built of ashlar faced with Totternhoe stone with a castellated parapet and low-pitched slate roofs. It features a variety of casement windows including pointed arch and ogee lights typical of the early Gothic Revival style. Before his untimely death, James Wyatt completed the north-facing front entrance and the central block, containing the state apartments and western courtyards. Jeffry Wyatt added private apartment blocks at an angle to the main building and an orangery with a turret in 1815–17. The main entrance features a projecting porte-cochère and octagonal turrets, added by Jeffry Wyatt c.1814.

Inside the mansion are a number of richly decorated state rooms; of the interior features, only the hall, the staircase tower and the chapel are Gothic in design. The high staircase hall features a stone stair with iron railing, surrounded by niches containing statues by Sir Richard Westmacott. At the centre of the fan-vaulted ceiling is a large dial connected to the weather vane on the roof which displays the current wind direction. The Brownlow Hall contains a giant frieze of the goddess Venus surrounded by putti with an armorial centrepiece and three early-Twentieth Century murals. Redecoration of the interiors was commissioned by Lady Marian Alford and executed in the neoclassical style in 1855–63 by Sir Matthew Digby Wyatt, including a replica of Guido Reni&#x27;s Aurora ceiling and aedicular door surrounds. Among the alterations carried out after the conversion of the mansion into a college, the conservatory was altered by Clough Williams-Ellis in 1919 to form a dining-room. The boundary between Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire originally passed through the dining room, though the house is now entirely in Hertfordshire.

The house incorporates a Gothic Revival Chapel designed by James Wyatt, completed by Jeffry Wyatt in 1817. The most notable exterior feature of the chapel is its spire which was demolished in 1922 by Lord Brownlow as it had become structurally unsound. The spire which can be seen today is in fact a fibreglass replica which was erected in 1969. The chapel interior features a pair of Fourteenth-Century carved doors, fan-vaulted coving supporting a canted panelled ceiling; a set of carved oak choir stalls designed by Jeffry; and an array of Rayonnant lancet windows. The windows were originally fitted with stained glass panels depicting scenes from the Bible; the glass was imported by the 7th Earl from Germany, having been originally designed in the Sixteenth Century for Steinfeld Abbey and Mariawald Abbey. The glass was auctioned off at Sotheby&#x27;s in 1928 and acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum. One glass panel featuring the Blessed Virgin was placed in the nearby Church of Ss Peter and Paul at Little Gaddesden; another, depicting St Peter was in Christ Church, Croydon in London. Beneath the chapel is a vaulted medieval wellhouse with a well.

===Gardens===
Outside the house stands the timber-frame and brick Fourteenth-Century Monks&#x27; Barn in the Monks&#x27; Garden. It was remodelled in 1816 by Jeffry Wyatt who added a covered walkway. In 1884 Mathew Digby Wyatt added the red brick Fern House.

The gardens were laid out from 1813 onwards under the direction of Charlotte Catherine Anne, Countess of Bridgewater, wife of the 7th Earl. She commissioned the noted landscape gardener Humphrey Repton, and they formed a friendship on his many visits to the estate. Repton presented many ideas in his &quot;Red Book&quot; for the estate in 1813, including a rosarie (or &quot;rosarium&quot;) and a &quot;Monks&#x27; Garden&quot; commemorating Ashridge&#x27;s monastic heritage with a layout of grave-shaped flower beds. The Countess approved many of his designs, but also had her own ideas for the estate and made alterations to his proposals. Writing in 1824, the chaplain to the Earl of Bridgewater, Rev Henry Todd, noted that &quot;the profusion of flowers which abound here, as the walks and conservatories together with the elegance of their arrangement, sufficiently indicates the care and attention bestowed by the Countess of Bridgewater upon her delightful pursuits of the garden.&quot; The rosarie and the Monks&#x27; Garden are still visible at Ashridge today.

===Bridgewater Monument===

The Grade II* listed Bridgewater Monument () is a tower on the Ashridge estate, built in 1832 in memory of Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater (1736–1803), &quot;the father of inland navigation&quot;.

===Ashridge Commons and Woods===

Ashridge Commons &amp; Woods () is a 640.1 hectare (1581.7 acre) Biological Site of Special Scientific Interest. The site was notified in 1987 under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and lies on the Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire border and is home to much semi-natural vegetation. As well as this, the site has extensive areas of woodland, grass and plantations. Ashridge Woods are also well known for their Bluebell woods.

===Later developments===
Part of the estate became Ashridge Golf Club in 1932, and had Henry Cotton as its club professional in the late 1930s, including his most successful year 1937.

During the Second World War, the building and the lawn in front of it was used as a secondary site for Charing Cross Hospital.

The house has housed the Ashridge Executive Education program, of Hult International Business School, since 1959.
==In popular culture==
Ashridge Common has been featured many times in film and television series due to its distinction as an area of natural beauty. Scenes for &quot;Maleficent&quot;, &quot;Plotlands&quot;, &quot;Sleepy Hollow&quot;, &quot;Jonathan Creek&quot; and &quot;Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire&quot; were filmed in Ashridge&#x27;s Frithsden Beeches wood. Ashridge House, which is now Ashridge Business School, has been featured in films such as &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot;. More recently, it has been used as a location for &quot;The Crown&quot; and &quot;Pennyworth&quot; TV series.

In early 2023, English singer-songwriter Sam Smith released a music video for his song &quot;I&#x27;m Not Here to Make Friends&quot;, almost entirely shot in and outside the property.

==References==
==Sources==
* 
*

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

*Ashridge Estate information at the National Trust
*Ashridge Business School 
*Ashridge (A Guide to Old Hertfordshire)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726273" start="0" end="8" title="Ashridge" label="Ashridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292478" start="14" end="28" title="Estate (land)" label="country estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="33" end="45" title="stately home" label="stately home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="49" end="62" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="95" end="109" title="Chiltern Hills" label="Chiltern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="114" end="148" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19784" start="165" end="176" title="Berkhamsted" label="Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148899" start="363" end="376" title="Hult Ashridge" label="Hult Ashridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047226" start="378" end="412" title="Hult International Business School" label="Hult International Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="515" end="529" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q15192660" start="615" end="630" title="Ashridge Priory" label="Ashridge Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146319" start="634" end="641" title="College (canon law)" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910356" start="667" end="676" title="Bonhommes" label="Bonhommes"/>
<link wikidata="Q283151" start="696" end="724" title="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Cornwall" label="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="732" end="738" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892150" start="753" end="771" title="Berkhamsted Castle" label="Berkhamsted Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="780" end="810" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="860" end="870" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1016" end="1025" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017342" start="1162" end="1180" title="Sir Thomas Egerton" label="Sir Thomas Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231481" start="1202" end="1214" title="John Egerton, 1st Earl of Bridgewater" label="John Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129742" start="1232" end="1251" title="Earl of Bridgewater" label="Earl of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441484" start="1347" end="1387" title="Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater" label="Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702166" start="1508" end="1545" title="John Egerton, 7th Earl of Bridgewater" label="John Egerton, 7th Earl of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129826" start="1617" end="1633" title="Little Gaddesden" label="Little Gaddesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862202" start="1695" end="1709" title="Baron Brownlow" label="Earls Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899919" start="1924" end="1946" title="Urban Hanlon Broughton" label="Urban Hanlon Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1985" end="2003" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="2028" end="2037" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="2071" end="2086" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744259" start="3135" end="3155" title="Ashridge Dining Club" label="Ashridge Dining Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148899" start="3549" end="3573" title="Hult Ashridge" label="Ashridge Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148899" start="3827" end="3855" title="Ashridge Executive Education" label="Ashridge Executive Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148899" start="3863" end="3876" title="Hult Ashridge" label="Hult Ashridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="4005" end="4020" title="Medieval Priory" label="Medieval Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350728" start="4140" end="4151" title="James Wyatt" label="James Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133673" start="4195" end="4211" title="foundation stone" label="foundation stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75453932" start="4268" end="4317" title="Charlotte Catherine Anne, Countess of Bridgewater" label="Charlotte Catherine Anne, Countess of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="4380" end="4407" title="George III of Great Britain" label="George III of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176743" start="4659" end="4675" title="Jeffry Wyatville" label="Jeffry Wyatville"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="4747" end="4774" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="4796" end="4811" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883540" start="5014" end="5024" title="undercroft" label="undercroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q568225" start="5041" end="5050" title="refectory" label="refectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007996" start="5066" end="5071" title="aisle" label="aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124247" start="5080" end="5083" title="Bay (architecture)" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="5091" end="5102" title="Vault (architecture)" label="rib-vaulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="5214" end="5220" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828484" start="5232" end="5248" title="Totternhoe stone" label="Totternhoe stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23423" start="5256" end="5267" title="castellated" label="castellated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286070" start="5268" end="5275" title="parapet" label="parapet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="5292" end="5297" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068441" start="5330" end="5345" title="casement window" label="casement window"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635434" start="5357" end="5369" title="pointed arch" label="pointed arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q339340" start="5374" end="5378" title="ogee" label="ogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719092" start="5748" end="5761" title="porte-cochère" label="porte-cochère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431958" start="5868" end="5878" title="state room" label="state room"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238282" start="6092" end="6110" title="Richard Westmacott" label="Richard Westmacott"/>
<link wikidata="Q668929" start="6133" end="6144" title="fan vaulting" label="fan-vaulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="6186" end="6198" title="weather vane" label="weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="6289" end="6295" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="6311" end="6316" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284865" start="6331" end="6336" title="putti" label="putti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675712" start="6345" end="6353" title="armorial" label="armorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760984" start="6463" end="6476" title="Marian Alford" label="Marian Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="6497" end="6509" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790415" start="6534" end="6553" title="Matthew Digby Wyatt" label="Matthew Digby Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q109061" start="6578" end="6588" title="Guido Reni" label="Guido Reni"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6596" end="6602" title=":File:Guido Reni - Aurora - WGA19273.jpg" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q507286" start="6615" end="6639" title="Aedicule" label="aedicular door surrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077174" start="6731" end="6743" title="Conservatory (greenhouse)" label="conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230582" start="6759" end="6780" title="Clough Williams-Ellis" label="Clough Williams-Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="6833" end="6846" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="6851" end="6866" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="6946" end="6959" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q852590" start="7124" end="7129" title="spire" label="spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="7262" end="7272" title="fibreglass" label="fibreglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="7392" end="7398" title="coving (interior design)" label="coving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033499" start="7412" end="7416" title="cant (architecture)" label="cant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="7453" end="7456" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="7457" end="7468" title="choir stall" label="choir stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914850" start="7506" end="7515" title="Rayonnant" label="Rayonnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060585" start="7516" end="7529" title="lancet window" label="lancet window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="7572" end="7585" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q883617" start="7740" end="7755" title="Steinfeld Abbey" label="Steinfeld Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q334026" start="7760" end="7775" title="Mariawald Abbey" label="Mariawald Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="7808" end="7822" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="7851" end="7877" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="7909" end="7923" title="Blessed Virgin" label="Blessed Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129826" start="7980" end="7996" title="Little Gaddesden" label="Little Gaddesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="8017" end="8025" title="St Peter" label="St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="8125" end="8129" title="water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="8175" end="8187" title="timber-frame" label="timber-frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q75453932" start="8459" end="8508" title="Charlotte Catherine Anne, Countess of Bridgewater" label="Charlotte Catherine Anne, Countess of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316530" start="8578" end="8593" title="Humphrey Repton" label="Humphrey Repton"/>
<link wikidata="Q291177" start="8768" end="8776" title="rosarium" label="rosarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436864" start="9098" end="9108" title="Henry Todd (priest)" label="Henry Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15108035" start="9514" end="9534" title="Bridgewater Monument" label="Bridgewater Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441484" start="9600" end="9640" title="Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater" label="Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="9799" end="9845" title="Biological Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Biological Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001340" start="9887" end="9920" title="Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981" label="Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="9937" end="9952" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="9957" end="9970" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805914" start="10218" end="10236" title="Ashridge Golf Club" label="Ashridge Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q715359" start="10254" end="10266" title="Henry Cotton (golfer)" label="Henry Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10364" end="10380" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982607" start="10456" end="10478" title="Charing Cross Hospital" label="Charing Cross Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148899" start="10506" end="10534" title="Ashridge Executive Education" label="Ashridge Executive Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047226" start="10547" end="10581" title="Hult International Business School" label="Hult International Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q172271" start="10763" end="10773" title="Maleficent (film)" label="Maleficent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28961530" start="10787" end="10796" title="Plotlands" label="Plotlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q208592" start="10810" end="10823" title="Sleepy Hollow (film)" label="Sleepy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q282518" start="10837" end="10851" title="Jonathan Creek" label="Jonathan Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q102225" start="10868" end="10903" title="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504764" start="10941" end="10958" title="Frithsden Beeches" label="Frithsden Beeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148899" start="10994" end="11018" title="Ashridge Business School" label="Ashridge Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q470735" start="11061" end="11076" title="The Dirty Dozen" label="The Dirty Dozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707362" start="11134" end="11155" title="The Crown (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Crown&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q57695644" start="11160" end="11182" title="Pennyworth (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Pennyworth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q116761093" start="11288" end="11321" title="I&amp;#x27;m Not Here to Make Friends" label="I&amp;#x27;m Not Here to Make Friends"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498893" wikidata="Q7909558" url="?curid=498893" title="Vale of Pewsey">
<text>The Vale of Pewsey or Pewsey Vale is an area of Wiltshire, England to the east of Devizes and south of Marlborough, centred on the village of Pewsey.

==Geography==
The vale is an extent of lower lying ground separating the chalk downs of Salisbury Plain to the south from the Marlborough Downs to the north. It is around long and around wide. At the western end is the town of Devizes. Larger settlements in the vale include Pewsey and Burbage with many smaller villages, the larger ones including Bishops Cannings, Etchilhampton, Urchfont, Chirton, Alton Priors, Woodborough, Milton Lilbourne, Easton Royal and Wootton Rivers.

Although not itself part of the downs, the vale is included as part of the North Wessex Downs AONB (Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty).

The vale is a major east–west feature opening to the west towards the Bristol Channel, but is drained by the headwaters of the Salisbury Avon, rather than the westward-flowing Bristol Avon. The river cuts through the chalk scarp to the south at Upavon and crosses Salisbury Plain towards the south coast. The higher part of the eastern vale south of Burbage is drained by the River Bourne, which cuts the scarp at Collingbourne Kingston, joining the Avon at Salisbury. Since the area is not believed to have been glaciated, this probably indicates that the course of the rivers pre-dates the modern topography.

The highest point is Milk Hill (near Alton Barnes) at 295 m / 968 ft above sea level, with the adjacent Tan Hill summiting at 294 m / 965 ft.

The vale is not used by any major roads, but is followed by a railway and canal as a route between the London Basin and the west. To the north of Burbage the head of the Avon valley, draining west into the vale, meets the head of the River Dun, draining east to the Kennet and the Thames. The valley floor at around above sea level provides a route through the downs which locally reach 200 to 300 metres. The Kennet and Avon Canal and the main line railway from London to the south-west make use of this route, the canal using the Bruce Tunnel. Formerly another rail route between Andover and Marlborough also followed this gap. Another line formerly branched off towards Bath via Devizes at the western end of the vale.

==Geology==
The vale lies along the eroded core of an anticline, a westward extension of the Mendip Axis, with a relatively thin covering of Mesozoic sediments folded upwards over an up-faulted horst of Palaeozoic rocks. The floor of the vale is composed of Albian (Lower Cretaceous) beds of the Upper Greensand, exposed by removal of the overlying chalk. It is surrounded to the north and south by chalk scarps which close to the east near Burbage. There is also a small inlier of Greensand to the east at Shalbourne; this area drains northwards to the Kennet.

==Archaeology==
Neolithic sites in the vale include Knap Hill, a causewayed enclosure near Alton Priors, first investigated by Benjamin and Maud Cunnington in 1908–9.

In 2000, near the village of Wilcot, a schoolboy found a hoard of Roman coins which became known as the Stanchester Hoard. The find is now at the Wiltshire Museum in Devizes. Since that time there have been several other Roman hoards discovered in the area.

In 2005, significant Neolithic finds and two henge sites – the Marden and Wilsford Henges – were discovered in the vale.

== Extent ==
According to the Pewsey Vale Local Plan prepared by Kennet District Council in 1992, the vale includes land in the following parishes: Alton, Buttermere, Burbage, Charlton, Chute, Chute Forest, Collingbourne Ducis, Collingbourne Kingston, Easton, Enford, Everleigh, Fittleton, Froxfield, Grafton, Great Bedwyn, Ham, Huish, Little Bedwyn, Manningford, Milton Lilbourne, Netheravon, North Newnton, Pewsey, Rushall, Shalbourne, Tidcombe and Fosbury, Upavon, Wilcot, Wilsford, Woodborough, and Wootton Rivers.

==Notable residents, past and present ==
*Michael Ancram MP, 13th Marquess of Lothian
*Sir Henry Howarth Bashford, physician and writer
*David Brudenell-Bruce, Earl of Cardigan, 31st hereditary warden of Savernake Forest
*Lord Devlin, judge
*Pete Doherty, musician
*Major-General Christopher Leslie Elliot
*Elinor Goodman, former Channel 4 Political Editor
*Brigadier Robert Hall, first Chairman of Wiltshire Council
*Nick Harper, musician
*Sir Henry Keswick, chairman of Jardine Matheson Holdings
*Peter Lewis, HTV West newsreader
*Peter Mandelson, Labour politician
*David Newbigging, High Sheriff of Wiltshire, 2003
*Claire Perry, former MP for Devizes
*Shelley Rudman, winner of the silver medal in the skeleton bob, Britain&#x27;s only medal at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin
*Peter Sarstedt, musician
*Andy Scott, musician of the band The Sweet
*Jane Seymour, Queen consort of England
*Nigel Stock, actor
*Zoë Wanamaker, actress

==Culture and sport==
Pewsey is the centre of activity for many of the smaller villages in and around the Vale of Pewsey and, as such, offers a wide range of activities for its small size.

==Places of interest==
Avebury (stone circle), West Kennet Long Barrow, Savernake Forest, Crofton Pumping Station, Silbury Hill, Wilton Windmill, Alton Barnes (crop circles), Marlborough, Kennet and Avon Canal, Bruce Tunnel.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7909558" start="4" end="18" title="Vale of Pewsey" label="Vale of Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909558" start="22" end="33" title="Vale of Pewsey" label="Pewsey Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="48" end="57" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026699" start="82" end="89" title="Devizes" label="Devizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q539528" start="103" end="114" title="Marlborough, Wiltshire" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q639675" start="142" end="148" title="Pewsey" label="Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472049" start="239" end="254" title="Salisbury Plain" label="Salisbury Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057217" start="277" end="294" title="Marlborough Downs" label="Marlborough Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q639675" start="426" end="432" title="Pewsey" label="Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q693399" start="437" end="444" title="Burbage, Wiltshire" label="Burbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463774" start="499" end="515" title="Bishops Cannings" label="Bishops Cannings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092459" start="517" end="530" title="Etchilhampton" label="Etchilhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135013" start="532" end="540" title="Urchfont" label="Urchfont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345380" start="542" end="549" title="Chirton" label="Chirton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313942" start="551" end="563" title="Alton Priors" label="Alton Priors"/>
<link wikidata="Q583272" start="565" end="576" title="Woodborough, Wiltshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117390" start="578" end="594" title="Milton Lilbourne" label="Milton Lilbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259062" start="596" end="608" title="Easton Royal" label="Easton Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843845" start="613" end="627" title="Wootton Rivers" label="Wootton Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253315" start="662" end="667" title="Downland" label="downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057217" start="705" end="728" title="North Wessex Downs" label="North Wessex Downs AONB"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="730" end="764" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188203" start="838" end="853" title="Bristol Channel" label="Bristol Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19710" start="895" end="909" title="River Avon, Hampshire" label="Salisbury Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711" start="944" end="956" title="River Avon, Bristol" label="Bristol Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229979" start="1013" end="1019" title="Upavon" label="Upavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337174" start="1144" end="1156" title="River Bourne, Wiltshire" label="River Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q642675" start="1182" end="1204" title="Collingbourne Kingston" label="Collingbourne Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q160642" start="1226" end="1235" title="Salisbury" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857989" start="1401" end="1410" title="Milk Hill" label="Milk Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313942" start="1417" end="1429" title="Alton Barnes" label="Alton Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682053" start="1484" end="1492" title="Tan Hill, Wiltshire" label="Tan Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602736" start="1626" end="1638" title="London Basin" label="London Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337372" start="1757" end="1766" title="River Dun (River Kennet)" label="River Dun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="1789" end="1795" title="River Kennet" label="Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1804" end="1810" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="1933" end="1954" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265965" start="1963" end="1980" title="Reading to Taunton line" label="main line railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978376" start="2055" end="2067" title="Bruce Tunnel" label="Bruce Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="2105" end="2112" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q539528" start="2117" end="2128" title="Marlborough, Wiltshire" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="2196" end="2200" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="2300" end="2309" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="2339" end="2345" title="Mendip Hills" label="Mendip"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="2387" end="2395" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212136" start="2440" end="2445" title="horst (geology)" label="horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="2449" end="2459" title="Palaeozoic" label="Palaeozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q301728" start="2504" end="2510" title="Albian" label="Albian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="2542" end="2557" title="Upper Greensand" label="Upper Greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="2645" end="2650" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q502899" start="2718" end="2724" title="inlier" label="inlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796277" start="2753" end="2763" title="Shalbourne" label="Shalbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993183" start="2825" end="2834" title="Neolithic British Isles" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17643582" start="2861" end="2870" title="Knap Hill" label="Knap Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q325017" start="2874" end="2894" title="causewayed enclosure" label="causewayed enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313942" start="2900" end="2912" title="Alton Priors" label="Alton Priors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885489" start="2936" end="2944" title="Ben Cunnington (archaeologist)" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212534" start="2949" end="2964" title="Maud Cunnington" label="Maud Cunnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000299" start="3006" end="3012" title="Wilcot" label="Wilcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q164099" start="3034" end="3039" title="hoard" label="hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q952064" start="3043" end="3054" title="Roman currency" label="Roman coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598024" start="3081" end="3098" title="Stanchester Hoard" label="Stanchester Hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023438" start="3123" end="3139" title="Wiltshire Museum" label="Wiltshire Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026699" start="3143" end="3150" title="Devizes" label="Devizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q113318309" start="3184" end="3210" title="Vale of Pewsey hoards" label="several other Roman hoards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993183" start="3257" end="3266" title="Neolithic British Isles" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035294" start="3281" end="3286" title="henge" label="henge"/>
<link wikidata="Q139573" start="3299" end="3305" title="Marden Henge" label="Marden"/>
<link wikidata="Q24181346" start="3310" end="3318" title="Wilsford Henge" label="Wilsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738836" start="3423" end="3446" title="Kennet District Council" label="Kennet District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313942" start="3506" end="3511" title="Alton, Wiltshire" label="Alton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760339" start="3513" end="3523" title="Buttermere, Wiltshire" label="Buttermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q693399" start="3525" end="3532" title="Burbage, Wiltshire" label="Burbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086277" start="3534" end="3542" title="Charlton, Pewsey Vale" label="Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118367" start="3544" end="3549" title="Chute, Wiltshire" label="Chute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103818" start="3551" end="3563" title="Chute Forest" label="Chute Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q609007" start="3565" end="3584" title="Collingbourne Ducis" label="Collingbourne Ducis"/>
<link wikidata="Q642675" start="3586" end="3608" title="Collingbourne Kingston" label="Collingbourne Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259062" start="3610" end="3616" title="Easton, Pewsey Vale" label="Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377361" start="3618" end="3624" title="Enford" label="Enford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962575" start="3626" end="3635" title="Everleigh, Wiltshire" label="Everleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q107565440" start="3637" end="3646" title="Fittleton" label="Fittleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077424" start="3648" end="3657" title="Froxfield" label="Froxfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q521269" start="3659" end="3666" title="Grafton, Wiltshire" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q995623" start="3668" end="3680" title="Great Bedwyn" label="Great Bedwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077057" start="3682" end="3685" title="Ham, Wiltshire" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426813" start="3687" end="3692" title="Huish, Wiltshire" label="Huish"/>
<link wikidata="Q581429" start="3694" end="3707" title="Little Bedwyn" label="Little Bedwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105207" start="3709" end="3720" title="Manningford" label="Manningford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117390" start="3722" end="3738" title="Milton Lilbourne" label="Milton Lilbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541018" start="3740" end="3750" title="Netheravon" label="Netheravon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056182" start="3752" end="3765" title="North Newnton" label="North Newnton"/>
<link wikidata="Q639675" start="3767" end="3773" title="Pewsey" label="Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418460" start="3775" end="3782" title="Rushall, Wiltshire" label="Rushall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796277" start="3784" end="3794" title="Shalbourne" label="Shalbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800811" start="3796" end="3816" title="Tidcombe and Fosbury" label="Tidcombe and Fosbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229979" start="3818" end="3824" title="Upavon" label="Upavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000299" start="3826" end="3832" title="Wilcot" label="Wilcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022888" start="3834" end="3842" title="Wilsford, Wiltshire" label="Wilsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q583272" start="3844" end="3855" title="Woodborough, Wiltshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843845" start="3861" end="3875" title="Wootton Rivers" label="Wootton Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332962" start="3920" end="3934" title="Michael Ancram" label="Michael Ancram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741548" start="3944" end="3963" title="Marquess of Lothian" label="Marquess of Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132614" start="3969" end="3991" title="Henry Howarth Bashford" label="Henry Howarth Bashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231842" start="4015" end="4054" title="David Brudenell-Bruce, Earl of Cardigan" label="David Brudenell-Bruce, Earl of Cardigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402775" start="4082" end="4098" title="Savernake Forest" label="Savernake Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033286" start="4100" end="4111" title="Lord Devlin" label="Lord Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311875" start="4120" end="4132" title="Pete Doherty" label="Pete Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361146" start="4185" end="4199" title="Elinor Goodman" label="Elinor Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="4208" end="4217" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345171" start="4236" end="4257" title="Robert Hall (British Army officer)" label="Brigadier Robert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990879" start="4277" end="4294" title="Wiltshire Council" label="Wiltshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q14031788" start="4296" end="4307" title="Nick Harper" label="Nick Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990102" start="4323" end="4336" title="Henry Keswick (businessman)" label="Henry Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683452" start="4350" end="4375" title="Jardine Matheson Holdings" label="Jardine Matheson Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175448" start="4377" end="4388" title="Peter Lewis (announcer)" label="Peter Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396232" start="4390" end="4398" title="HTV West" label="HTV West"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="4411" end="4426" title="Peter Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9015363" start="4447" end="4463" title="David Newbigging" label="David Newbigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756955" start="4465" end="4490" title="High Sheriff of Wiltshire" label="High Sheriff of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q575452" start="4498" end="4510" title="Claire Perry" label="Claire Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10110" start="4535" end="4549" title="Shelley Rudman" label="Shelley Rudman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186190" start="4585" end="4597" title="Skeleton (sport)" label="skeleton bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="4632" end="4652" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="4656" end="4661" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350150" start="4663" end="4677" title="Peter Sarstedt" label="Peter Sarstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="4722" end="4731" title="The Sweet" label="The Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182637" start="4733" end="4745" title="Jane Seymour" label="Jane Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q517562" start="4773" end="4784" title="Nigel Stock (actor)" label="Nigel Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q227142" start="4793" end="4806" title="Zoë Wanamaker" label="Zoë Wanamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q639675" start="4839" end="4845" title="Pewsey" label="Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q661855" start="5030" end="5037" title="Avebury" label="Avebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q541312" start="5054" end="5077" title="West Kennet Long Barrow" label="West Kennet Long Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402775" start="5079" end="5095" title="Savernake Forest" label="Savernake Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187496" start="5097" end="5120" title="Crofton Pumping Station" label="Crofton Pumping Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q225896" start="5122" end="5134" title="Silbury Hill" label="Silbury Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023404" start="5136" end="5151" title="Wilton Windmill" label="Wilton Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313942" start="5153" end="5165" title="Alton Barnes" label="Alton Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193330" start="5167" end="5179" title="crop circles" label="crop circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q539528" start="5182" end="5193" title="Marlborough, Wiltshire" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="5195" end="5216" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978376" start="5218" end="5230" title="Bruce Tunnel" label="Bruce Tunnel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498895" wikidata="Q3501625" url="?curid=498895" title="Przebrno">
<text>Przebrno () is a neighborhood of the town of Krynica Morska on the Vistula Spit in northern Poland, located in the western part of the town.

The village has sandy beaches on the shores of the Bay of Gdańsk on the northern side of the spit, and the Vistula Lagoon on the southern side.

==History==
Previously a separate village, it was a possession of the city of Gdańsk, located in the Pomeranian Voivodeship in the Kingdom of Poland until the Second Partition of Poland in 1793, when it was annexed by Prussia. In 1871 it became part of Germany. During World War II, in 1939–1941, it was the location of a subcamp of the Stutthof concentration camp, in which the Germans imprisoned 200 people as forced labour at a time. Following Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War II, in 1945, the village was reintegrated with Poland.

It was included within town limits of Krynica Morska in 1991. Until then it was a village administratively located in Gmina Sztutowo.

The Vistula Spit canal passes near Przebrno.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3501625" start="0" end="8" title="Przebrno" label="Przebrno"/>
<link wikidata="Q935756" start="45" end="59" title="Krynica Morska" label="Krynica Morska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601" start="67" end="79" title="Vistula Spit" label="Vistula Spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="92" end="98" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="193" end="206" title="Bay of Gdańsk" label="Bay of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601" start="235" end="239" title="Vistula Spit" label="spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605" start="249" end="263" title="Vistula Lagoon" label="Vistula Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="365" end="371" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048909" start="388" end="410" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship (1466–1772)" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="418" end="435" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="446" end="472" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="505" end="512" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="556" end="568" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="624" end="651" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="699" end="712" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q551707" start="943" end="957" title="Gmina Sztutowo" label="Gmina Sztutowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734885" start="964" end="982" title="Vistula Spit canal" label="Vistula Spit canal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498896" wikidata="Q628731" url="?curid=498896" title="Poor Knights Islands">
<text>The Poor Knights Islands (Māori: &quot;Tawhiti Rahi)&quot; are a group of islands off the east coast of the Northland Region of the North Island of New Zealand. They lie to the northeast of Whangārei, and offshore halfway between Bream Head and Cape Brett. Uninhabited since the 1820s, they are a nature reserve and popular underwater diving spot, with boat tours typically departing from Tutukaka. The Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserve surrounds the island.

Beaglehole (1955) comments that the origin of the island name is not clear, and speculates that the name could be related to the Poor Knights of Windsor, or that the islands were named for their resemblance to Poor Knight&#x27;s Pudding, a bread-based dish topped with egg and fried, popular at the time of discovery by Europeans.

==Description==
The chain consists of two large islands (Tawhiti Rahi, the larger at , and Aorangi () to the south), and several smaller islands. Aorangaia and Archway Island lie to the southwest of Aorangi Island, and there is also a group of smaller rocky islets between the two main islands, the largest of which is Motu Kapiti Island. Others include Bird and Kaka Rock. To the south, there is a smaller island named Ngoio Rock. The Poor Knights Islands are the eroded remnants of a 4-million-year-old rhyolitic volcano that is estimated to have been tall and in diameter.

===Oceanography===
Spring tide range for the islands is around , decreasing to a neap tide of around . The deep water around the island results in only moderate tidal currents. These are around the same magnitude as the prevailing shelf currents. In the general vicinity of the islands mean flows are around and run toward the southeast.

A remarkable feature of the region is the large internal tides that occur. These are a form of internal wave driven by the local tidal flow forcing the stratification against sloping areas of the shelf face. The surface manifestation of these waves can be seen from space. These waves generate brief highly localised accelerations. Internal wave amplitudes of around have been observed, generating flow speeds as great as .

==Geology==

The Poor Knights Islands were created in some of the earliest eruptions of the Coromandel Volcanic Zone, between 10 and 9.5 million years ago. The Poor Knights Islands vulcanism represents an early period for the Coromandel Volcanic Zone, as changes in tectonic forces caused the east belt of the Northland Arc (23 to 16 million years ago) to begin moving southwards, and eventually forming the modern Taupō Volcanic Zone.

==Environment==
The islands are protected as a nature reserve and a permit is required to land or tie boats up. Permits are usually granted only for scientific research. A notable native plant of the islands is the spectacularly flowering Poor Knights lily, which has become a popular garden plant.

Feral pigs, which had roamed Aorangi since the departure of Māori in the 1820s, were exterminated in 1936. The islands have been identified as an Important Bird Area, by BirdLife International because they are home to a breeding population of about 200,000 pairs of Buller&#x27;s shearwaters.

The islands contain rock arches and sea caves, including Rikoriko Cave, the largest sea cave by volume in the southern hemisphere, with a cavern measuring and an opening large enough for small tour boats to enter. Rikoriko Cave measures , with a ceiling height of and extends deep below water.

Tawhiti Rahi contains the Northern Arch, Middle Arch, and Maomao Arch, the latter being a popular diving location. Aorangaia Island&#x27;s east–west rock arch resembles a long tunnel, while the aptly named Archway Island is bisected by two rock arches, with the larger Cathedral Arch about tall.

==History==
The islands were earlier inhabited by Māori of the Ngāti Wai and Ngati-Toki tribes who grew crops and fished the surrounding sea. The tribe traded with other Maori.

A chief of the tribe named Tatua led his warriors on a fighting expedition to the Hauraki Gulf with Ngā Puhi chief Hongi Hika in the early 1820s. While they were away, a slave named Paha escaped the islands and travelled to Hokianga where he told Waikato, a chief of the Hikutu tribe, that the islands had been left undefended. As Waikato had been offended by Tatua some years previous when he was refused pigs he had come to trade for, so he and his warriors set out on three large canoes to attack the islands. They arrived at the islands one night in December 1823 and soon overpowered the islanders in the absence of their warriors. Many islanders jumped off the high cliffs to avoid being taken as slaves. Tatua&#x27;s wife Oneho and daughter were captured and taken to the mainland where a distant relative recognised the wife and helped the two to escape.

Tatua returned to the islands to find a scene of destruction. Only nine or ten people were left on the islands, including his five-year-old son Wehiwehi who had been hidden in a cave during the attack. The islands were declared tapu and Tatua left with the survivors and went to Rawhiti in the Bay of Islands where he unexpectedly found his wife and daughter.

==See also==

* List of volcanoes in New Zealand
* List of islands of New Zealand
* List of islands
* Desert island

==References==
== External links ==
*&quot;Geology – New Zealand&#x27;s Geological History&quot;, from &quot;An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand&quot;, edited by A. H. McLintock, originally published in 1966. Te Ara – The Encyclopedia of New Zealand, updated 2006-09-26. Retrieved 2007-04-15.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q628731" start="4" end="24" title="Poor Knights Islands" label="Poor Knights Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="26" end="31" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="108" end="124" title="Northland Region" label="Northland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="132" end="144" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="148" end="159" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q744239" start="190" end="199" title="Whangārei" label="Whangārei"/>
<link wikidata="Q838705" start="230" end="240" title="Bream Head" label="Bream Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034281" start="245" end="255" title="Cape Brett" label="Cape Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="297" end="311" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="324" end="341" title="underwater diving" label="underwater diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660166" start="389" end="397" title="Tutukaka" label="Tutukaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228777" start="403" end="438" title="Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserve" label="Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225581" start="462" end="472" title="John Beaglehole" label="Beaglehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857895" start="591" end="614" title="Military Knights of Windsor" label="Poor Knights of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q197973" start="672" end="698" title="French toast" label="Poor Knight&amp;#x27;s Pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778739" start="940" end="949" title="Aorangaia Island" label="Aorangaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32119800" start="954" end="968" title="Archway Island (Poor Knights Islands)" label="Archway Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1113" end="1131" title="Motu Kapiti Island" label="Motu Kapiti Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q628731" start="1148" end="1152" title="Bird Rock (Poor Knights Islands)" label="Bird"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1157" end="1166" title="Kaka Rock" label="Kaka Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1214" end="1224" title="Ngoio Rock" label="Ngoio Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="1299" end="1308" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1309" end="1316" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="1397" end="1401" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081384" start="1758" end="1772" title="internal tides" label="internal tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q382774" start="1805" end="1818" title="internal wave" label="internal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q580585" start="2550" end="2569" title="Taupō Volcanic Zone" label="Taupō Volcanic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007658" start="2811" end="2828" title="Xeronema callistemon" label="Poor Knights lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q844397" start="2872" end="2881" title="Feral pig" label="Feral pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="3018" end="3037" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="3042" end="3064" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074602" start="3138" end="3162" title="Buller&amp;#x27;s shearwater" label="Buller&amp;#x27;s shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="3808" end="3813" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023293" start="3821" end="3830" title="Ngāti Wai" label="Ngāti Wai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3963" end="3968" title="Tatua" label="Tatua"/>
<link wikidata="Q767824" start="4018" end="4030" title="Hauraki Gulf" label="Hauraki Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283558" start="4036" end="4044" title="Ngā Puhi" label="Ngā Puhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627025" start="4051" end="4061" title="Hongi Hika" label="Hongi Hika"/>
<link wikidata="Q697092" start="4160" end="4168" title="Hokianga" label="Hokianga"/>
<link wikidata="Q112628942" start="4183" end="4190" title="Waikato (rangatira)" label="Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="4419" end="4424" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11046554" start="5028" end="5032" title="Tapu (Polynesian culture)" label="tapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296991" start="5079" end="5086" title="Rawhiti" label="Rawhiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q812091" start="5094" end="5108" title="Bay of Islands" label="Bay of Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161776" start="5177" end="5209" title="List of volcanoes in New Zealand" label="List of volcanoes in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="5212" end="5242" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="List of islands of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="5245" end="5260" title="List of islands" label="List of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="5263" end="5276" title="Desert island" label="Desert island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498897" wikidata="Q639675" url="?curid=498897" title="Pewsey">
<text>Pewsey is a village and civil parish at the centre of the Vale of Pewsey in Wiltshire, about south of Marlborough and west of London. It is within reach of the M4 motorway and the A303 and is served by Pewsey railway station on the Reading to Taunton line.

The parish includes the settlements of Kepnal to the east, Pewsey Wharf (on the Kennet and Avon Canal) to the north, Sharcott to the west, and Southcott on the south-east.

==History==
The place name comes from the Old English &quot;peose&quot;, or &quot;piosu&quot; meaning &quot;pea&quot; &quot;island,&quot; collectively meaning &quot;island, or dry ground in marsh, where peas grow.&quot;

Archaeological excavations on Pewsey Hill show evidence of a settlement in the 6th century. In the Tudor era, the Manor of Pewsey belonged to the Duchess of Somerset. Several of the village&#x27;s houses were built in this era: the timber framed cruck house at Ball Corner, Bridge Cottage on the Avon and the Court House by the Church.

In 1764, the founder of the Methodist movement John Wesley (1703–1791) preached at Pewsey&#x27;s Church of England parish church. The rector at that time, Joseph Townsend, was responsible for the building of Pewsey&#x27;s first bridge over the River Avon.

The Kennet and Avon Canal reached Pewsey in 1810. Of more lasting effect for the village was the completion of the Hungerford to Devizes section of the GWR&#x27;s Berks &amp; Hants line in 1862, which allowed fast travel to London and to the West Country. Since 1906, the line at Pewsey has been part of the Reading to Taunton line, a more direct route via Westbury to the West Country.

In 1898 Pewsey Carnival was first held, a tradition that flourishes today with a fortnight of events, including The Feaste, culminating in an illuminated procession in mid to late September.

A prominent statue of King Alfred the Great, the former Anglo Saxon King of Wessex and a local landowner, stands in the middle of the village.

==Pewsey White Horse==
The Pewsey White Horse hill figure is located on a steep slope of Pewsey Hill about south of the village, and can be viewed from several places in the surrounding area. It was cut in 1937 and is one of the smaller Wiltshire white horses. It replaces an earlier one which was possibly cut in 1785.

==Governance==
The civil parish elects a parish council. It is in the area of Wiltshire Council, a unitary authority which is responsible for most local government functions. The Pewsey electoral division covers the parishes of Pewsey, Milton Lilbourne, Wootton Rivers and Easton Royal, and elects one member to Wiltshire Council.

==Education==
Pewsey Vale School is a state secondary school, without a sixth form.

Pewsey has a state Primary Academy, Pewsey Primary School which is linked to Pewsey vale secondary school. It appeared in the 100 Most Improved Schools table for its 2013 results and its 2014 results put it in the top 100 schools nationally. An Ofsted inspection in 2012 rated the school as &#x27;good&#x27; and this was confirmed by a short inspection in 2017.

St. Francis School, an independent preparatory school, is just outside the village.

==Churches==
=== Parish church ===
The parish church of St John the Baptist stands next to the main road in the south of the village and is built in flint and sarsen with limestone dressings.

A church at Pewsey was recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086. The present building has work from the late 12th or early 13th centuries in the four-bay arcades, on foundations of large sarsens; Pevsner suggests the arches were cut through the walls of an earlier building. The plain font bowl is also from the 12th century. The chancel was rebuilt in the late 13th or early 14th century, the clerestory added in the late 14th or early 15th century, and the ashlar west tower added in the 16th century.

In 1861, G.E. Street largely rebuilt the chancel and added the south chapel, reusing early windows from the chancel. Restoration in 1889–1890 by C.E. Ponting included the addition of the north porch.

The tower has six bells, the oldest cast in 1620 by Purdue of Salisbury; two others from the 18th century are by Rudhall of Gloucester. On the outside of the tower&#x27;s east wall hangs a sanctus bell cast by James Burrough of Devizes in 1754. The church was recorded as Grade I listed in 1964.

Notable rectors include Joseph Townsend, from 1764 until his death in 1816. Townsend, who lived in Bath, was known for his work in medicine, geology and the theory of economics.

Today the church is central to the Vale of Pewsey Team, which includes many rural parishes around Pewsey.

===Others===

A Methodist chapel was built in 1873 and became a church in 1932.

The Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Family was built in 1964.

==Amenities==

Pewsey has a post office, a petrol station, and a Co-op supermarket. The village has an Indian restaurant and five pubs (the Royal Oak, the Crown Inn, the Moonrakers, the Coopers Arms, and The Shed Alehouse micropub). At Pewsey Wharf, north of the village, is the Waterfront bar and bistro.

Pewsey Sports Centre, run by Wiltshire Council, is next to Pewsey Vale School. Its facilities include a 25m heated indoor swimming pool, squash courts and a large multi-sport hall.

Pewsey Heritage Centre is a museum run by the local history society, housed in Avonside Works, a former foundry building used by the agricultural engineering firm of Whatley &amp; Hiscock. The company&#x27;s collection of historic farm machinery forms the core of the museum&#x27;s collection.

Jones&#x27;s Mill is a wetland nature reserve by the Avon. Pewsey is connected to London Paddington via its railway station, a short walk from the village centre.

==Notable residents==
* Richard Hardinge (c.1593 – 1658), Groom of the Chamber to the then Prince of Wales, later King Charles II
* Stephen Duck (c.1705 in Charlton, Pewsey Vale – 1756), poet
* Joseph Gilbert (1800 in Puckshipton – 1881), pastoralist and winemaker from Pewsey Vale in South Australia from 1839 
* Francis Carter (1851–1935), Anglican priest who served in Cornwall, Kent, East Anglia and South Africa
* Harold Sheppard (1889–1978), cricketer
* Major General Peter George Francis Young (1912–1976), senior British Army officer, General Officer Commanding Cyprus District from 1962 to 1964
* Elinor Goodman (born 1946), journalist, political editor of Channel 4 News from 1988 to 2005
* Moose Harris (born 1967 in Devizes), bass guitarist
* Mary Killen, newspaper advice columnist and TV personality known for appearances on &quot;Gogglebox&quot;
* Tara Shears (born 1969), Professor of Physics at the University of Liverpool
* Ian Walker (born 1971), former goalkeeper for the England national football team and Tottenham Hotspur F.C.
* Shelley Rudman (born 1981), winner of the silver medal in the skeleton bob, Britain&#x27;s only medal at the 2006 Winter Olympics

==Sport and leisure==
Pewsey has two rugby teams and a junior club. For the 2017–18 season, Pewsey Vale 1st XV plays in the SSE South West Division, Dorset &amp; Wilts 1 North League. PVRFC have a joint second team called Alfred&#x27;s Nomads, shared with Marlborough RFC; they play in Dorset and Wilts 3 North.

Pewsey has a Non-League football team Pewsey Vale F.C. who play at The Recreation Ground. In July 2014 Pewsey Vale Youth FC was awarded &#x27;FA Chartered Standard&#x27; Club of the year by the Wiltshire Football Association.

Wiltshire Council run Pewsey Leisure Centre which is next to Pewsey Vale School. Its amenities include a 25m heated indoor swimming pool (used for swimming, float play, kayaking and snorkelling), squash courts and a multi-sport hall (used for badminton, indoor cricket/football/rugby, basketball, volleyball, circuit training, archery and martial arts (judo, taekwondo and kung fu)).

Pewsey has a running club. A Bowls Club is next to the Tennis club. A swimming pool and gym offer a range of courses including spinning and aqua-aerobics.

Pewsey Music Festival, established in 2007, is a celebration of live music held each August in Cooper&#x27;s Field, behind the Cooper&#x27;s Arms pub.

==References==
==External links==

* Pewsey Parish Council
* Pewsey Heritage Centre
* Historic Pewsey Photos at BBC Wiltshire
* &quot;Day Out: The Vale of Pewsey&quot; – a 30-minute BBC TV programme made in 1984 of a day spent exploring Pewsey Vale</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q639675" start="0" end="6" title="Pewsey" label="Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="24" end="36" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909558" start="58" end="72" title="Vale of Pewsey" label="Vale of Pewsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q539528" start="102" end="113" title="Marlborough, Wiltshire" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="160" end="171" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135895" start="180" end="184" title="A303" label="A303"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028949" start="202" end="224" title="Pewsey railway station" label="Pewsey railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265965" start="232" end="255" title="Reading to Taunton line" label="Reading to Taunton line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="338" end="359" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="652" end="666" title="Archaeological" label="Archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="751" end="756" title="Tudor dynasty" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="766" end="771" title="Manorialism" label="Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="798" end="805" title="Duchess" label="Duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="809" end="817" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="884" end="897" title="timber framing" label="timber framed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141926" start="898" end="903" title="cruck" label="cruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="1017" end="1026" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="1036" end="1047" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1086" end="1117" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="1123" end="1129" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185688" start="1144" end="1159" title="Joseph Townsend" label="Joseph Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="1250" end="1271" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="1398" end="1408" title="Great Western Railway" label="GWR&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q820955" start="1409" end="1431" title="Berks and Hants Railway" label="Berks &amp;amp; Hants line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="1488" end="1500" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265965" start="1554" end="1577" title="Reading to Taunton line" label="Reading to Taunton line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="1649" end="1657" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000326" start="1776" end="1798" title="illuminated procession" label="illuminated procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="1853" end="1869" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="1882" end="1893" title="Anglo Saxon" label="Anglo Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="1902" end="1908" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918952" start="2016" end="2027" title="hill figure" label="hill figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="2332" end="2346" title="Parish councils in England" label="parish council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990879" start="2369" end="2386" title="Wiltshire Council" label="Wiltshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="2390" end="2407" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117390" start="2527" end="2543" title="Milton Lilbourne" label="Milton Lilbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843845" start="2545" end="2559" title="Wootton Rivers" label="Wootton Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259062" start="2564" end="2576" title="Easton Royal" label="Easton Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179559" start="2637" end="2655" title="Pewsey Vale School" label="Pewsey Vale School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079781" start="2953" end="2959" title="Ofsted" label="Ofsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="3106" end="3124" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="3195" end="3208" title="Church of England parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920343" start="3315" end="3321" title="sarsen" label="sarsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="3388" end="3401" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="3542" end="3549" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="3740" end="3750" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538851" start="3860" end="3871" title="George Edmund Street" label="G.E. Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="3968" end="3979" title="Victorian restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081709" start="3996" end="4008" title="Charles Ponting" label="C.E. Ponting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376914" start="4165" end="4186" title="Rudhall of Gloucester" label="Rudhall of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500690" start="4241" end="4253" title="Sanctus bell (church bell)" label="sanctus bell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4324" end="4338" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185688" start="4373" end="4388" title="Joseph Townsend" label="Joseph Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="4651" end="4660" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4720" end="4734" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915516" start="5565" end="5582" title="Jones&amp;#x27;s Mill" label="Jones&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028949" start="5673" end="5688" title="Pewsey railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326264" start="5753" end="5769" title="Richard Hardinge" label="Richard Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610265" start="5787" end="5807" title="Groom of the Chamber" label="Groom of the Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="5820" end="5835" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5848" end="5858" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609103" start="5861" end="5873" title="Stephen Duck" label="Stephen Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040871" start="5923" end="5937" title="Joseph Gilbert (winemaker)" label="Joseph Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="5968" end="5979" title="Pastoralism" label="pastoralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179558" start="5999" end="6010" title="Pewsey Vale" label="Pewsey Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026144" start="6043" end="6057" title="Francis Carter (priest)" label="Francis Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048541" start="6148" end="6163" title="Harold Sheppard (English cricketer)" label="Harold Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177827" start="6189" end="6229" title="Peter Young (British Army officer)" label="Major General Peter George Francis Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361146" start="6335" end="6349" title="Elinor Goodman" label="Elinor Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323623" start="6430" end="6442" title="Moose Harris" label="Moose Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q67439892" start="6484" end="6495" title="Mary Killen" label="Mary Killen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993042" start="6574" end="6583" title="Gogglebox" label="Gogglebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387971" start="6592" end="6603" title="Tara Shears" label="Tara Shears"/>
<link wikidata="Q499510" start="6645" end="6668" title="University of Liverpool" label="University of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q356378" start="6671" end="6681" title="Ian Walker (footballer)" label="Ian Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="6721" end="6751" title="England national football team" label="England national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="6756" end="6778" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q10110" start="6781" end="6795" title="Shelley Rudman" label="Shelley Rudman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186190" start="6843" end="6855" title="Skeleton (sport)" label="skeleton bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="6890" end="6910" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="7238" end="7257" title="Non-League football" label="Non-League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418154" start="7263" end="7279" title="Pewsey Vale F.C." label="Pewsey Vale F.C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498903" wikidata="Q161528" url="?curid=498903" title="Large blue">
<text>The large blue (Phengaris arion) is a species of butterfly in the family Lycaenidae. The species was first defined in 1758 and first recorded in Britain in 1795. In 1979 the species became mostly extinct in Britain but has been successfully reintroduced with new conservation methods. The species is classified as &quot;near threatened&quot; on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Today &quot;P. arion&quot; can be found in Europe, the Caucasus, Armenia, western Siberia, Altai, north-western Kazakhstan and Sichuan.

The large blue can be distinguished by its unique speckled black dots on its wings with a blue background.

The large blue butterfly is well known in behavioural ecology as it is a brood parasite of a single species of red ant, &quot;Myrmica sabuleti&quot;. The discovery was made by Captain Edward Bagwell Purefoy along with F. W. Frohawk and others.

==Subspecies==
*&quot;P. a. arion&quot; Mainland Europe, western Siberia, Altai, north-western Kazakhstan 
*&quot;P. a. delphinatus&quot; 
*&quot;P. a. zara&quot; Caucasus, Armenia
*&quot;P. a. buholzeri&quot; 
* &quot;P. a. eutyphron&quot; formerly southern Britain

==Description==

Large blue caterpillars grow to about half an inch (13 millimetres) in length, and spend up to 9 months before they undergo metamorphosis to a chrysalis to become a butterfly. Large blue butterflies are one of the largest in the family Lycaenidae, known as the gossamer-winged butterfly, with a wingspan of up to , and live only for a few weeks. The wings of the large blue butterfly are speckled with black dots.
==Description by Seitz==

L. arion L. (83 c). Larger, above of a lighter and more shining blue [than &quot;arcas&quot;], with a row of black spots across both wings, the spots being sometimes obsolete only on the hindwing of the male. At once recognized by the large number of ocelli on the underside, especially on the hindwing, and by the bright blue dusting of the base beneath. Europe and Anterior Asia, from North Europe, the Baltic provinces, and England to the Mediterranean (Corsica), and from Spain to Armenia and South Siberia. In ab. &quot;unicolor&quot; Hormuz. the upperside is entirely blue, all the black spots with the exception of the discocellular one being absent. ab. &quot;arthurus&quot; Melvill is without ocelli beneath. In ab. &quot;jasilkowskii&quot; Hornuz the ocelli are absent beneath in the cell as in &quot;euphemus&quot;, from which this aberration is at once distinguished by its blue-green basal scaling on the underside. In ab. &quot;coalescens&quot; Gillm. the black spots of the upperside are confluent. — Quite a number of local forms have been separated Northern specimens, which are feebly spotted, are named &quot;alconides&quot; by Aurivillius. — &quot;obscura&quot; Christ. (83 c) is an alpine form in which the whole outer half of the wings above is black or dark brown; it occurs typically in the High Alps, being locally very plentiful, e. g. at Bergun, Zermatt, Stilvio and at many places in the Alpes Maritimes. This darkened form occurs also in the Ural (= &quot;ruehli&quot; Krulik.) — In the South two aberrant forms have been found, namely &quot;ligurica&quot; Wagn., at the Eiviera between San Remo and Bordighera, with a conspicuous row of white marginal ocelli on the upperside of the hindwing, and &quot;aldrovandus&quot; S. L., from the Vesuvius, the underside darkened with brown. — &quot;cyanecula&quot; Stgr. [ now species &quot;Phengaris cyanecula&quot; (Eversmann, 1848)] (83 d) is an Asiatic form, from the Caucasus to Mongolia, with the metallic blue green dusting of the hindwing beneath being abundant, bright, and extending almost to the distal edge. — Egg very flat semiglobular, pale bluish white, deposited on &quot;Thymus&quot; which just begins to flower. Larva adult pale ochreous, with a pale lilac tinge at the sides; head ochreous, marked with black anteriorly; prothoracic plate black; feeds until the autumn on Thyme, then disappears and is found full grown the next June in the nests of ants. It is therefore suggested that the ants feed it up (Frohawk) and perhaps also protect the pupae. The chrysalis the colour of amber except for the wing-cases, smooth, somewhat elongate, without web. The butterflies occur usually singly, being locally frequent on open ground, on broad roads through shrubby woods, flying about 1 m above the ground. They rest with closed wings, particularly on Thymes and Scabious. On the wing from the end of June into August.

==Distribution==
The large blue butterfly is found from coast to coast of the Palearctic realm, but is most concentrated in the areas from France to China.

===Habitat===
The habitat of the large blue butterfly is largely influenced by location of its food sources. The species requires a combination of abundant amounts of its larval food plant, &quot;Thymus drucei&quot; and the presence of &quot;Myrmica sabuleti&quot; ants in order to survive.

It has also been found that an underlying key factor for the survival of the large blue is site heterogeneity. The butterfly is most abundant in pastures and abandoned areas of diverse vegetation and shrubbery. This preference can be explained by examining the result of a uniform landscape. A constant landscape synchronizes many biological activities including flowering of host plants, adult emergence dates, or larval pressures on the ant colonies. If important biological functions take place at the same times, the population becomes much more susceptible to random unfortunate events such as environmental disasters. Thus traditional farming acts to desynchronize the biological system, and allows for re-colonization of patches that are temporarily untouched. The presence of differing sites and varied ecological structures provides differing microclimates that can make a huge impact on the survival of the large blue butterfly.

===Extinction/conservation===
In the late 1900s, &quot;Phengaris&quot; populations began decreasing drastically throughout Europe with the large blue butterfly being particularly affected. By the 1950s, only an estimated 100,000 adults remained in Britain, and by 1978, 48% of the UK&#x27;s 91 known large blue populations had been lost. Initially experts were completely baffled by the disappearance of large blues as the sites did not appear to have changed. Leading hypotheses targeted collectors, insecticides, and air pollution as factors that led to the butterfly extinction. A large number of projects were conducted to combat these factors, but all were completely unsuccessful. The species became extinct in the Netherlands in 1964, in the UK in 1979. In Belgium, it had been considered extinct until 1996, when a recolonized population was discovered in the south of the country. Severe decreases in population have also occurred in Denmark, Germany, France, and Estonia. Because of this decline they are being protected. The succession of extinctions and decreases in population has been characterized as a result of unsuccessful conservation efforts that stemmed from a lack of understanding of the behaviour of the butterfly.

Currently the large blue butterfly is classified as critically endangered in Britain as well as being endangered in many areas of Europe. It is a priority species of under the UK Biodiversity Action Plan. However, a long-term conservation project in the UK, led by the Royal Entomological Society, led to a significant increase in numbers in 2022, with the species described as &quot;thriving&quot;.

Recent findings have also shown that there is a positive correlation between large blue butterfly conservation success and that of other endangered species. One specific example is the relationship between &quot;Myrmica&quot; ants, the large blue butterfly, violet seeds, and the violet-feeding butterfly (&quot;Boloria euphrosyne&quot;). The ants will bring the violet seeds into the nest. The seeds will often germinate in the nest, and their potential for germination increases as the nest becomes deserted. Since large blue butterfly predation of ant larvae can lead to desertion of the nest and &quot;B. euphrosyne&quot; tend to prefer violets growing on deserted ant nests, the fitness of &quot;B. euphrosyne&quot; appears to be indirectly affected by the presence of the large blue.
==Behaviour==

===Brood-parasitic behaviour===
Like many members of the genus &quot;Phengaris&quot;, large blues are brood parasites, relying on another insect to raise their young. In this case, the hosts are species of &quot;Myrmica&quot; ant. By being physically and chemically similar to &quot;Myrmica&quot; ants in their larval stage, and possibly by using other forms of mimicry, &quot;Phengaris&quot; caterpillars trick the ants into taking them back to the ant nest. Once there, the caterpillar will either become a predator of the ant larvae, or beg for food by acting like an ant larva in what is known as a &quot;cuckoo&quot; strategy. The &quot;cuckoo&quot; method is viewed as a more successful strategy, as studies have consistently found more larvae per nest for cuckoo butterfly species than predator butterflies. Through much research, it has been well documented that large blue butterflies act as predators in the host nests.

Early ideas of the &quot;Phengaris-Myrmica&quot; relationship resulted in the construction of a linear relationship between one predator and one host. It was proposed that each species of &quot;Phengaris&quot; had evolutionarily adapted to prey on one specific species of &quot;Myrmica&quot; with the large blue focusing on &quot;M. sabuleti&quot;. More recent reports indicate that while each &quot;Phengaris&quot; species can prey on more than one &quot;Myrmica&quot; species, that ability varies between species and each butterfly species still prefers a specific ant species. While results are not conclusive, it has been shown that the large blue strongly favours &quot;M. sabuleti&quot; but has been documented to also prey on &quot;M. scabrinodis&quot;. Studies have also shown that species of butterfly may exhibit different host preferences depending on the location. For example, in Finland, large blue butterflies exclusively fed off &quot;M. lonae&quot; nests. Due to differing reports and the difficulties involved in these types of studies, the nature of the host-parasite relationship is still inconclusive.

===Female egg-laying behaviour===
Since the parasitic-host relationship between the large blue and the &quot;Myrmica&quot; is essential for the caterpillar survival, female butterflies must lay eggs in areas where the larvae can be found by ant workers of the correct species. In the past it was unclear if &quot;Phengaris&quot; butterflies were capable of identifying areas of specific &quot;Myrmica&quot; species. It was believed that the certain species of &quot;Phengaris&quot; could detect specific odours to identify &quot;Myrmica&quot; species. It was also thought that certain species of &quot;Phengaris&quot; were capable of avoiding overcrowding on food plants by detecting high egg loads. New studies indicate that female egg laying is merely attuned to the &quot;Myrmica&quot; species, and that females do not take other factors into consideration.

===Larva/caterpillar stage===
Female &quot;Phengaris&quot; lay eggs on specific plants such as thyme. Wild thyme is the preferred food plant in the UK and in cooler or more mountainous areas in Europe, marjoram is preferred by populations in warmer areas. After about three weeks, larvae hatch to feed on the seeds and flowers of the plant. The caterpillar will stay in the vicinity of its food plant until its 4th instar, when it will drop to the ground. From there the caterpillar will adopt various strategies to be found by &quot;Myrmica&quot; ants. Several caterpillar species of &quot;Phengaris&quot;, such as &quot;P. rebeli&quot; and &quot;P. alcon&quot;, will secrete pheromones that are specific to their respective hosts. The purpose of such behaviour is to mimic the pheromones of ant larvae that will become workers in the future. By successfully mimicking ant larvae, the caterpillars are taken back to the host nest and fed by the ants. Originally it was thought that the large blue butterfly behaved differently in that some believed it either secreted a poor pheromone mimic, or did not secrete one at all. Today it has been determined that it still secretes semiochemicals as a form of chemical mimicry to gain acceptance into the host ant nest. Large blue caterpillars will sometimes follow ant trails or move away from the food plant during peak-foraging time to expose themselves specifically to &quot;Myrmica&quot; and not other ants. This results in workers generally ignoring the caterpillar once in the nest because it does not attract attention. The methods in which large blue caterpillars interact with the host ants are not yet known.

===Behaviour in the host nest===

====&quot;Cuckoo&quot; strategy====
While most &quot;Phengaris&quot; caterpillars behave similarly before entering the host ant nest, once adopted into a nest the larvae adopt one of two strategies. The first is the &quot;cuckoo&quot; strategy. This has been studied extensively in &quot;P. rebeli&quot;, and consists of continued interaction between the caterpillar and the host ants. Once in the nest, the caterpillar uses acoustic mimicry to hide its identity. The large blue larvae using the cuckoo strategy stay in close quarters with the ants while producing a noise very similar to that of a larval queen ant. By mimicking a queen, &quot;Phengaris&quot; species which employ the cuckoo strategy are fed by the worker ants and are given preferential treatment over the real ant larvae. Cuckoo strategy users become such high-status members of the nest that the ants will kill their own larvae to feed the caterpillar and will rescue the caterpillar first in the face of danger.

====Predator strategy====
Unlike other members of the genus &quot;Phengaris&quot;, the large blue becomes a predator once in the ant nest. It feeds on the ant pupae while continuing to pose as a &quot;Myrmica&quot; ant. Even with mimicry, mortality for the large blue within the nest is high. One explanation is that each species of &quot;Phengaris&quot; is most suited for a single species of &quot;Myrmica&quot;. Caterpillars that are adopted by an unfamiliar species of ant are often killed and eaten. Even if matched with the correct host, many large blue butterflies are unable to survive. If the mimicry is not perfect and the ants become suspicious, death is highly likely. Further, ants in nests without a consistent supply of food are much more likely to identify the large blue as an intruder. Large blue caterpillars are most likely to be attacked during the first 10 days after being adopted by the host ants. This is because in this time the caterpillars become larger than typical &quot;Myrmica&quot; ant larvae.

=====Mimicry=====
Even once &quot;Phengaris&quot; butterflies have infiltrated the host nest, they continue to hide their identity as caterpillars and will go further in their act of deception. There have been many studies documenting the use of acoustic communication in ants, and it has been found that members of the genus &quot;Phengaris&quot; exploit this behaviour. For example, &quot;P. rebeli&quot; mimics the unique sound of the queen to elevate its status in the nest. This mimicry is effective enough to cause worker ants to prefer to rescue the &quot;P. rebeli&quot; over their own pupae in times of danger.
Previously it had been thought that only &quot;cuckoo&quot; strategy species used acoustic mimicry. The sound was so similar, that the sounds of the two caterpillars differed more than each did compared to the sound of the queen. Different &quot;Myrmica&quot; species utilize distinct semiochemicals to distinguish themselves, but they use very similar acoustic commands once in the nest.

=====Lab studies and applications=====
Laboratory studies have shown that large blue butterfly larvae first consume the largest ant larvae. This evolved tactic maximizes efficiency not only because the largest larvae provide the most substance by volume, but also because it prevents the larvae pupating and becoming inaccessible prey. Further, it allows more newly hatched larvae time to grow bigger. While in the nest, large blue caterpillars acquire 99% of their final biomass, growing from an average of 1.3 mg to 173 mg. Results from laboratories estimate that 230 large larvae and a minimum of 354 &quot;Myrmica&quot; workers are needed to ensure the survival of one butterfly; however, such a large nest is very rarely found in the wild. This supports findings that large blue butterflies are extremely capable of withstanding starvation. This becomes extremely beneficial in situations when the ants desert the colony and leave the caterpillar behind. Large blue butterflies have been known to be capable of migrating to new nests once the original is deserted. In many cases, a nearby colony with a fresh brood will populate the nest allowing the surviving large blues to sequentially parasitize multiple &quot;Myrmica&quot; colonies.

====Cuckoo vs. predatory strategies====
Scientists remain unsure why there are multiple strategies within the host nest, but studies have been conducted to determine the effectiveness of each. The cuckoo strategy results in six times more butterflies per nest than the predatory strategy. While this seems to indicate a dominance of the cuckoo strategy, there are other factors to consider. Since the cuckoo caterpillars remain in close vicinity of the ants, they must secrete chemicals that are almost identical to the host species in order to survive. This explains why cuckoo strategy users are more likely to be predated by the host colony when adopted by a non-primary host than predatory strategy users. Current data seem to support the idea that cuckoo strategy users depend on a specific species of &quot;Myrmica&quot; ant while predatory &quot;Phengaris&quot; are more versatile overall but still perform better with a specific species.

====The queen effect====
It has been found that large blue butterflies are three times less likely to survive in nests that have queen ants present. This discovery has been explained with a theory called the &quot;queen effect&quot;. In most &quot;Myrmica&quot; nests, the queen ant will lay two main batches of eggs, and the females that hatch from these eggs will either become workers or virgin queens. Whether these females become workers or virgin queens is dependent on the status of the queen in the nest. If the queen dies, worker ants have the largest of the female larvae transition into virgin queens. If the queen is present and healthy, she influences the nurse workers to neglect, starve and bite the female larvae which results in restricted growth and aids in the transition to workers. This indicates that &quot;Phengaris&quot; butterflies must maintain a strict balance between mimicking the queen in the presence of workers and appearing to be a worker to avoid the queen.

== See also ==
*List of butterflies of Great Britain

==References==
==External links==
*Life cycle
*Butterfly Conservation - large blue project
*Cornwall Wildlife Trust - large blue reintroduction</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161528" start="4" end="14" title="Large blue" label="large blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="73" end="83" title="Lycaenidae" label="Lycaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="145" end="152" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="349" end="384" title="IUCN Red List of Threatened Species" label="IUCN Red List of Threatened Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="441" end="449" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="451" end="458" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="468" end="475" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="498" end="508" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="513" end="520" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205637" start="673" end="692" title="Behavioral ecology" label="behavioural ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="704" end="718" title="brood parasite" label="brood parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375776" start="757" end="773" title="Myrmica sabuleti" label="Myrmica sabuleti"/>
<link wikidata="Q75641816" start="815" end="837" title="Edward Bagwell Purefoy" label="Edward Bagwell Purefoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485761" start="849" end="862" title="Frederick William Frohawk" label="F. W. Frohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="1172" end="1183" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="1285" end="1298" title="metamorphosis" label="metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1304" end="1313" title="Pupa#Chrysalis" label="chrysalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="1326" end="1335" title="butterfly" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="1397" end="1407" title="Lycaenidae" label="Lycaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3463" end="3482" title="Phengaris cyanecula" label="Phengaris cyanecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="4585" end="4601" title="Palearctic realm" label="Palearctic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4646" end="4652" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4656" end="4661" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q131224" start="4860" end="4873" title="Thymus (plant)" label="Thymus drucei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375776" start="4906" end="4922" title="Myrmica sabuleti" label="Myrmica sabuleti"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="5052" end="5065" title="heterogeneity" label="heterogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="5808" end="5821" title="microclimates" label="microclimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q48406" start="5951" end="5960" title="Phengaris" label="Phengaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="6397" end="6409" title="insecticides" label="insecticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6617" end="6628" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="6660" end="6667" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="6839" end="6846" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6848" end="6855" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6857" end="6863" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="6869" end="6876" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887917" start="7312" end="7339" title="UK Biodiversity Action Plan" label="UK Biodiversity Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127466" start="7849" end="7867" title="Boloria euphrosyne" label="Boloria euphrosyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q48406" start="8411" end="8420" title="Phengaris" label="Phengaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="8444" end="8458" title="brood parasite" label="brood parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134468" start="8554" end="8561" title="Myrmica" label="Myrmica"/>
<link wikidata="Q26381" start="8951" end="8957" title="cuckoo" label="cuckoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q788781" start="10012" end="10026" title="Myrmica scabrinodis" label="M. scabrinodis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13886984" start="10224" end="10232" title="Myrmica lonae" label="M. lonae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131224" start="11354" end="11359" title="Thymus (plant)" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="11674" end="11680" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047011" start="11881" end="11890" title="Phengaris rebeli" label="P. rebeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q973034" start="11907" end="11915" title="Phengaris alcon" label="P. alcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847215" start="12435" end="12448" title="semiochemical" label="semiochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090479" start="12463" end="12479" title="chemical mimicry" label="chemical mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="13174" end="13201" title="brood parasite" label="&amp;quot;cuckoo&amp;quot; strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047011" start="13246" end="13255" title="Phengaris rebeli" label="P. rebeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="13392" end="13399" title="mimicry" label="mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209437" start="13564" end="13573" title="queen ant" label="queen ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134468" start="18421" end="18428" title="Myrmica" label="Myrmica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209437" start="18564" end="18577" title="Queen ant" label="virgin queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967109" start="19182" end="19218" title="List of butterflies of Great Britain" label="List of butterflies of Great Britain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498904" wikidata="Q16784121" url="?curid=498904" title="Grenzdorf">
<text>Grenzdorf may refer to:

* Graniczna Wieś, a village in Pomeranian Voivodeship, in northern Poland
* Hraničky, a settlement located in Sudetenland, Czech Republic
* Grenzdorf (Ramin), a settlement in Ramin municipality in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2684578" start="27" end="41" title="Graniczna Wieś" label="Graniczna Wieś"/>
<link wikidata="Q980817" start="101" end="109" title="Hraničky" label="Hraničky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="165" end="182" title="Grenzdorf (Ramin)" label="Grenzdorf (Ramin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q675611" start="200" end="205" title="Ramin, Germany" label="Ramin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498909" wikidata="Q2684578" url="?curid=498909" title="Graniczna Wieś">
<text>Graniczna Wieś is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trąbki Wielkie, within Gdańsk County, Pomeranian Voivodeship, in northern Poland. It lies approximately west of Trąbki Wielkie, south-west of Pruszcz Gdański, and south-west of the regional capital Gdańsk.

The name of the village means &quot;boundary village&quot;.

During the Second World War, in 1939–1941, Graniczna Wieś was the site of the &quot;Grenzdorf&quot; subcamp of the Stutthof concentration camp, in which the Germans subjected hundreds of people to forced labour. Many Poles from Gdańsk died in the subcamp.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2684578" start="0" end="14" title="Graniczna Wieś" label="Graniczna Wieś"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="20" end="27" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355489" start="62" end="82" title="Gmina Trąbki Wielkie" label="Gmina Trąbki Wielkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165710" start="91" end="104" title="Gdańsk County" label="Gdańsk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="106" end="128" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q139080" start="180" end="194" title="Trąbki Wielkie" label="Trąbki Wielkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q988590" start="210" end="225" title="Pruszcz Gdański" label="Pruszcz Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="266" end="272" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="347" end="363" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="451" end="478" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="533" end="546" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="553" end="558" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498910" wikidata="Q1112183" url="?curid=498910" title="Colt Single Action Army">
<text>The Colt Single Action Army (also known as the SAA, Model P, Peacemaker, or M1873) is a single-action revolver handgun. It was designed for the U.S. government service revolver trials of 1872 by Colt&#x27;s Patent Firearms Manufacturing Company (today known as Colt&#x27;s Manufacturing Company) and was adopted as the standard-issued revolver of the U.S. Army from 1873 to 1892.

The Colt SAA has been offered in over 30 different calibers and various barrel lengths. Its overall appearance has remained consistent since 1873. Colt has cancelled its production twice, but renewed it due to popular demand. The revolver was dubbed the &quot;Peacemaker&quot;, and is a famous piece of Americana and the American Wild West era, due to its popularity with ranchers, lawmen, and outlaws alike. Today, it is mainly bought as memorabilia by collectors and re-enactors. Its design has influenced the production of numerous other models from other companies.

The original length of the barrel, issued to the U.S. Cavalry, was , with an overall length of .

==History==
Bound by the Rollin White patent (), and not wanting to pay a royalty fee to Smith &amp; Wesson, Colt could not begin development of bored-through revolver cylinders for metallic cartridge use until April 4, 1869. For the design, Colt turned to two of its best engineers: William Mason and Charles Brinckerhoff Richards who had developed a number of revolvers and black powder conversions for the company. Their effort was designed for the United States government service revolver trials of 1872 by Colt&#x27;s Patent Firearms Manufacturing Company and adopted as the standard military service revolver. Production began in 1873 with the Single Action Army model 1873, also referred to as the &quot;New Model Army Metallic Cartridge Revolving Pistol&quot;.

The first production Single Action Army, serial number 1, thought lost for many years after its production, was found in a barn in Nashua, New Hampshire, in the early 1900s. This gun was chambered in .44 S&amp;W, a centerfire design containing charges of up to of fine-grained black powder and a blunt roundnosed bullet. Relative to period cartridges and most later handgun rounds, it was quite powerful in its full loading.

The Colt Single Action Army revolver, along with the 1870 and 1875 Smith &amp; Wesson American and Model 3 &quot;Schofield&quot; revolvers, replaced the Colt 1860 Army Percussion revolver. The Colt quickly gained favor over the S&amp;W and remained the primary U.S. military sidearm until 1892 when it was replaced by the .38 Long Colt caliber Colt Model 1892, a double-action revolver with swing-out cylinder. By the end of 1874, serial no. 16,000 was reached; 12,500 Colt Single Action Army revolvers chambered for the .45 Colt cartridge had entered service and the remaining revolvers were sold in the civilian market.

==First generation (1873–1941)==
The Single Action Army became available in standard barrel lengths of inch, inch, as well as the Cavalry standard, original inch. The shorter barrelled revolvers are sometimes called the &quot;Civilian&quot; or &quot;Gunfighter&quot; model ( inch) and the Artillery Model ( inch). There was also a variant with a sub-4-inch barrel, without an ejector rod, unofficially called the &quot;Sheriff&#x27;s Model&quot;, &quot;Banker&#x27;s Special&quot;, or &quot;Storekeeper&quot;.

From 1875 until 1880 Colt marketed a single-action revolver chambered in .44 Henry in a separate number range from no. 1 to 1,863.

A &quot;Flattop Target Model&quot; was listed in Colt&#x27;s catalogs from 1890 to 1898. Colt manufactured 914 of these revolvers with a frame that was flat on top and fitted with an adjustable leaf rear sight. The front sight consisted of a base with an interchangeable blade.

In 1896, at serial number 164,100, a spring-loaded base pin latch replaced the cylinder pin retaining screw and by 1900, at serial number 192,000, the Colt Single Action was certified for use with smokeless powder. In 1920, larger, highly visible sights replaced the original thin blade and notch. The revolvers remained essentially unchanged from that point until cessation of manufacture at the beginning of World War II.

From 1873 through 1940 (with small numbers assembled during and after World War II, the so-called &quot;Pre-War, Post-War&quot; model), production of the Colt Single Action Army reached 357,859. This is identified as the &quot;Pre War&quot; or &quot;First Generation&quot; of the model. Calibers, at least thirty in all, ranged from .22 rimfire through .476 Eley, with approximately half, or 158,884 (including Bisley and Flat Top Target variations), chambered for .45 Colt. The next most prevalent were the .44-40 Winchester Center fire (WCF) at 71,392; 38-40 (38 WCF) at 50,520; .32-20 Winchester (32 WCF) at 43,284 and, the 41 Colt at 19,676.

===Military use===
All original, good condition, U.S. Cavalry and Artillery Single Action Armies (those produced between 1873 and 1891) are among the most valuable to collectors. Especially valuable, often going for well over $10,000, are the OWA (Orville Wood Ainsworth) and the rare Henry Nettleton inspected Single Action Army Colts.

The OWA Colt refers to the earliest issued Single Action Army guns, which were inspected by Orville W. Ainsworth. Ainsworth was the ordnance sub-inspector at the Colt factory for the first 13 months (October 1873 to November 1874) of the Single Action Army&#x27;s production. It was Ainsworth who inspected the Colts used by Col. G. A. Custer&#x27;s 7th Cavalry at the Battle of the Little Bighorn. The number range of possible Little Bighorn Colts is 4500–7527.

Henry Nettleton was the U.S. Principal Sub-inspector in 1878 at the Springfield Armory. Second only to the OWA Colts, Nettleton Colts are prized by serious collectors. Both the Nettleton and OWA Colts have the cartouche (OWA or HN) on the left side of the wood grip.

By the mid-1870s, the Army had purchased a significant number of Smith &amp; Wesson Schofield revolvers chambering a shorter .45 round. Logistical problems arose because the ammunition was not interchangeable. The Colt revolvers would accept the shorter round, but not vice versa. For a time, the Government stopped orders for the longer Colt cartridge and used the Smith &amp; Wesson round exclusively. The Schofield was soon retired and sold to the civilian market.

The largest group of U.S. Colt Cavalry revolvers was inspected by David F. Clark, his D.F.C. cartouche being encountered on revolvers inspected from 1880 to 1887. During 1893, the .45 U.S. Colt Single Action Army revolver was retired by the Cavalry and replaced by the .38 caliber Colt Model 1892 Double Action Army revolver. The .45 Single Action Army revolver was still standard issue to the Infantry, Artillery and other branches of the U.S. Army.

In 1895–1896, the U.S. federal government returned 2,000 SAA revolvers to Colt to be refurbished; 800 were issued to the New York Militia with the barrel and 1,200 were altered to a barrel length of . In 1898, 14,900 of the SAA revolvers were altered the same way by Springfield Armory. The original records of the War Department do refer to these revolvers with the shortened barrel as the &quot;Altered Revolver&quot;. The name &quot;Artillery&quot; is actually a misnomer, which Sapp speculates may have originated because the Light Artillery happened to have the first units armed with the altered revolver.

The Artillery Single Actions were issued to the Infantry, the Light Artillery, the Volunteer Cavalry and other troops because the standard-issue .38 caliber Colt M 1892 double-action revolver was lacking in stopping power. For that reason, the .45 Artillery SAA Revolvers were used successfully by front troops in the Spanish–American War and the Philippine–American War. Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s Rough Riders charged up San Juan Hill wielding the .45 caliber Artillery Model.

The Artillery Model usually had mixed numbers. It can be identified by the U.S. on the frame, the inspector&#x27;s stamps on different parts (such as a tiny A for Orville W. Ainsworth, DFC, HN, RAC for later inspectors and K for replacement parts) and the cartouche of Rinaldo A. Carr (RAC), the inspector who inspected the refurbished guns, on the grip.

===The Colt Frontier Six-Shooter===
The Colt Frontier or Frontier Six-Shooter was a Colt&#x27;s 1873 &quot;Model P&quot; type revolver manufactured in .44-40 Winchester caliber instead of .45 Colt (in which configuration it was called the &quot;Single Action Army&quot;) so that it was compatible with Winchester Model 1873 ammunition. Production began in 1877. &quot;Colt Frontier Six-Shooter&quot; was the actual name of the Colt pistol model, and this was acid-etched on the left side of the barrel. After 1889, the legend was roll-stamped until 1919, when the caliber designation &quot;.44-40&quot; was added. Later Colt M1878 Double Action Army Models also wore this designation on the barrel when chambered in .44 WCF/.44-40 Winchester. The Bisley 1895 Model was the final Colt to wear the Frontier Six Shooter designation.

The 44-40 was also promoted as the standard chambering for the new, hugely successful, Winchester Model 1873 rifle. Users of the .44-40 Winchester cartridge in the Far West appreciated the convenience of being able to carry a single caliber of ammunition, which they could fire in both revolver and rifle. The &quot;Colt Frontier Six Shooter&quot; Revolver and the Winchester Model 1873 or the Winchester Model 1892 in .44-40 WCF caliber was one of the most common combinations seen in &quot;the Old West&quot;. For example, the two mounted &quot;Cowboys&quot; at the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral were armed with this rifle and pistol combination. .38-40 and .32-20 (.32 WCF) also qualify as &quot;Frontier Calibers&quot; because 1873 and 1892 Winchesters were made in these calibers, offering the same convenience as the 44-40 (44WCF) caliber, namely using the same cartridge in both revolver and rifle.

===The Bisley Model===

The Colt Bisley (1894–1912) was introduced in 1894 as an accurate target pistol. The name Bisley came from the famous firing range in Bisley, England. The Colt Bisley can be distinguished by the longer grip, the wider hammer spur, and the wider trigger. The distinguishing feature of the Bisley Target Model is the topstrap, which is flat and fitted with a sliding rear sight, adjustable for windage only. The front sight is a removable blade, which fits into the slotted base attached to the barrel. The revolvers were supplied with different blades for elevation.

The Bisley mainspring is longer than the SAA mainspring, and the two are not interchangeable; it is attached to the hammer with a stirrup via a forked upper end. The serial numbers are stamped on the frame, the backstrap and the trigger-guard at the end of production, with tiny dies.

Bisleys were serial-numbered in the range of 156300–331916, in the same sequence as the Single Action Army. All Bisleys after No. 161,376 had &quot;BISLEY MODEL&quot; with the caliber stamped on the left side of the barrel, which is rare for older Colt revolvers. The most common were in the American calibers of .32-20, .38-40, .45 Colt, .44-40, .41 Long Colt, and also in the British calibers of .450 Eley and .455 Eley. A total number of 44,350 were manufactured. Production of the Bisley was terminated in 1912, but serial No. 331916 was shipped after the First World War. Most Bisley Standard Model Revolvers shipped to a United States address were not used for target shooting, but for self-defense, because the grip and hammer were ideal for fast shooting.

Surveys of existing Bisley show that a much larger number of Bisleys, perhaps as high as 62%, have survived as compared to the &quot; and &quot; barreled guns. Considering the majority of Bisleys were made in .32/20 and .38/40, some 60%, it appears that the market for SAAs was changing. In the late 1890s, with increasing urbanization in the Western United States, suggests the possibility that many of these pistols were used as companion pieces to lever-action rifles of the same period. The unique features of the Bisley with their low-slung hammer, less humped backstrap, and shorter barrel may have suited the city-dwelling suit-coat-wearing clientele who still found themselves outdoors, not only on horses but in buggies and automobiles. The need for man-stopping bullets was decreasing in urbanized environments, although in semi-urban areas, a pistol like the Bisley would be suitable for discouraging both four-legged and two-legged &quot;varmints&quot; while also suitable for collecting supper along the road. The Bisley may mark a movement to a more civilized West.

===Buntline Special===
Wyatt Earp biographer Stuart N. Lake popularized the myth of the Buntline Special. In his highly fictionalized biography, &quot;Wyatt Earp: Frontier Marshal&quot;, published in 1931, he wrote that Earp and four other lawmen—Bat Masterson, Bill Tilghman, Charlie Bassett and Neal Brown—were each presented with a customized revolver with a barrel. However, according to some other accounts, on October 26, 1881, the day of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral, Earp carried an 1869 .44 caliber Smith &amp; Wesson American Model with an barrel.

==Second generation (1956–1974)==

At the beginning of World War II, Colt ceased production of the Single Action Army revolver to devote more time to filling orders for the war. When the war ended, no plans were made to revive the Single Action Army revolver as the design was seen as obsolete. However, the advent of television and Western-themed movies created customer demand for the revolver, so Colt resumed manufacture in 1956 with the Second-Generation line of Single Action Army revolvers.

These Second-Generation Colt Single Action Army revolvers were produced from 1956 to 1974 and carried serial numbers in the range of 0001SA to 73,205SA. Due to the popularity of the television show &quot;The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp&quot;, Colt introduced the aforementioned Buntline Special as a Second generation offering from 1957 to 1974.

From 1961 to 1975, Colt offered an adjustable-sight model known as &quot;The New Frontier&quot;, capitalizing on President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s campaign slogan. Colt manufactured 4200 of these revolvers, including 70 built on the Buntline frame.
==Third generation (1976–1982)==
The Third Generation began in 1976, characterized by a change in barrel thread pitch and a solid cylinder bushing replacing the removable/replaceable part from the first and second generations. This series ran until 1982 as a limited-issue product with the serial number range of SA80,000 to SA99,999.

==Late Third/Fourth generation (1994–Present)==
In 1994, production of the SAA resumed with the increase in popularity of &quot;Cowboy Action Shooting&quot; matches. These models are known either as &quot;Late Third Generation&quot; or sometimes Fourth Generation. They have the original style removable/replaceable cylinder bushing. The serial number for this series started at S02001A and continue to use the &quot;S&quot; prefix and &quot;A&quot; suffix as of 2022. Colt currently offers the Single Action Army in one of two finishes: either an all-nickel, or blued with color case-hardened frame; in the traditional three barrel lengths: ; and eight chamberings: .32-20, .38-40, .44-40, .38 Special, .357 Magnum, .44 Special, .45 Colt, or .45 ACP; a total of 42 variations.

Colt manufactured Third Generation Buntlines and New Frontiers through the Colt Custom Shop, as well as many engraved pistols. In 2010, Colt released a &quot;revival&quot; of the Frontier Six Shooter with a nickel finish.

==The Colt Cowboy==
Starting in 1999, Colt began manufacturing a version of the Single Action Army revolver with a modern transfer bar safety, allowing it to be carried with the hammer resting on a loaded chamber. The Colt Cowboy, as it was named, was designed to be more affordable than the Single Action Army. It was offered with barrel lengths of 4.75&quot;, 5.5&quot;, and 7.5&quot;. The 7.5&quot; variant was discontinued in 1999, as was the 4.75&quot; variant, which was reintroduced in 2002. Manufacturing of the Colt Cowboy was discontinued in 2003.

==Engraving==
Colt engraved about one percent of its first-generation production of the Single Action Army revolver, which makes these engraved models extremely rare and valuable with collectors. Engraved pieces were often ordered by or for famous people of the day, including lawmen, heads of state, and captains of industry. This tradition began with the founder, Samuel Colt, who regularly gave such examples away as a means of publicity for Colt.

Colt employed a number of engravers, many of whom were trained artisans who emigrated from Europe. These artisans, such as Gustave Young, Cuno A. Helfricht, Rudolph J. Kornbrath and Louis Daniel Nimschke, were known for inlaying gold, silver, and precious stones in their work. Many of these engraved pieces were adorned with stocks made of ivory or pearl, with engraving and inlays as well.

About 400 of the Second Generation Colt Single Actions were factory-engraved by Colt. The factory engravers of the period were Alvin Herbert, Earl Bieu, Dennis Kies, Robert Burt, Steve Kamyk and Leonard Francolini. One of the most sought-after engravers who have worked on Colt revolvers was Alvin White and the shop of A. A. White Engravers.

==Loading, Operation, and Instructions for Carrying==

===Original U.S. Army Instructions for Loading===

The original instructions for operation of the Single Action Army, both by Colt and the United States Army Ordnance Corps, specifies the loading of all six chambers and carrying the revolver habitually with the hammer cocked in the safety notch.

Specifically, the 1874 U.S. Army Ordnance Manual, &quot;Description and Rules for the Management of the Springfield Rifle, Carbine, and Army Revolvers, Caliber .45&quot;, state &quot;bring the hammer to the safety notch; keep it there until the Pistol is to be fired.&quot; as part of the loading instructions.

===Colt&#x27;s commercial instructions for loading and carrying===

Colt continued to provide instructions specifying the revolver was to be carried with all six chambers loaded and with the hammer on the safety notch from 1874 to at least 1945. In 1898, the advertisements for the Single Action Army, 1877, and M1878 all instructed: &quot;These Revolvers should be carried with the hammer resting in the Safety Notch.&quot; Colt&#x27;s advertisements in the 1920s through 1945 (after which the first generation Single Action Armys were discontinued) instructed that the revolver &quot;May be carried cocked with the hammer in the safety notch.&quot;

==Mechanics==

The Single Action Army action is a refinement of the earlier Colt percussion revolvers and the Colt 1871 cartridge revolver. The cylinder is mounted on a central axis and operated by a hand with a double finger with which more extended action allows the cylinder-ratchet to be cut in a larger circle, giving more torsional force to the cylinder. Four notches on the face of the hammer engage the sear portion of the trigger, affording four basic hammer positions. The hammer rests within the frame when it is fully lowered. Drawn slightly to the rear, the hammer engages the safety notch of the sear and holds the firing pin out of direct contact with a chambered cartridge. Like the earlier percussion revolvers, the Single Action Army was designed to allow loading of all the chambers.

The safety notch replaced pins on the rear of the percussion revolver cylinders, which served the same purpose as the safety position; that is, preventing hammer contact with the primer/percussion cap. According to the original instructions from Colt, as well as the U.S. Army Ordnance Department, the revolver was to be carried with all six chambers loaded and carried with the hammer half-cocked in the safety notch. However, beginning sometime after the Second World War and after the introduction of the Second Generation single action in the 1950s, some gun-writers began strongly advocating the practice of leaving one empty chamber under the hammer. It is likely this was recommended after the Second World War because with the changed tolerances of the re-designed Second Generation Single Action Army, a sharp blow could damage the re-designed half-cock mechanism and allow a fully loaded revolver to fire. Drawn back about halfway, the hammer engages the second notch. This cams the cylinder bolt out of engagement and allows the cylinder to rotate for loading. Fully cocked, the revolver is ready to fire. Cartridge ejection is via the spring-loaded rod housed in a tube on the right side of the barrel.

It is possible to fire the SAA rapidly by holding down the trigger and &quot;fanning&quot; the hammer with the other hand. Ed McGivern dispelled the myth of the inaccuracy of this procedure by shooting tight groups while fanning the revolver.

==Calibers==
By 1878, the Single Action Army was being offered from the factory in additional calibers for civilian and foreign military sales. Many were sold in .44-40 Winchester Winchester Center Fire (WCF), introduced in 1878 to allow cross-compatibility with the Winchester &#x27;73 lever-action rifle; this model was called the &quot;Colt Frontier Six-Shooter&quot;, which was etched and later roll-stamped on the left side of the barrel. Additional period calibers for the SAA included .38-40 Winchester introduced in 1884, the .32-20 Winchester introduced in 1884, the .41 Long Colt introduced in 1885, the .38 Long Colt in 1887, the .38 Special and the .357 Magnum in the 20th century. Some of the separately-serialized .44 Henry rimfire revolvers were rechambered to .22 rimfire after 1885. The SAA at one time or another was offered in dozens of calibers from .22 rimfire to .476 Eley, though the .45 Colt has always been the most common. A scaled-down .22 rimfire version called the Scout or Frontier Scout was available in the late 20th century.

===45 Colt cartridge variations===

The first Colt Single Action Army prototypes were manufactured in .44 American caliber for the 1872 government trials, as the .44 American was the cartridge used in the 1,000 Smith &amp; Wesson Model 3 revolvers issued to the troops. After the tests, the Colt was declared the superior revolver and the government specified that a .45 caliber cartridge would be required. With the adoption of the Colt Single Action Army revolver in 1873, the service cartridges were Copper-cased .45 centerfire Benét inside primed &quot;Colt&#x27;s Revolver Cartridges&quot; loaded with 30 grains of black powder and an inside lubricated bullet of 250 grain. They were manufactured at Frankford Arsenal, Philadelphia, PA, through 1874. In 1875, the cartridge was shortened so that it would also function in the newly adopted S &amp; W Schofield revolver. It was designated &quot;Revolver Cartridge&quot; and loaded with 28 grains of black powder and a bullet of 230 grain. The Bénet-primed cartridges were manufactured until 1882 and then replaced by reloadable cartridges with brass cases and external primers.

The original .45 Colt black-powder load of propelled a bullet weight of at a nominal . Authors John Taffin and Mike Venturino have demonstrated that modern black-powder loadings of the .45 Colt cartridge frequently achieve velocities in the vicinity of with the -inch &quot;cavalry&quot; barrel length, even though modern solid-head cases make it impossible to load a full 40 grains. Specifications for 20th-century smokeless loads set velocity with a round-nosed flat-point bullet at providing energy.

The version of the .45 Colt as of 2014 differs from the original cartridge case in that the rim is significantly larger (with a groove immediately above it) and the internal aspect of the primer pocket is surrounded by solid brass instead of protruding into the powder chamber. This &quot;solid head&quot; case is stronger and resists deformation of the primer pocket. Some commercial and custom revolvers and single-shot pistols (such as the Ruger Blackhawk, T/C Contender and others) employ high-pressure loads that are dangerous in the Single Action Army and other vintage arms chambered for the .45 Colt cartridge, especially 19th-century &quot;pre-smokeless&quot; revolvers, which should be fired (if at all) with black powder, only.

Prior to World War II, the .45 Colt used a groove diameter of .454&quot;; post-WWII production adopted the .452&quot; groove diameter of the .45 ACP. From 1924 through 1940, a small number of Single Actions in the pistol caliber .45 ACP were produced. Colt&#x27;s records list several Single Actions chambered for the .45 Colt cartridge and being accompanied by an extra cylinder for the .45 ACP.

==Legacy==
The power, accuracy and handling qualities of the Single Action Army (SAA) made it a popular sidearm from its inception, well into the 20th century. The association with the history of the American West remains to the present century, and these revolvers remain popular with shooters and collectors. George S. Patton, who began his career in the horse-cavalry, carried a custom-made SAA with ivory grips engraved with his initials and an eagle, which became his trademark. He used it during the Mexican Punitive Expedition of 1916 in a gunfight with two of Pancho Villa&#x27;s lieutenants and carried it until his death in 1945 shortly after the end of World War II. It remains on display, along with the SAA carried by actor George C. Scott portraying Patton in the 1970 film by the same name at the General George Patton Museum of Leadership at Fort Knox, KY Villa himself used a 5-inch barrelled Colt Bisley in .44-40 caliber for the full length of his military career.

In the early and mid-20th century, original Peacemakers lacking historical provenance and not in pristine condition were not particularly valuable. They served as raw material for early enthusiasts such as Elmer Keith, Harold Croft and R. F. Sedgley who modified the revolvers to enhance performance and experimented with more effective ammunition. At the beginning of the 21st century, first- and second-generation SAAs are highly regarded as collectors&#x27; items and often considered too valuable to shoot.

After World War II, new interest in the SAA started and firearms enthusiast William R. Wilson recognized the need and the opportunity. In 1953 Wilson founded the Great Western Arms Company to produce an almost-exact clone of the old Colt SAA for television and movie westerns. The Great Western revolvers were manufactured in Los Angeles.

Later Colt editions are more common, and various copies and near-copies of the revolver are made by Uberti of Italy. Uberti is now owned by Beretta, producer of the Beretta Stampede. American manufacturers include Colt Manufacturing Company, which still retains the model in its catalog. Until its dissolution in 2017, U.S. Fire Arms Mfg. Co. built several variations true to the original first- and second-generation specifications. STI International has introduced a very precisely made Single Action Army with a modified hand/spring assembly designed to last longer than the originals.

The Single Action Army is the precursor and inspiration for modern sporting revolvers from John Linebaugh, Freedom Arms, Ruger, Cimarron, and others.

In 2010, Arizona State Rifle and Pistol Association President Noble C. Hathaway and Cast Bullet Director Dan Walliser surveyed state residents to determine what &quot;Old West&quot; firearm should be named the official state firearm. The Colt Patent Firearms Single Action Army won by a 38% margin. Afterwards, Hathaway submitted a bill to the Arizona legislature, and on the last day of the 2010–2011 regular legislative session, Arizona Senate Bill 1610 was passed. Governor Jan Brewer signed the bill into law. Arizona is the second state to have an official firearm, following Utah&#x27;s adoption of the Colt M1911 pistol.

==See also==

* Colt Model 1871-72 Open Top, the direct ancestor of the Colt Single Action Army
* Magnum Research BFR
* Table of handgun and rifle cartridges

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* The Colt Revolver in the American West – Single Action Army
* Official Safety and Instruction Manual (PDF)
* Colt М1873 SAA at Modern Firearms
* The Colt Single Action Army ... John Taffin at Sixguns.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="4" end="27" title="Colt Single Action Army" label="Colt Single Action Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="47" end="50" title="Colt Single Action Army" label="SAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="52" end="59" title="Colt Single Action Army" label="Model P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="61" end="71" title="Colt Single Action Army" label="Peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="76" end="81" title="Colt Single Action Army" label="M1873"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88" end="101" title="Trigger (firearms)#Single-action" label="single-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="102" end="110" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="111" end="118" title="handgun" label="handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q745019" start="261" end="294" title="Colt&amp;#x27;s Manufacturing Company" label="Colt&amp;#x27;s Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q282381" start="319" end="343" title="Service pistol" label="standard-issued revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="351" end="360" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="453" end="459" title="Gun barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q467355" start="684" end="693" title="Americana (culture)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="711" end="720" title="Wild West" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="850" end="861" title="Historical reenactment" label="re-enactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q861477" start="1001" end="1013" title="United States Cavalry" label="U.S. Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361161" start="1075" end="1087" title="Rollin White" label="Rollin White"/>
<link wikidata="Q463090" start="1139" end="1157" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015206" start="1334" end="1347" title="William Mason (Colt)" label="William Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075787" start="1352" end="1381" title="Charles Brinckerhoff Richards" label="Charles Brinckerhoff Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="1952" end="1958" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2314" end="2385" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson Model 3#Schofield revolver" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson American and Model 3 &amp;quot;Schofield&amp;quot; revolvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347928" start="2400" end="2425" title="Colt Army Model 1860" label="Colt 1860 Army Percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797555" start="2569" end="2582" title=".38 Long Colt" label=".38 Long Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376194" start="2591" end="2606" title="Colt M1892" label="Colt Model 1892"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2610" end="2623" title="Trigger (firearms)#Double-action" label="double-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q158781" start="3454" end="3463" title=".44 Henry" label=".44 Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="5527" end="5544" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="Col. G. A. Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q269574" start="5552" end="5563" title="7th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="7th Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="5571" end="5599" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Battle of the Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="5734" end="5752" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q224104" start="5876" end="5885" title="cartouche" label="cartouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q16582162" start="6976" end="6992" title="New York Militia" label="New York Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="7786" end="7806" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="7815" end="7838" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093017" start="7866" end="7878" title="Rough Riders" label="Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215310" start="7890" end="7903" title="Battle of San Juan Hill" label="San Juan Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570235" start="8616" end="8626" title="Winchester rifle" label="Model 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149409" start="8923" end="8933" title="Colt M1878" label="Colt M1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324018" start="9528" end="9549" title="Winchester Model 1892" label="Winchester Model 1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347682" start="9702" end="9729" title="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral" label="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q158757" start="9781" end="9787" title=".38-40 Winchester" label=".38-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q158729" start="9792" end="9808" title=".32-20 Winchester" label=".32-20 (.32 WCF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21474154" start="10174" end="10193" title="National Shooting Centre" label="famous firing range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062021" start="10197" end="10203" title="Bisley, Surrey" label="Bisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="12024" end="12045" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q44616" start="12785" end="12795" title="Wyatt Earp" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357935" start="12807" end="12821" title="Stuart N. Lake" label="Stuart N. Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q704265" start="13009" end="13022" title="Bat Masterson" label="Bat Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13379" end="13391" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828800" start="14027" end="14060" title="The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp" label="The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="14295" end="14310" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334659" start="14884" end="14906" title="Cowboy Action Shooting" label="Cowboy Action Shooting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15880" end="15899" title="Safety (firearms)#Transfer bar" label="transfer bar safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q183246" start="16683" end="16694" title="Samuel Colt" label="Samuel Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856682" start="16951" end="16972" title="Louis Daniel Nimschke" label="Louis Daniel Nimschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100878" start="17700" end="17733" title="United States Army Ordnance Corps" label="United States Army Ordnance Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984492" start="18473" end="18477" title="Colt 1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20084" end="20100" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282414" start="20966" end="20977" title="Ed McGivern" label="Ed McGivern"/>
<link wikidata="Q158779" start="21249" end="21266" title=".44-40 Winchester" label=".44-40 Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="21426" end="21451" title="Colt Frontier Six-Shooter" label="Colt Frontier Six-Shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q158757" start="21579" end="21596" title=".38-40 Winchester" label=".38-40 Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q158729" start="21621" end="21638" title=".32-20 Winchester" label=".32-20 Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545340" start="21663" end="21676" title=".41 Long Colt" label=".41 Long Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797555" start="21701" end="21714" title=".38 Long Colt" label=".38 Long Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q24634" start="21728" end="21739" title=".38 Special" label=".38 Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q158754" start="21748" end="21759" title=".357 Magnum" label=".357 Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545379" start="21972" end="21981" title=".476 Enfield" label=".476 Eley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545352" start="22248" end="22260" title=".44 American" label=".44 American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504980" start="22357" end="22383" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson Model 3" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson Model 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357068" start="22851" end="22868" title="Frankford Arsenal" label="Frankford Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260160" start="23374" end="23385" title="John Taffin" label="John Taffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158803" start="24664" end="24671" title=".45 ACP" label=".45 ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="25232" end="25248" title="George S. Patton" label="George S. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926257" start="25427" end="25462" title="Pancho Villa Expedition" label="Mexican Punitive Expedition of 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="25489" end="25501" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182450" start="25658" end="25673" title="George C. Scott" label="George C. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202846" start="25733" end="25775" title="General George Patton Museum of Leadership" label="General George Patton Museum of Leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q176693" start="26112" end="26123" title="Elmer Keith" label="Elmer Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600183" start="26580" end="26606" title="Great Western Arms Company" label="Great Western Arms Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609355" start="26858" end="26864" title="A. Uberti, Srl." label="Uberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q324782" start="26898" end="26905" title="Beretta" label="Beretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891345" start="26923" end="26939" title="Beretta Stampede" label="Beretta Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863179" start="27077" end="27100" title="U.S. Fire Arms Mfg. Co." label="U.S. Fire Arms Mfg. Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q6244888" start="27439" end="27453" title="John Linebaugh" label="John Linebaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500480" start="27455" end="27467" title="Freedom Arms" label="Freedom Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508526" start="27469" end="27474" title="Sturm, Ruger &amp;amp; Co." label="Ruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16942363" start="27476" end="27484" title="Cimarron Firearms" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q236941" start="27967" end="27986" title="Governor Jan Brewer" label="Governor Jan Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="28013" end="28020" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="28080" end="28084" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q745019" start="28108" end="28112" title="Colt&amp;#x27;s Manufacturing Company" label="Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q201419" start="28113" end="28125" title="M1911 pistol" label="M1911 pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112047" start="28144" end="28171" title="Colt Model 1871-72 Open Top" label="Colt Model 1871-72 Open Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843375" start="28226" end="28245" title="Magnum Research BFR" label="Magnum Research BFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673227" start="28248" end="28285" title="Table of handgun and rifle cartridges" label="Table of handgun and rifle cartridges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498912" wikidata="Q415350" url="?curid=498912" title="Akaishi Mountains">
<text>The are a mountain range in central Honshū, Japan, bordering Nagano, Yamanashi and Shizuoka prefectures. They are also called the , as they join with the Hida Mountains (&quot;Northern Alps&quot;) and the Kiso Mountains (&quot;Central Alps&quot;) to form the Japanese Alps.

== Origin of the name ==
There are a lot of red stones (赤石 Aka-Ishi) around the Akaishi River, a tributary of the Ōi River in the southern part of Southern Alps. Then it was said that the mountain of red stone came to be called Mount Akaishi. The mountain represents the mountain range and the name &quot;Akaishi&quot; is used for the whole range mountain range, Akaishi Mountains.

== Major peaks ==
Almost all major peaks of the Akaishi Mountains are in Minami Alps National Park that was established on June 1, 1964. 
The range is the source of two rivers, Ōi River and Tenryū River, which flow to the Pacific Ocean. 

== Panorama ==
== Flora and fauna ==
Alpine plants, such as Siberian dwarf pine can be seen above the tree line. Rock ptarmigan and spotted nutcracker also live in the alpine zone. Japanese serow and sika deer live in the forest belt on the mountain slopes. is endemic to Mount Kita.

== Walter Weston in the Japanese Alps ==
Englishman Walter Weston introduced the Western world to the Japanese Alps in his book &quot;Mountaineering and Exploring in the Japanese Alps&quot;. During his visits to Japan, he climbed Akaishi Mountains. Several monuments in his memory have been set up in several places in the Japanese Alps.

He climbed the following peaks: 
* 1892 Mount Akaishi - The first non-Japanese to climb this mountain
* 1902 Mount Kita
* 1903 Mount Kaikoma
* 1904 Mount Hōō and Mount Senjō

== See also ==
*Japanese Alps
**Hida Mountains (Northern Alps)
**Kiso Mountains (Central Alps)
*Minami Alps National Park
*Minami-Alps Biosphere Reserve
*100 Famous Japanese Mountains
*Walter Weston

== References ==
== Books ==
*&quot;Mountaineering and Exploring in the Japanese Alps&quot; -by Walter Weston (1896)

== External links ==

*Yamanashi Nichinichi Newspaper: Minami Alps website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="10" end="24" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="36" end="42" title="Honshū" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="44" end="49" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127877" start="61" end="67" title="Nagano Prefecture" label="Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q132720" start="69" end="78" title="Yamanashi Prefecture" label="Yamanashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320" start="83" end="91" title="Shizuoka Prefecture" label="Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072070" start="154" end="168" title="Hida Mountains" label="Hida Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072062" start="205" end="219" title="Kiso Mountains" label="Kiso Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="259" end="272" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="372" end="381" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044017" start="389" end="397" title="Ōi River" label="Ōi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695513" start="503" end="516" title="Mount Akaishi" label="Mount Akaishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131218" start="731" end="756" title="Minami Alps National Park" label="Minami Alps National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044017" start="835" end="843" title="Ōi River" label="Ōi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13667" start="848" end="860" title="Tenryū River" label="Tenryū River"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="880" end="893" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582662" start="934" end="947" title="Alpine plants" label="Alpine plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q243964" start="957" end="976" title="Siberian dwarf pine" label="Siberian dwarf pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q205930" start="1010" end="1024" title="Rock ptarmigan" label="Rock ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184820" start="1029" end="1047" title="spotted nutcracker" label="spotted nutcracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q754034" start="1078" end="1092" title="Japanese serow" label="Japanese serow"/>
<link wikidata="Q190516" start="1097" end="1106" title="sika deer" label="sika deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q961873" start="1169" end="1179" title="Mount Kita" label="Mount Kita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565923" start="1234" end="1247" title="Walter Weston" label="Walter Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="1505" end="1518" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="1712" end="1725" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072070" start="1728" end="1742" title="Hida Mountains" label="Hida Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072062" start="1761" end="1775" title="Kiso Mountains" label="Kiso Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131218" start="1792" end="1817" title="Minami Alps National Park" label="Minami Alps National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771854" start="1819" end="1848" title="Minami-Alps Biosphere Reserve" label="Minami-Alps Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156761" start="1850" end="1879" title="100 Famous Japanese Mountains" label="100 Famous Japanese Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565923" start="1881" end="1894" title="Walter Weston" label="Walter Weston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498913" wikidata="Q1017796" url="?curid=498913" title="Busuanga Island">
<text>Busuanga, is the largest island in the Calamian Group of islands in the province of Palawan in the Philippines. Busuanga Island is the second largest island in the province after Palawan island itself. The island is located halfway between the islands of Mindoro and Palawan with the South China Sea located to the west and the Sulu Sea to the southeast. South of the island are the two other major islands of the Calamian Group: Culion Island and Coron Island. The western third of the island is under the municipality of Busuanga and the eastern two-thirds belong to the municipality of Coron.

Busuanga Island is known as a recreational diving location due to World War II Japanese wrecks that were sunk by American navy bombings in Coron Bay, a natural anchorage near the town center of Coron, on September 24, 1944.

==Geology==
Part of the North Palawan Block, Busuanga Island consists mainly of the Liminangcong Formation, a Permian to Late Jurassic chert. This chert forms the distinguishing mountain ranges, with the Middle-Late Jurassic Guinlo Formation clastics forming the valleys on Busuanga. Busuanga was known for its tabular manganese deposits found within the chert sequence, thick and extending laterally up to . Braunite is the common manganese mineral type found in the ore.

===Geology Gallery===

==References==
==External links==
* Images from a dive trip to Coron, Busuanga in April 2006
* Landscapes of Busuanga 2012 (archived 26 September 2017)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1017796" start="0" end="8" title="Busuanga Island" label="Busuanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026221" start="39" end="64" title="Calamian Group of Islands" label="Calamian Group of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="84" end="91" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="99" end="110" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061269" start="179" end="193" title="Palawan (island)" label="Palawan island"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="284" end="299" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160194" start="328" end="336" title="Sulu Sea" label="Sulu Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q111427" start="430" end="443" title="Culion, Palawan" label="Culion Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134477" start="448" end="460" title="Coron Island" label="Coron Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q111393" start="523" end="531" title="Busuanga, Palawan" label="Busuanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q111414" start="589" end="594" title="Coron, Palawan" label="Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719546" start="627" end="646" title="recreational diving" label="recreational diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="663" end="675" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="676" end="681" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716373" start="846" end="865" title="North Palawan Block" label="North Palawan Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="919" end="928" title="formation (geology)" label="Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="932" end="939" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="943" end="956" title="Late Jurassic" label="Late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="957" end="962" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1141" end="1150" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q413391" start="1231" end="1239" title="Braunite" label="Braunite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="1290" end="1293" title="ore" label="ore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498915" wikidata="Q5623703" url="?curid=498915" title="Gwiździny, Nowe Miasto County">
<text>Gwiździny is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Nowe Miasto Lubawskie, within Nowe Miasto County, Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, in northern Poland. It lies approximately south-east of Mszanowo (the gmina seat), south-east of Nowe Miasto Lubawskie, and south-west of the regional capital Olsztyn.

During the Second World War it was the site of the &quot;Gwisdyn&quot; subcamp of the Nazi Stutthof concentration camp.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5623703" start="0" end="9" title="Gwiździny, Nowe Miasto County" label="Gwiździny"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="15" end="22" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q554662" start="57" end="84" title="Gmina Nowe Miasto Lubawskie" label="Gmina Nowe Miasto Lubawskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q138001" start="93" end="111" title="Nowe Miasto County" label="Nowe Miasto County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54184" start="113" end="141" title="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship" label="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="155" end="161" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930236" start="199" end="207" title="Mszanowo" label="Mszanowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q176229" start="240" end="261" title="Nowe Miasto Lubawskie" label="Nowe Miasto Lubawskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q82765" start="302" end="309" title="Olsztyn" label="Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="323" end="339" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="403" end="430" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498916" wikidata="Q111393" url="?curid=498916" title="Busuanga, Palawan">
<text>Busuanga, officially the Municipality of Busuanga (), is a 1st class municipality in the province of Palawan, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 25,617 people.

==History==
Oral tradition has it, that the entire island of Busuanga was once the realm of a Cuyonon datu named Datu Macanas. The island was once part of the four jurisdictions of Cuyonon datus with the other three being Datu Magbanua who reigned over Cuyo archipelago, Datu Cabaylo who had Taytay and surrounding islands and Datu Cabangon reigning over south of Taytay.

The town of Busuanga was created from the barrios of Concepcion, Salvacion, Busuanga, New Busuanga, Buluang, Quezon, Calawit, and Cheey of the town of Coron in 1950.

Quezon was reinstated as a barangay in 2000.

The history of Busuanga could well be said to date back as early as 3,000 B.C. at the time group of nomadic people were known to make such waves of immigration by way of land-bridges from the Asia mainland, some of which lagged and drifted along the Philippines Archipelago. Much later, the Malayans and Indonesians followed. For some thousands of years, they explored, discovered, utilized, and finally spread and populated the Philippines Island, presumably including the island of Busuanga.

Accordingly, as early as the 9th century A.D., Chinese traders were known to transact business with the natives of the coastal regions of Calamianes, and referred to some places as &quot;Pa-laoyu&quot;, &quot;Kia-ma-yan&quot;, and &quot;Pa-ki-nung&quot;, meaning Palawan, Calamian, and Busuanga, respectively, as mentioned in their (Chinese) narratives.

In 1380, nearly a century and half before Christianity reached the Philippines, an Arab missionary from Mallaca, named Mahdu introduced Islam in Sulu. Through the next centuries the Islamic faith must have spread and secured a profound influence in the lives of the early Filipinos. Thus, our ancestors possessed dominantly an Islamic-pagan life and culture, long before the Spaniards came to the islands.

===Origin===
More than 300 years before the conversion of Busuanga into a municipality in 1951, the name BUSUANGA was already attributed to the island. The name is ascribed to that of a big river, the largest in the municipality (an average width of 100 meters; length is unknown), christened by the natives after the great calamitous upheaval in nature, handed down then by word of mouth to be a legend.

===The legend===
According to the age-old legend, *a small limpid river with a narrow picturesque bank no bigger than a brook flow and runs southwards inland in a beautiful valley where people had their livelihood and seems to have always enough. Everyday the inhabitants make good spoils of the bounties of nature around, and lived a contented life. Until on that one fateful day, a violent, strong storm raged and made a rampage of the whole island; and on five or fourteen consecutive days, dilute the place with heaviest rains and strongest winds to sweep the island.

*It is believed that the legend is real account of a natural calamitous event, which could have actually occurred thus causing the sporadically located small rivers and creeks in the island to branch out and unite their flow one great stream, which is the now-evolved Busuanga River.

In the clear, cold dawn that settled after the storm, the inhabitants were amazed to find-in a mixed awe and terror-a massive phenomenal transformation in their place. Out of the darkness of the storm, a wide new channel through the western portion of the mainland into the sea. Thus, nature gave birth to this great river, evolved out of a small brook which up to this day serves an unmistakable beautiful natural landmark.

Busuanga, from the vernacular word meaning &quot;burst&quot; in English, is the popular rendition of this event.

===Formation===
Busuanga during the Spanish Regime : 1600-1898

In 1622, the colonization of Palawan under Count San Augustine reached the island of Busuanga. A number of Augustinian-Recollect missionaries landed in the eastern coast of the mainland, converted the inhabitants to Christianity and built church for them together with the establishment of the Spanish local government in the barrio, known then as Busuanga*, the oldest barrio in the municipality.

Later, 1636, the Spaniards began constructing fortification with small muzzle-loading artilleries to defend the barrio from an almost perennial raids and onslaught of Muslim rebels. With the establishment of a strong naval station at Puerto Princepe Alfonso, now Balabac, together with the forts of Cuyo, Taytay, Labao, etc. combined with the powerful Spanish fleets cruising the seas, the Muslim attacks was eventually put to an end.

In 1898, the Treaty of Peace between the United States and Spain brought the more democratic Americans to the island, thus ending the epidotic Spanish rule.

===The American regime: 1901-1914===
In 1904, with American Military Government ruling the province under Governor Wright, the island of Culion was made into a government reservation, providing a colony for lepers and a vast government farm, its jurisdiction and control eventually served from the municipality of Coron.

On June 2 of the same year, some former inhabitants of Culion was resettled to a place southeastern of the mainland and founded Concepcion, known then as &quot;Kinamotean&quot;, from the word camote, a root crop growing abundantly in the place.

*Busuanga, now Old Busuanga, the mother barrio. Present study and research as of 1977; set the year 1600 the earliest probable founding of Busuangan.

Sometime, between 1906 and 1911, with the Governor Edmund Miller in office a number of school buildings were erected in some of the barrios, (Salvacion, Concepcion, Calauit, etc.)

The founding of New Busuanga, formerly called &quot;Kanyepet&quot;, is significant. If only its most controversial creation, a part of which she would still play in the last phase of Busuanga history.

Given official recognition by Mayor Restituto Bacnan in 1937, mainly for religious commitments to the members of the Evangelical Church, the barrio was directed another official order in that time for its dissolution. Dissolution followed.

About the year 1938, four or five years before the Second World War, manganese mine deposits were uncovered in the island. In the mining boom that followed a national road was expedite from Coron to the northern barrios passing through Bintuan to Concepcion.

===World War II through the liberation: (1941-1949)===
In 1942, still a nondescript barrio under the municipality of Coron, Busuanga entered the era of war. The Japanese occupation of Coron and Busuanga was primarily due to the manganese mines-good source of precious metals for ammunitions. Provoked and with no alternatives, the Busuangenos formed the Resistance Movement, foremost of which was the daring Bolo Battalion under Ignacio Libarra.

Late of the same year, members of the Resistance Movement burned down the semi-permanent school buildings in Busuanga, Salvacion, Cheey and Calauit, which they fear would be a good headquarters for the Japanese. Spreading havoc and massacre, the enemies were already enjoying their plunder.

On September 24, 1944, however, US bomber planes raided, and several Japanese ships, among them big tankers, were bombed and sunk off Concepcion coast. The sea became so thick laden with oil from the tankers that it burned furiously and spread out the nearby mangroves creating a bright sea-inferno for several days and nights. This was followed, in April 1945, by an ambush kill of two Japanese Officers coming from the manganese mines. Within the same month three more enemy soldiers died in the hands of the gallant Bolo Battalion. This foreshadowed the doom of Japanese invaders and the end of war.

Immediately after the war, the US Government built and caused the establishment of Long Range (LORAN) Transmitting Station on the western coast of Panlaitan. The station was staffed and maintained by US Coast Guards until 1970.

With peace fully reigning in the island, schools were re-opened; and the people vanishing their painful experience of war happily sent their children to school. Accordingly, the US government gave aids and full support for rehabilitation of the people from their low economic state.

Thus Busuanga came out of the ashes of war still recouping and, one year after, still wavering from the moral and economic depression which it suffered in war, was forced to emerge into a full-pledged independent municipality.

===Foundation: the ABORDO Bill)===
The year 1950 came to be the dawn of the birth of Busuanga as a full pledged municipality. With 13 daughter barrios already settled and populated, it only waited for some process of law turned for its promulgation into an independent municipality.

It was Governor Gaudencio Abordo, then Congressman of Palawan, and foremost of the earliest Palaweno Statesman, who trigged the session of Congress in 1950 into his bill for the realization of the municipality. The bill number 381, sought for the creation of Busuanga, including all the barrios in its realm, into a municipality. Both houses of Congress approved the bill without much restraint, and its final approval by the President of the Philippines was eventually contained and sealed in the Republic of Act No. 560.

New Busuanga, the controverter, once-dissolved barrio founded by the members of the Evangelical Church, became politically the favored site for the municipality.

On December 30, 1951, with a temporary &quot;wood and nipa&quot; structure for a municipal building, the first town mayor, by virtue of appointment, served his term, Mayor Adriano Custodio. He ruled the first few months of its founding years up to December 1952.

===The municipal site controversy===
It was Tiburcio Barracoso, a southern, of a prominent clan from Salvacion, who ascended the mayorship by rights and virtue of popular election. His first bold act of moving the municipal site to Salvacion created the first wave of &quot;locality conflict&quot; between the southerners and the northerners. Accordingly, when a northerner, Antonio Capague, 1956 to a 1959, won the next election in 1955, the municipal site was moved again from Salvacion back to New Busuanga.

The succeeding mayors however did not cause further migration of the municipal site since the political tide and atmosphere in the higher level favored New Busuanga; and there the municipality remained until 1974.

===Relocation of the municipal site: The MITRA Bill===
About the tenure of the late Mayor Antero Hachero between 1968 and 1971, the then representative of Palawan, Ramon V. Mitra Jr. was fighting another bill in the session of Congress; this time it provided for the proper relocation and immediate transfer of the municipal site, from New Busuanga to Salvacion.

The bill was approved for various justifiable and sound reasons, among them, Salvacion possessed a relatively more suitable and strategic location geographically and more economically developed community, making in the most suited political center for public service and the strategic seat of the municipal government.

For some nebulous reasons, however, the bill had a hard and jolty time getting its way into the local government. Due to an admixture of conflicting personal and political interest and motives waged from all directions at once, the bill remained unexecuted in the local administration concerned.

Consequently, the barrio council of Salvacion in collaboration filed a case of &quot;Mandamus&quot; with some municipal councilors against the involved municipal officials. But while serving in the middle of his tenure, the incumbent mayor, Antero Hachero, died, and the mandamus case hung like the word of Damocles upon the would-be successor. Eventually when laureano Custodio won in the 1972 local election, the same fell hair to the mandamus.

This time it was the municipal council who sought the power of the court (CFI) to issue an order for the execution of the municipality&#x27;s transfer to Salvacion against the indifference of the officials concerned. A little &quot;cold war&quot; almost sprung to the surface between the people of Salvacion and New Busuanga.

===The final seat of the municipal government===
On September 2, 1974, with some constabulary men acting as peacekeepers and mediators between the people of New Busuanga and Salvacion, the municipality was finally transferred and laid to its ultimate site. This historic transfer of the municipal site was characterized by clashing sentiments and convictions by the people and their leaders, both from personal and political motives and interest that made no little significance to the history of Busuanga.

Thus ended the conflict between the two locality-after almost two decades.

These are the barrios found, in chronological order:
==Geography==
The territory of Busuanga covers the western one-third of Busuanga Island, as well as Calauit Island, which both are part of the Calamian Islands, lying between Mindoro and Palawan Island. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 25,617 people.

===Geographical Location===
At the northernmost part of the province of Palawan, Calamianes group of islands is found. This is composed of five islands namely: Busuanga, Calauit, Coron, Culion and Linapacan as it corresponds to four major municipalities which are Busuanga, Coron, Culion and Linapacan. The Municipality of Busuanga is the largest island as it covers 1/3 of Busuanga Island and about 3.8% of Palawan&#x27;s total land area. Based from the Comprehensive Land Use Plan (CLUP 2001–2009) of the municipality, the total land area of the municipality is 52, 748 hectares while according to DENR –CENRO, the total land area was 53, 051 ha. It is bounded by Mindoro strait on the north, municipality of Coron on the east, South China Sea on the west and Culion Island on the south. A majority (59%) of the land area of the Municipality of Busuanga consists of the Calauit Game Preserve and Wildlife Sanctuary (3,323 ha) and the Yulo King Ranch (YKR) (28.380 ha).

===Administrative boundary===
The Municipality of Busuanga is composed of 14 barangays namely: Bogtong, Buluang, Cheey, Concepcion, Maglalambay, New Busuanga, Old Busuanga, Panlaitan, Quezon, Salvacion, San Isidro, San Rafael, Sagrada and Sto. Niño. San Isidro, Panlaitan, Maglalambay are island barangays. Meanwhile, as shown in Table 2, Barangay Cheey has the largest area as it comprises about 32% of total land area of the municipality. It is followed by Sto. Niño with 11%. Busuanga has also a high number of Islets which mostly are home for the Indigenous People (Tagbanuas) in the municipality.

===Barangays===
Busuanga is politically subdivided into 16 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios.


Note: On July 15, 2002, plebiscites held in Culion and Busuanga simultaneously with the election of barangay officials and Sangguniang Kabataan representatives resulted in the ratification of the transfer of Halsey and Burabod to Culion and the creation of Barangay Carabao.

Source: DENR-CENRO, 2016

===Islet===

Source: ECAN Zones Management Framework and Guidelines for Busuanga Municipality, 2006

Famous of these are the following:

A. CALAUIT SAFARI PARK

-Calauit Island is a 4,000 has. Protected are with active environmental and resources management separated by the narrow mangrove channel from nearby Busuanga Island. It includes an 18-kilometers coastline and along the coasting line is about 9-km of reef, although much of it are limestone rock and sand, rubble communities dominated by sea grass, seaweeds and micro invertebrates. About 70-80% of the coastal area of the island is surrounded by coral reefs of moderate cover and sea grass beds, and latter serving as feeding grounds for dugongs and turtles. Another 40% meters wide fins the reef, with an estimated of 1.80 km of living covered.
In the 1979 Presidential 1578 declared Calauit Island Game Preserve and Wildlife Sanctuary for the endemic and exotic animals. The latter consisted of a total of 104 composed of GIRAFFES, ZEBRAS, IMPALAS, WATERBUCKS, GRANT GAZELLES, ELANDS, TOPI and BUSHBACKS imported from Kenya and arrived at Calauit Island in March 1977. These animals are now numbered more than 600 mostly island born and only a few of the original stocks lived.
The game preserve was originally managed by Ministry of Natural Resources by the Presidential Commission for the conservation of the Tamaraw (PCCT) through the Presidential Assistance for Cultural Minorities (PANAMIN). Later on the management of the park is under the jurisdiction of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) through the Conservation and Resources management Foundation (CRMF). At present, management of the park is under the Palawan Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD).

B. BLACK ISLAND – located near Panlaitan. The island is called Malajom(in native dialect) or Black Island due to its unique physical characteristics. It has three small caves with mini-pool inside, and a black rock of about 150 feet into a majestic cave. The island has natural grass which serves as flooring around the beach, as white silica of more or less 5 km. Assorted fishes are available in a whole year. Fisherman usually staying as a resting place. The island is one of the municipality&#x27;s sources of edible bird&#x27;s nests and its quano for fertilizers. Inside the caves, you will find the writings on the wall in Spanish. A mini-pool, a table forms rock, and a bench. Vacationers/Adventurers believed that it was a natural built. It invites the adventurous who dare and explore its interior for discovery, mystery and fun.

C. PAMALICAN ISLAND – Is considered as one of the tourist attraction in the municipality. It is bound with silica sand and famous for its sparkling white beaches. The water is so clear that you can see the corals under. The abundant marine life and coral reefs attracts people from neighboring barangays and town to go swimming, scuba diving and snorkeling. This activity cannot be enjoyed if you cannot go to this place. And if you dream of natural resort with all the breathtaking beauty, then go to this island, and is one of the best places to go during summertime. It has a total land of 50 hectares and approximately 30 minutes travel time from the poblacion. Development of the island is potential.
The means of transportation form the poblacion to the island is to hire a motorized boat around P200.00 one way. There are no cottages in the island; accommodation is in poblacion, at the rate P 100.00 per day.

D.LAS HAMACAS BEACH RESORT – Located seven kilometers away from the poblacion. The island is surrounded by coconut grooves recently, along its white sand beaches, crystal clear water and idea for swimming, scuba diving, and snorkeling. People will enjoy if they go this place. The resort is presently operating with beautiful cottages as tourist&#x27;s accommodation and with the necessary transportation facilities as to cater the needs of the tourist. You can go there anytime.

E.CALUMBUYAN ISLAND – It is about ten (10) hectares situated in the islands of considered as one of the tourist&#x27;s attraction in the municipality. The abundant marine life white beaches attracts the people to go swimming, and if you dream of a natural resort with all the breathtaking beauty then go to this place and one of the best place to go during summertime. A transportation facility from poblacion to Concepcion is service by two units of buses/jeepneys plying between Busuanga to Coron wherein regular fare is only P38.00. The resort is presently operating with the necessary accommodation. There are transportation and cottages to cater the needs of tourist.

F.TREASURE ISLAND – The Island is abounding with silica sand and famous for its sparkling white beaches. It has natural beauty with locally made cottages that will attract people to get there especially during summertime. Its white beaches sand with prolific fish life is suitable for snorkeling and scuba diving.
The means of transportation from the poblacion is to hire a motorboat amounting to P300.00 one way. Tourist accommodations in the place were locally made cottages.

G.CONCEPCION FALLS – It is located 17 km away from the poblacion and both accessible by land and water transportation. It is an ideal place to those who would dare and like to dip in cool fresh water. Transportation is by 2 units of buses and jeepneys plying between Busuanga and Coron and vice versa at the rate of P38.00 regular and P10.00 from the poblacion. Development of this falls is potential.

H.WEST NALAUT ISLAND – In barangay Panlaitan. The abundant marine life attracts the people from neighboring barangays to go swimming, scuba diving and snorkeling and other activities, and its noted for its beautiful coral reefs and seaweeds. It cannot be docked during rainy season due to large waves. It is approximately 1 hour travel from barangay Panlaitan. Accommodation is in Panlaitan proper, and transportation facilities are to hire a pump boat from the poblacion to the island wherein pump boat hire is amounted to P300.00 one way.

I.MALTATAYOK ISLAND – The Island is abounding with silica and like any other island is also famous for its sparkling white beaches. It is approximately 45 minutes travel from the poblacion to the island and the transportation facilities is to hire a pump boat wherein pump boat hire is amounted to P500.00 one way. Approximately area of the island is 100 hectares. Tourist accommodations are the cottages.

J.NAGTENGA ISLAND – The island abound with silica sand with an area of about 90 hectares and famous for its sparkling white beaches. It is approximately 50 minutes from the poblacion to the islands and the transportation facilities are to hire a pump boat. There are also tourist accommodations in the island. Foremost of which are locally made cottages.

K.PAGBINIT ISLAND – The Island is also considered one of the tourist attractions due to its unique and special features. It is also abound with silica sand and famous for its sparkling white beaches. The means of transportation to the island is to hire a pump boat amounting to P300.00 one way.

L.CHINIBAYAN FALLS – In New Busuanga. It is located 16 km from the poblacion and accessibility by both water and land transportation. It is special place to those who would dare and like to dip in cool fresh water. Transportation is serviced by 2 units of jeepneys plying between poblacion to New Busuanga and by pump boat amounting to P260.00 one way. Development of the falls is potential.

M.DIBUTUNAI ISLAND – It is approximately 15 nautical miles from barangay Panlaitan. It is abound with silica sand and famous for its sparkling white beaches. It can be docked even in low tide. It is approximately 1 hour travel to Panlaitan. Means of transportation from Poblacion to Dibutunai amounted to P300.00 one way. Development of the island is potential.

===Topography===
Elevation
The municipality&#x27;s western and central portions are predominantly rough and mountainous with rolling to hilly terrain. A part of this is the Chinabayan Mountain and Wayan Range that still support extensive parches of Molave forest and Cogon grassland (features which are dominant in the locale). Chinabayan, also called Sinibayan, is approximately near to Sinibayan River and the waterfalls found in Barangay New Busuanga. Chinabayan traverses along Barangay San Rafael and Barangay Sagrada where forest cover is much more extensive. Meanwhile, the hilly portions of the mountain range is covered by lowland beach and limestone forest while those that are confined to the sides of hills following the municipality&#x27;s streams and river have thicker forest covers. The central hills have low elevation (less than 700 meters above sea level) while some have an elevation reaching more than 500 meters. Also, on the western portion are numerous islets while on the northern tip is the Calauit Island.
The Salvacion Mountain Range located in Salvacion, the Sinabuyan Mountain Range between New Busuanga and Cheey, and the Naapac Mountain Range in San Rafael are among the major mountain ranges of the municipality.

Slope
Due to the mountainous features of the municipality, most of the areas have high
variations of slope composition. Areas more than 50% slope account for 2% of the municipality; about 32% represent those areas with more than 18% slope but lesser than 50% slope; while 59% are areas with less than 18% slope. The relatively flat areas are generally devoted to rice and tree plantations. Areas with slope that ranges from 0-3% can be used for agricultural and urban development while those slope classes with 3-18% can be allocated for human settlement expansion.

===Geology===
The whole Busuanga Island belongs to the non-volcanic micro-continental fragment of the northern Palawan group of islands which includes all areas on- and offshore north of the Ulugan Bay Fault. Based on geophysical observations, these groups of islands are believed to be part of the southeastern continental shelf of mainland China before the Tertiary period (Mid-Oligocene) (particularly during the beginning of the sea-floor spreading of the South China Sea).

As stated in the Flora Survey and Biodiversity Assessment for Core Zoning Report by the PCSD in 2006, the geology of Busuanga consists of several formations. These include King Ranch Formation, Liminangcong Formation, Quaternary Alluvium and Malajon Limestone. The Liminangcong Formation which is distinguished of its bedded chert is dominant in the municipality while the Quaternary Alluvium which consists of unconsolidated floodplain deposits accumulated at the foot of the hills can be found in the low – lying coastal areas and along the river channels of most of the barangays in Busuanga. On the other hand, Malajon Limestone, typified by creamy to dark gray massive coralline, marbleized limestone, is commonly found in Elet and Kalapisauan Islands located northwest of the municipality. Most of the land formations are karst limestone having silicon dioxide as its major elements. Limestone distribution over the municipality, however, can only be observed in few areas such as Barangay Buluang.

===Soil===
The soil classification and fertility of lands in the municipality is affected by climate, rainfall, and its varying elevation. There are six major types of soil in Busuanga namely: Rough Mountainous Land, Coron Clay Loam, San Miguel Clay Loam, Aborlan Clay Loam, Busuanga Loam and Hydrosol. Sub-surface textures of these soils can be classified as either loam to clay loam and sandy clay; these fall under the medium to fine- textures soils.
The types of soil in the municipality vary on its geographical location. According to the report of the Office of the Provincial Agriculturist, those soils located in the plains, valleys and plateaus are made up of silt clay loam while those soils located in the area where it is gently sloping to slightly steep are composed of sandy clay to sandy clay loam. For coastal plains on the southern part of the municipality, the major type of soil is hydrosol while in some valley areas, there is rich Busuanga loam. Of these types of soil, silt clay loam soil, given its properties, makes it suitable for the community to plant their crops and grow their vegetables.

===Climate===
Busuanga has two distinct climate types. It is dry from December to May and rainy from June to November; the warmest months are March, April, and May while the coldest are December, January, and February. It has an average yearly rainfall measurement of 2,873.9 mm.
Meanwhile, though Palawan as a whole is outside the typhoon belt, the northern portion where Busuanga is located experiences persistent gales and torrential rains especially during the months of July to August.


===Surface water===
Busuanga has three mineral springs . It has several river systems as well. The major ones are as follows.
* Busuanga River in Old Busuanga
* Binalayan River in Cheey
* Dipuyal River in Sto. Niño
* Lele River in New Busuanga
* Malabnas River in San Rafael
* Ditapec River in Calauit
* Kiwit River in Sagrada

Falls
* Concepcion Fall in Conception
* Chinabayan / Sinibayan Falls in New Busuanga

===Land resources===
The land classification map of the Municipality of Busuanga in 2006 (in accordance with SEMP- ECAN Zoning Project). It can be seen that majority of the land is classified as alienable and disposable; dominance of this land classification is primarily because secondary brushland/ shrub lands are abundant in the area.

On the other side, there are different sources of information indicating the composition of various land classification of the municipality. Department of Environment and Natural Resource- CENRO have identified the total municipal land area of Busuanga with 32, 144 hectares (71.3%) classified as alienable and disposable (A&amp;D) land and 12, 950 hectares (28.7%) of forest land; SEMP-ECAN Zoning Project which formulated a NAMRIA-land classification map, however, revealed that the A&amp;D land is only about 48%. On the other hand; while CLUP showed the allocation of municipal land uses with 46% devoted to brushland and grassland, 39% to forest, 8% for agriculture, and 1% for built-up areas or only about 392 hectares of the total land area.

==Demographics==
In the 2020 census, the population of Busuanga was 25,617 people, with a density of .

== Economy ==
==Notes==
==External links==

* Busuanga Turismo

*Busuanga Profile at PhilAtlas.com
*[ Philippine Standard Geographic Code]
*Philippine Census Information
*Local Governance Performance Management System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111393" start="0" end="8" title="Busuanga, Palawan" label="Busuanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q111393" start="25" end="49" title="Busuanga, Palawan" label="Municipality of Busuanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q24764" start="69" end="81" title="municipality of the Philippines" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="89" end="97" title="Philippine Province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="101" end="108" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="110" end="121" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q111414" start="716" end="721" title="Coron, Palawan" label="Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017796" start="13010" end="13025" title="Busuanga Island" label="Busuanga Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037114" start="13038" end="13052" title="Calauit Island" label="Calauit Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026221" start="13081" end="13097" title="Calamian Islands" label="Calamian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q211800" start="13113" end="13120" title="Mindoro" label="Mindoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061269" start="13125" end="13139" title="Palawan (island)" label="Palawan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="14844" end="14852" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261368" start="14881" end="14886" title="purok" label="purok"/>
<link wikidata="Q572784" start="14902" end="14908" title="sitios" label="sitios"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498917" wikidata="Q111414" url="?curid=498917" title="Coron, Palawan">
<text>Coron, officially the Municipality of Coron (), is a municipality in the province of Palawan, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 65,855 people.

The main population center of the municipality is composed of Poblacion barangays 1 to 6, where the Municipal Building, the Municipal Legislative Building, and the Judicial Hall of the Municipal Circuit Trial Court are located. Its fiesta is held annually on August 28 in honor of Saint Augustine. It is the commercial capital of the Calamian Islands.

The municipality is home to the Coron Island Natural Biotic Area, which is listed in the natural category of the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List.

==History==
The Calamian Islands were originally inhabited by the Tagbanuas, Calmiananen, and Cuyonon tribes.

Oral history tells that the Datu Macanas ruled the entire Busuanga Island where present-day Coron town lies. Early on Spanish exploration of the islands, Fray de la Concepcion took note of the friendliness of the people of Busuanga Island and the ferocity of the Tagbanua tribe living in Coron Island.

Early on the history of the Calamianes, Coron was directly ruled by the Spanish in Mindoro while the island of Cuyo by the Spanish authorities in Panay. In this area of the Calamianes, the first permanent Spanish settlement was Culion. Coron was a mere visita of Culion at that time. A fort and church were built in Libis, Culion around 1670 by the Spaniards as part of the defenses (along with Cuyo, Taytay, and Linapacan) against the Muslim raids. This became a settlement for migrants to the Calamianes. Don Nicolas Manlavi a Cuyonon served several years in Spanish Galleons, and an Ilonggo from Jaro, Ilo-ilo named Claudio Sandoval later wed Nicolas&#x27; only daughter Evarista. The Sandoval clan of the Calamianes came from this union. It was Don Nicolas Manlavi who established the first settlement in Coron which was initially at Banuang Lague (old town) in present-day Banuang Daan in Coron Island. The town center was then again moved to present-day Maquinit and later on, it was finally established in present-day Bancuang in Barangay 5 where a good water source was found. 

Late in the 1890s, an American naturalist, Dean Worcester, journeyed through the Calamianes collecting specimens and stayed briefly in Culion. At the turn of the century, he was appointed part of the First Philippine Commission, becoming the Secretary of the Interior. He recommended Culion as the Philippine Leper Colony. This act forced the transfer of the Sandoval clan in 1900 to the various barrios of what is now Coron and Busuanga. The Coron town was settled by the family of Claudio Sandoval, and the other Sandovals settled in what is now Bintuan, Salvacion, Concepcion, and Old Busuanga.

In 1950, the town of Busuanga was created from the barrios of Concepcion, Salvacion, Busuanga, New Busuanga, Buluang, Quezon, Calawit, and Cheey which used to belong to Coron. In 1954, the islands of Linapacan, Cabunlaoan, Niangalao, Decabayotot, Calibanbangan, Pical, and Barangonan were separated from Coron to form the town of Linapacan.

==Geography==
The municipality of Busuanga comprises the western part of Busuanga Island, while Coron comprises the eastern part of Busuanga Island, all of Coron Island and about 50 other minor islets stretching as far as Tara Island in the north-east and Canipo Island in the south. All these islands are part of the Calamian Archipelago in northern Palawan that separates the South China Sea from the Sulu Sea.

===Barangays===
Coron is politically subdivided into 23 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios.
* Banuang Daan
* Bintuan
* Borac
* Buenavista
* Bulalacao
* Cabugao
* Decabobo
* Decalachao
* Guadalupe (also called Binalabag)
* Lajala
* Malawig
* Marcilla
* Barangay I (Poblacion)
* Barangay II (Poblacion)
* Barangay III (Poblacion)
* Barangay IV (Poblacion)
* Barangay V (Poblacion)
* Barangay VI (Poblacion)
* San Jose
* San Nicolas
* Tagumpay
* Tara
* Turda
===Climate===
==Demographics==
In the 2020 census, the population of Coron, Palawan, was 65,855 people, with a density of .

==Economy==
The main industries of Coron are fishing and tourism. Former industries include manganese mining at Singay Mines in Barangay San Nicolas during the Japanese Occupation period. This was followed by the fishing industry boom during the 1970s up to the 1990s which gradually dwindled due to illegal blast and sodium cyanide fishing. The rattan and basket-weaving industry which also gradually declined during the same period due to the ensuing depletion of raw materials.

Currently tourism is the top industry in Coron due to local beaches, dive sites, Lagoons and other natural tourist spots. A dozen sunken Japanese warships at depths between off Coron Island is a diving destination, listed in &quot;Forbes Traveler Magazine’s&quot; top 10 best scuba diving sites in the world. A description of the diving highlights in 2021 is provided by Dive the World.

===Siete Pecados Marine Park===

On April 17, 2024, the Siete Pecados Marine Park, under Jose Mazo, manager, in Coron, as one of 3 marine protected areas, won the Blue Park Award by Marine Conservation Institute at the 9th Our Ocean Conference in Athens for its role in conservation of marine biodiversity. It is part of the Calamian Islands Network in the Philippines, within a short distance from the coast of Coron. Founded in 2005 by the United States Agency for International Development, it is currently an ecotourism landmark.

==Transportation==
The Francisco B. Reyes Airport serves the town. The airport has direct flights such as Manila, Cebu and Angeles

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* [ Philippine Standard Geographic Code]
*Local Governance Performance Management System
*Philippine Department of Tourism official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111414" start="0" end="5" title="Coron, Palawan" label="Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q111414" start="22" end="43" title="Coron, Palawan" label="Municipality of Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q24764" start="53" end="65" title="municipality of the Philippines" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="73" end="81" title="Philippine Province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="85" end="92" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="94" end="105" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q652541" start="238" end="247" title="Poblacion" label="Poblacion"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="248" end="256" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026221" start="510" end="526" title="Calamian Islands" label="Calamian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="642" end="678" title="UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List" label="UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026221" start="697" end="713" title="Calamian Islands" label="Calamian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q332359" start="1241" end="1246" title="Panay" label="Panay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253627" start="2388" end="2409" title="Philippine Commission" label="Philippine Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q111393" start="2802" end="2810" title="Busuanga, Palawan" label="Busuanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q111506" start="3111" end="3120" title="Linapacan" label="Linapacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111393" start="3157" end="3165" title="Busuanga, Palawan" label="Busuanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017796" start="3196" end="3211" title="Busuanga Island" label="Busuanga Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134477" start="3279" end="3291" title="Coron Island" label="Coron Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026221" start="3441" end="3461" title="Calamian Islands" label="Calamian Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="3501" end="3516" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160194" start="3526" end="3534" title="Sulu Sea" label="Sulu Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="3593" end="3601" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261368" start="3630" end="3635" title="purok" label="purok"/>
<link wikidata="Q572784" start="3651" end="3657" title="sitios" label="sitios"/>
<link wikidata="Q652541" start="3831" end="3840" title="Poblacion" label="Poblacion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="4193" end="4200" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="4205" end="4212" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="4240" end="4249" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269057" start="4456" end="4461" title="blast fishing" label="blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q445055" start="4473" end="4488" title="cyanide fishing" label="cyanide fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719546" start="4825" end="4831" title="Recreational diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="4861" end="4867" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="4906" end="4918" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378402" start="5074" end="5087" title="Siete Pecados" label="Siete Pecados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="5149" end="5170" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079045" start="5200" end="5229" title="Marine Conservation Institute" label="Marine Conservation Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="5265" end="5271" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="5304" end="5323" title="Marine life" label="marine biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026221" start="5343" end="5359" title="Calamian Islands" label="Calamian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="5460" end="5510" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="5531" end="5541" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500743" start="5576" end="5602" title="Francisco B. Reyes Airport" label="Francisco B. Reyes Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="5659" end="5665" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="5667" end="5671" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55741" start="5676" end="5683" title="Angeles City" label="Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498919" wikidata="Q1072062" url="?curid=498919" title="Kiso Mountains">
<text>are a mountain range in Nagano and Gifu prefectures in Japan. They are also called the and they combine with the Hida Mountains (&quot;Northern Alps&quot;) and the Akaishi Mountains (&quot;Southern Alps&quot;) to form a group collectively known as the Japanese Alps.

== Outline ==
The mountain range consists of granite. The Komagatake Ropeway is on the east side of Mount Kisokoma. A lot of tourists visit the station on the top. The upper part of the mountain range is the tree line, and a lot of alpine plants grow naturally. Leontopodium shinanense of &quot;Leontopodium&quot; is endemic around Mount Kisokoma.

== Geography ==

=== Major peaks ===
;Foothills
*Mount Nenjō (念丈岳), 
*Mount Nagiso (南木曽岳), 
*Mount Kazakoshi (Kiso) (風越山), 
*Mount Kazakoshi (Ena) (風越山), 

=== Rivers===
Rivers with headwaters in the Kiso Mountains drain to Ise Bay of the Pacific Ocean. They include:
* Kiso River
* Tenryū River

==See also==
*Japanese Alps
**Hida Mountains (Northern Alps)
**Akaishi Mountains (Southern Alps)
*List of mountains in Japan

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="6" end="20" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q127877" start="24" end="30" title="Nagano Prefecture" label="Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277" start="35" end="39" title="Gifu Prefecture" label="Gifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="55" end="60" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072070" start="113" end="127" title="Hida Mountains" label="Hida Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q415350" start="164" end="181" title="Akaishi Mountains" label="Akaishi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="252" end="265" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="313" end="320" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428059" start="326" end="344" title="Komagatake Ropeway" label="Komagatake Ropeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695791" start="368" end="382" title="Mount Kisokoma" label="Mount Kisokoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="476" end="485" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582662" start="500" end="512" title="alpine plant" label="alpine plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483297" start="563" end="575" title="Leontopodium" label="Leontopodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="585" end="592" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="666" end="677" title="Mount Nenjō" label="Mount Nenjō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="687" end="699" title="Mount Nagiso" label="Mount Nagiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="787" end="792" title="River" label="River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="799" end="809" title="headwaters" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368308" start="841" end="848" title="Ise Bay" label="Ise Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="856" end="869" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q779607" start="887" end="897" title="Kiso River" label="Kiso River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13667" start="900" end="912" title="Tenryū River" label="Tenryū River"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="928" end="941" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072070" start="944" end="958" title="Hida Mountains" label="Hida Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q415350" start="977" end="994" title="Akaishi Mountains" label="Akaishi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q467843" start="1012" end="1038" title="List of mountains and hills of Japan by height" label="List of mountains in Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498921" wikidata="Q1072070" url="?curid=498921" title="Hida Mountains">
<text>The , or , is a Japanese mountain range which stretches through Nagano, Toyama and Gifu prefectures. A small portion of the mountains also reach into Niigata Prefecture. William Gowland coined the phrase &quot;Japanese Alps&quot; during his time in Japan, but he was only referring to the Hida Mountains when he used that name. The Kiso and Akaishi mountains received the name in the ensuing years.

== Geography ==
The layout of the Hida Mountains forms a large Y-shape. The southern peaks are the lower portion of the Y-shape, with the northern peaks forming two parallel bands separated by a deep V-shaped valley. It is one of the steepest V-shaped valleys in Japan. The Kurobe Dam, Japan&#x27;s largest dam, is an arch dam located in the Kurobe Valley in the central area of the mountains. The western arm of mountains, also known as the Tateyama Peaks (立山連峰 &quot;Tateyama Renpō&quot;), are dominated by Mount Tsurugi and Mount Tate. The eastern arm, known as the Ushiro Tateyama Peaks (後立山連峰 &quot;Ushiro Tateyama Renpō&quot;), are dominated by Mount Shirouma and Mount Kashimayari.

===Glaciers===
Although it was originally thought that no glaciers existed in East Asia south of Kamchatka, recent research has shown that three small glaciers still survive in Mount Tsurugi and Mount Tate owing to the extremely wet climate of the Hokuriku region allowing for very heavy snowfalls on the high peaks.

== Major peaks ==
* Mount Shirouma, 
* Mount Kashimayari, 
* Mount Tate, 
* Mount Tsubakuro, 
* Mount Tsurugi, 
* Mount Noguchigoro, 
* Mount Yari, 
* Mount Hotaka, 
* Mount Norikura, 
== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Japanese Alps
** Kiso Mountains (Central Alps)
** Akaishi Mountains (Southern Alps)
* List of mountains in Japan
* 100 Famous Japanese Mountains
* Chūbu-Sangaku National Park

== References ==
== External links ==

* North Alps Broad Band Network 
* Northern Alps Lodging Cooperative 
* Northern Alps Information for Gifu Prefecture </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="25" end="39" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q127877" start="64" end="70" title="Nagano Prefecture" label="Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q132929" start="72" end="78" title="Toyama Prefecture" label="Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277" start="83" end="87" title="Gifu Prefecture" label="Gifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132705" start="150" end="168" title="Niigata Prefecture" label="Niigata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568666" start="170" end="185" title="William Gowland" label="William Gowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="210" end="223" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072062" start="332" end="336" title="Kiso Mountains" label="Kiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q415350" start="341" end="348" title="Akaishi Mountains" label="Akaishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="609" end="615" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208749" start="674" end="684" title="Kurobe Dam" label="Kurobe Dam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="842" end="856" title="Tateyama Peaks" label="Tateyama Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109050" start="909" end="922" title="Mount Tsurugi (Toyama)" label="Mount Tsurugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977103" start="927" end="937" title="Mount Tate" label="Mount Tate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="969" end="990" title="Ushiro Tateyama Peaks" label="Ushiro Tateyama Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695423" start="1051" end="1065" title="Mount Shirouma" label="Mount Shirouma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11677135" start="1070" end="1087" title="Mount Kashimayari" label="Mount Kashimayari"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="1187" end="1196" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q381025" start="1338" end="1353" title="Hokuriku region" label="Hokuriku region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695423" start="1428" end="1442" title="Mount Shirouma" label="Mount Shirouma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11677135" start="1447" end="1464" title="Mount Kashimayari" label="Mount Kashimayari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977103" start="1469" end="1479" title="Mount Tate" label="Mount Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924214" start="1484" end="1499" title="Mount Tsubakuro" label="Mount Tsubakuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109050" start="1504" end="1517" title="Mount Tsurugi (Toyama)" label="Mount Tsurugi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1522" end="1539" title="Mount Noguchigoro" label="Mount Noguchigoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592686" start="1544" end="1554" title="Mount Yari" label="Mount Yari"/>
<link wikidata="Q656026" start="1559" end="1571" title="Mount Hotaka (Nagano, Gifu)" label="Mount Hotaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133588" start="1576" end="1590" title="Mount Norikura" label="Mount Norikura"/>
<link wikidata="Q645773" start="1624" end="1637" title="Japanese Alps" label="Japanese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072062" start="1641" end="1655" title="Kiso Mountains" label="Kiso Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q415350" start="1674" end="1691" title="Akaishi Mountains" label="Akaishi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q467843" start="1710" end="1736" title="List of mountains and hills of Japan by height" label="List of mountains in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156761" start="1739" end="1768" title="100 Famous Japanese Mountains" label="100 Famous Japanese Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q764357" start="1771" end="1798" title="Chūbu-Sangaku National Park" label="Chūbu-Sangaku National Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498922" wikidata="Q2083648" url="?curid=498922" title="Kerio Technologies">
<text>Kerio Technologies, Inc. is a former technology company specializing in collaboration software and unified threat management for small and medium organizations. Founded in 1997, Kerio is headquartered in San Jose, California. In January 2017, GFI Software acquired Kerio. GFI Software is owned by Aurea SMB Solutions, which in turn is owned by ESW Capital Group.

==History==

Kerio Technologies incorporated in 2001, but its first product WinRoute Pro entered the Internet security market in 1997, as it was owned and maintained by Tiny Software until February 1, 2002. Tiny Software then transferred sales and development of its software to Kerio, where the developers continued to work on it under the Kerio brand.

Kerio&#x27;s main products (in the early 2000s) were Kerio Personal Firewall and Kerio WinRoute Firewall and the company focused on collaboration software with Kerio MailServer. Kerio discontinued its Personal Firewall in late 2005, which was then acquired by Sunbelt Software.

Starting in 2010, Kerio MailServer was renamed to Kerio Connect and Kerio WinRoute to Kerio Control. Kerio introduced Kerio Operator, an IP PBX system, in 2011 and Samepage, a file sharing and collaboration software, in 2013.

In January 2017, Kerio was bought by GFI Software. Kerio Connect, Kerio Control, Kerio Operator and Kerio Cloud became GFI assets but Samepage was not part of the acquisition.

== Products and services ==
Kerio provides IT products and services mainly in security solutions which are physical devices and virtual appliance that could run on virtualization platforms such as VMware vSphere.

=== Kerio Control===
Kerio Control is a network security solution that manages security services and perform as Unified Threat Management such as intrusion detection and prevention (IPS), gateway antivirus, VPN, web content, application filtering and endpoint security software.

=== Kerio Connect=== 
Kerio Connect provides email service for small and mid-sized businesses. Some of its features include security features such as SSL encryption, S/MIME and antispam. Supporting for Microsoft Outlook, and mail services IMAP and POP. 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2083648" start="0" end="24" title="Kerio Technologies" label="Kerio Technologies, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q18388277" start="37" end="55" title="technology company" label="technology company"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="72" end="94" title="collaboration software" label="collaboration software"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147013" start="99" end="124" title="unified threat management" label="unified threat management"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="204" end="224" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978634" start="1135" end="1141" title="IP PBX" label="IP PBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="1174" end="1186" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q752708" start="1530" end="1547" title="virtual appliance" label="virtual appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="1566" end="1580" title="virtualization" label="virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881459" start="1599" end="1613" title="VMware vSphere" label="VMware vSphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147013" start="1728" end="1753" title="Unified threat management" label="Unified Threat Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q745881" start="1762" end="1781" title="Intrusion detection system" label="intrusion detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="1812" end="1821" title="Antivirus software" label="antivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="1823" end="1826" title="Virtual private network" label="VPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948731" start="1828" end="1839" title="web content" label="web content"/>
<link wikidata="Q451816" start="1841" end="1862" title="Application firewall" label="application filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273203" start="1941" end="1954" title="email service" label="email service"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="2046" end="2049" title="Transport Layer Security" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="2050" end="2060" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505049" start="2062" end="2068" title="S/MIME" label="S/MIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392270" start="2073" end="2081" title="Anti-spam techniques" label="antispam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80911" start="2098" end="2115" title="Microsoft Outlook" label="Microsoft Outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q166936" start="2135" end="2139" title="Internet Message Access Protocol" label="IMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268005" start="2144" end="2147" title="Post Office Protocol" label="POP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498924" wikidata="Q2741739" url="?curid=498924" title="Eugène Rousseau (chess player)">
<text>Eugène Rousseau (13 November 1805, Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis, France – Paris, France, 1870) was a French chess master. He was the strongest chess player in New Orleans in the first half of the 1840s. The Rousseau Gambit is named after him.

==Chess biography==
In 1845, Rousseau played a match against the Englishman Charles Stanley for the title of chess champion of the US, the first contest ever for that title. The match was played for a stake of $1,000. Rousseau lost the match (+8 −15 =8) and Stanley became the first US Champion.

Rousseau&#x27;s second in the match was Ernest Morphy, who took his eight-year-old nephew, Paul Morphy, along and allowed him to be present for the contests. Later, Paul was allowed to play Rousseau, and it became clear that Paul was the better player, despite his young age.

In 1850, Johann Löwenthal paid a visit to New Orleans, and beat Rousseau five games straight.

==Notable game==

Rousseau beat Winawer with the black pieces in Paris in 1867:
:1.e4 e5 2.f4 Bc5 3.Nf3 d6 4.c3 Bg4 5.Bc4 Nd7 6.h3 Bxf3 7.Qxf3 Qe7 8.a4 a6 9.b4 Ba7 10.Na3 Ngf6 11.f5 c6 12.d3 h6 13.Nc2 Rd8 14.Be3 Bb8 15.0-0 Nh7 16.Qg4 Qf8 17.h4 Ndf6 18.Qf3 Qe7 19.g4 d5 20.Bc5 Bd6 21.Bxd6 Qxd6 22.Bb3 0-0 23.Rad1 g5 24.Ne3 Kg7 25.h5 Rfe8 26.Rf2 Nf8 27.Rb2 b5 28.Ra2 d4 29.axb5 axb5 30.Nc2 Ra8 31.Rxa8 Rxa8 32.cxd4 exd4 33.Kg2 N8d7 34.Qf2 Nxg4 35.Qxd4+ Qxd4 36.Nxd4 Ne3+ 37.Kf3 Nxd1 38.Bxd1 Ne5+ 39.Ke3 Ra1 40.Be2 Rb1 41.Nf3 Nxf3 42.Bxf3 Rxb4 43.e5 c5 44.Bc6 Rb1 45.Ke4 b4 46.Kd5 b3 47.Kd6 b2 48.Ke7 Re1 49.f6+ Kg8 50.Be4 Rxe4 51.dxe4 b1=Q 52.Kd6 Qxe4 0–1

==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2741739" start="0" end="15" title="Eugène Rousseau (chess player)" label="Eugène Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575588" start="35" end="65" title="Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis" label="Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="67" end="73" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="83" end="89" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093327" start="110" end="122" title="chess master" label="chess master"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="161" end="172" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096451" start="209" end="224" title="Rousseau Gambit" label="Rousseau Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079730" start="228" end="233" title="List of chess openings named after people" label="named"/>
<link wikidata="Q728106" start="322" end="337" title="Charles Stanley (Chess player)" label="Charles Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297972" start="355" end="379" title="US Chess Championship" label="chess champion of the US"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="559" end="565" title="Glossary of chess#Second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q105589" start="634" end="645" title="Paul Morphy" label="Paul Morphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93683" start="829" end="845" title="Johann Löwenthal" label="Johann Löwenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q376206" start="947" end="954" title="Szymon Winawer" label="Winawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="980" end="985" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498925" wikidata="Q176229" url="?curid=498925" title="Nowe Miasto Lubawskie">
<text>Nowe Miasto Lubawskie (; ) is a town in northern Poland, situated on the River Drwęca. The total population in June 2018 was 11,062. Nowe Miasto Lubawskie is the capital of Nowe Miasto County in the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship.

== Geographical location ==
Nowe Miasto Lubawskie lies on the right (west) bank of the upper course of the River Drwęca in Chełmno Land in the historic region of Pomerania, some 15 km south-west of the town of Lubawa, 70 km south-west of the town of Olsztyn, and 120 km south-east of the region&#x27;s capital, Gdańsk.

== History ==

Early history involved settlement by early Slavic peoples; later settlement was by Old Prussians who were conquered by Polish ruler Bolesław Krzywousty. In 1310 the Teutonic Order invaded and occupied the region of Gdańsk Pomerania and Otto von Luttenberg, commander of Culm (Chełmno), founded the settlement in 1325. It was known under the names &quot;Nuwenmarkt&quot;, &quot;Novum Forum&quot; and &quot;Nowy Targ&quot;. Between 1334–43 it was the seat of a Vogt of the Teutonic Order. It adopted Kulm law in 1353.

During the Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War, in 1410, the town briefly became part of Poland due to result of local fighting, and remained so until the 1411 peace treaty. In 1440, the town was a founding member of the Prussian Confederation, an association of towns and gentry that opposed the policies of the Order and wanted the region to become part of Poland. In 1454, the association asked Polish King Casimir IV Jagiellon to incorporate the region into the Kingdom of Poland, to which the King agreed and signed the act of incorporation in Kraków in 1454. In the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) the Teutonic Order renounced any claims to the area, and the reincorporation of the town into the Kingdom of Poland was confirmed. Administratively, it was part of the Chełmno Voivodeship in the province of Royal Prussia (which after 1569 was itself part of the province of Greater Poland). During the Reformation, in 1581 the parish church, which is almost as old as the town itself, became evangelical. In the 18th century the town was still surrounded by a town wall and by a rampart, and the parish church was Catholic. A Protestant church was built in 1824.

In the First Partition of Poland in 1772 the town was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia, and as &quot;Neumark&quot; it was included to the newly formed province of West Prussia. It was briefly regained by the Poles and was part of the short-lived Polish Duchy of Warsaw between 1807 and 1815, and later it, again, fell under Prussian rule. The population was subjected to Germanisation policies. In October 1831, various Polish infantry units of the November Uprising stopped in the town on the way to their internment places. At the end of the 19th century, the town was capital of Landkreis Löbau in the Prussian administrative district of Regierungsbezirk Marienwerder in West Prussia, where it remained until 1919. According to the German census of 1890, the town had a population of 2,723, of which 800 (29.4%) were Poles. It had a Lutheran and a Catholic church, a Progymnasium, a court, a steam mill with grain trading, and (as of 1885) 2,678 inhabitants. The monastery Maria-Lonk was nearby. Around 1908 the town also had a dairy, an electric power plant, three sawmills and brickwork.

Following World War I, in 1918, Poland regained independence, and after the Treaty of Versailles became effective in January 1920, the town was reintegrated with Poland. Within the Second Polish Republic, Nowe Miasto Lubawskie was the capital of Nowe Miasto County () in the Polish Pomeranian Voivodeship.

On 3 September 1939, during the German Invasion of Poland which started World War II, the town and area were captured and then occupied by Germany. Afterwards 2,500 civilians were murdered in actions carried out by the SS and units made up from German minority&#x27;s militia, the Selbstschutz. Under German occupation, from 26 October 1939 to 1945, Nowe Miasto Lubawskie was annexed directly to Germany and administratively made part of the Landkreis Löbau/Neumark in the newly formed province of Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia. On 21 January 1945 the town was captured by the Red Army. After the war the town was restored to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime which stayed in power until the 1980s (see People&#x27;s Republic of Poland).


==Sports==
The local football club is . It competes in the lower leagues.

== Famous people ==
* Katarzyna Dąbrowska, Polish actress
* Zyta Gilowska, Polish economist and politician
* Wiesław Lendzion, Polish footballer
* Joseph Newmark (1799–1881), American Orthodox rabbi
* Philip Newmark, father of Harris Newmark, Los Angeles pioneer and retailer
* (1869–1923), German military person
* Jonatan Straus, Polish footballer
* Nikolaus von Vormann, German military person, Wehrmacht general
* (1937–2014), Polish organist and music educator

==International relations==
===Twin towns — Sister cities===
Nowe Miasto Lubawskie is twinned with:
* Hude, Germany
* Šalčininkai, Lithuania

==References==
==External links==

* Tygodnik Internetowy - weekly alternative newspaper online features top news stories, local information for Nowe Miasto area.
* Official town website
*Old photo of towns square and church
*Images of Nowe Miasto Lubawskie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q176229" start="0" end="21" title="Nowe Miasto Lubawskie" label="Nowe Miasto Lubawskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="49" end="55" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261531" start="73" end="85" title="Drwęca" label="River Drwęca"/>
<link wikidata="Q138001" start="173" end="191" title="Nowe Miasto County" label="Nowe Miasto County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54184" start="199" end="227" title="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship" label="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261531" start="337" end="349" title="Drwęca" label="River Drwęca"/>
<link wikidata="Q672344" start="353" end="365" title="Chełmno Land" label="Chełmno Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="392" end="401" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q987188" start="440" end="446" title="Lubawa" label="Lubawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q82765" start="480" end="487" title="Olsztyn" label="Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="541" end="547" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="648" end="661" title="Old Prussians" label="Old Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q53441" start="697" end="716" title="Bolesław Krzywousty" label="Bolesław Krzywousty"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="730" end="744" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q524980" start="822" end="831" title="Commander (order)" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q161962" start="841" end="848" title="Chełmno" label="Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q677907" start="1024" end="1028" title="Vogt" label="Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q561381" start="1063" end="1071" title="Kulm law" label="Kulm law"/>
<link wikidata="Q937255" start="1093" end="1123" title="Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War" label="Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="1166" end="1172" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26679" start="1237" end="1249" title="Peace of Thorn (1411)" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q281484" start="1298" end="1320" title="Prussian Confederation" label="Prussian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="1487" end="1507" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="1626" end="1632" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="1649" end="1670" title="Second Peace of Thorn" label="Second Peace of Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254440" start="1846" end="1865" title="Chełmno Voivodeship" label="Chełmno Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="1885" end="1898" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="1952" end="1966" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1980" end="1991" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="2249" end="2274" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="2311" end="2329" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="2406" end="2418" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="2496" end="2511" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137265" start="2614" end="2627" title="Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="2692" end="2709" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2825" end="2840" title="Landkreis Löbau" label="Landkreis Löbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q510368" start="2884" end="2913" title="Regierungsbezirk Marienwerder" label="Regierungsbezirk Marienwerder"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="2917" end="2929" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="3063" end="3068" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3079" end="3087" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3094" end="3102" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="3113" end="3125" title="Progymnasium" label="Progymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3347" end="3358" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="3413" end="3433" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="3518" end="3540" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581404" start="3619" end="3641" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship (1919–1939)" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="3683" end="3701" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3716" end="3728" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="3771" end="3790" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupied by Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="3863" end="3865" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416195" start="3925" end="3937" title="Selbstschutz" label="Selbstschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q510368" start="4142" end="4171" title="Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia" label="Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="4221" end="4229" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4294" end="4300" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="4371" end="4403" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4429" end="4437" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375200" start="4505" end="4524" title="Katarzyna Dąbrowska" label="Katarzyna Dąbrowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q55938" start="4543" end="4556" title="Zyta Gilowska" label="Zyta Gilowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9373538" start="4592" end="4608" title="Wiesław Lendzion" label="Wiesław Lendzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22020442" start="4630" end="4644" title="Joseph Newmark" label="Joseph Newmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664991" start="4710" end="4724" title="Harris Newmark" label="Harris Newmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563564" start="4799" end="4813" title="Jonatan Straus" label="Jonatan Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q72290" start="4835" end="4855" title="Nikolaus von Vormann" label="Nikolaus von Vormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="5036" end="5043" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q703497" start="5052" end="5056" title="Hude, Lower Saxony" label="Hude"/>
<link wikidata="Q391011" start="5068" end="5079" title="Šalčininkai" label="Šalčininkai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498927" wikidata="Q675110" url="?curid=498927" title="Darwin College, Cambridge">
<text>Darwin College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge. Founded on 28 July 1964, Darwin was Cambridge University&#x27;s first graduate-only college, and also the first to admit both men and women. The college is named after one of the university&#x27;s most famous families and alumni, that of Charles Darwin. The Darwin family previously owned some of the land, Newnham Grange, on which the college now stands.

The college has between 650 and 800 students, mostly studying for PhD or MPhil degrees with strengths in the sciences, humanities, and law. About half the students come from outside the United Kingdom, representing 80 nationalities as of 2016. Darwin is the largest graduate college of Cambridge. Darwin&#x27;s sister college at Oxford University is Wolfson College.

Members of Darwin College are termed &quot;Darwinians&quot;. The college has several distinguished alumni including prominent heads of government and state, politicians, diplomats, and scientists from various countries such as British primatologist and anthropologist Jane Goodall, American conservationist Dian Fossey, Barbadian Governor-General Elliott Belgrave, Nobel Prize winner Elizabeth Blackburn, Nobel Prize winner Eric Maskin, Solicitor-General of the United States Paul Clement, Global Energy Prize winning scientist Thorsteinn I. Sigfusson, and Pulitzer Prize nominated neurosurgeon Paul Kalanithi.

Sir Ian Wilmut, the leader of the research group that in 1996 first cloned a mammal from an adult somatic cell (a Finnish Dorset lamb named Dolly), is also an alumnus of the college. Honorary fellows include Nobel laureate Amartya Sen, and the scientist Martin Rees. Notable students and fellows of Darwin College include British politician Oliver Letwin, Nobel Prize winner Richard Henderson and four Nobel Laureates. The college has 23 Fellows of the Royal Society among its current, emeritus, and honorary fellows including Dame Jane Francis.

== History ==


A significant increase in the number of postgraduate students at Cambridge University in the post-war period led to a growing realisation that a graduate college was becoming a necessity. In 1963, three of the university&#x27;s older colleges – Trinity College, St John&#x27;s College, and Gonville and Caius College – announced their intention to jointly form a new, wholly graduate college. The college was established in 1964, located on the bank of the River Cam, opposite Queens&#x27; College. On 29 January 1965, the Privy Council gave formal approval to the college as an Approved Foundation. It received its Royal Charter as an independent college within the university in 1976.

The college is named after the Darwin family, Charles Darwin&#x27;s second son, George Darwin, having owned some of the property which the college now occupies. He bought Newnham Grange, the oldest part of the college, in 1885, together with the adjacent building known as The Old Granary, and Small Island. (Newnham Grange was originally built in 1793 for the family of Patrick Beales, a local corn and coal merchant. It was extensively remodelled by George Darwin.)

Following the death of George&#x27;s son, Sir Charles Galton Darwin, in 1962, those concerned with the foundation of the new college learned that the property was to become available. Katherine, Lady Darwin, and her family were very receptive to the idea of their home becoming the nucleus of a new college, and to the suggestion that it should bear the family&#x27;s name. Family portraits of the Darwin family are on loan to the college from the Darwin Heirloom Trust and can be found on the walls of several of the college&#x27;s main rooms. In the book &quot;Period Piece: A Cambridge Childhood&quot;, the granddaughter of Charles Darwin, Gwen Raverat describes how she grew up at Newnham Grange.

A commemorative book entitled &quot;Darwin College: A 50th Anniversary Portrait&quot; was commissioned and published by the college in 2014 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the college in 1964.

==Buildings==
Darwin College is known for its distinctive Georgian and Victorian architecture, gardens, and college site which is integrated into the nearby River Cam.

Located on Silver Street and Newnham Road, the college is also known for the Darwin College Bridges which connect the college grounds with the two islands of the college.

In 1966 the college acquired the Hermitage (a house built in the nineteenth century on the west side of Newnham Grange) from St John&#x27;s College. Work to convert and extend the college&#x27;s buildings was funded by the founding colleges and through substantial donations from the Rayne Foundation established by Sir Max Rayne, a Jewish businessman and philanthropist.

In 1994 Darwin College completed construction of a new library and study centre along the side of The Old Granary. The centre is built on a narrow strip of land alongside the millpond in Cambridge, and uses a structure of green oak and lime mortar brickwork. The building uses high-level automatically opening windows and a chimney to control natural ventilation.

In 2004, the college acquired the Malting House to accommodate 12 students. The Malting House is Grade II listed and its name reflects the original purpose of the building. The building was the home of the Malting House School, which experimented with radical ideas in education in the 1920s.

In 2010 the college acquired No 4 Newnham Terrace, the former Rectory for the Church of St Mary the Less, Cambridge (Little St Mary&#x27;s) thereby finally establishing an entire boundary for the college from Queen&#x27;s Bridge to Newnham Road and to the River Granta. The long boundary returns to Queen&#x27;s Bridge and is formed by the two islands in the middle of the river.

== Academic profile ==
Darwin College has particular strengths across a range of subjects and is particularly strong in the sciences, law, and humanities with the majority of the postgraduate students graduating with PhDs and MPhils in these academic subjects.

As a postgraduate college, Darwin College is not ranked in the Tompkins Table ranking of Cambridge colleges that provide undergraduate studies.

== Student life ==

The college organises the annual prestigious Darwin Lecture Series, eight talks over eight weeks structured around a single theme (such as &#x27;Power&#x27;) examined from very different perspectives (scientific, humanities, arts), given by eminent speakers who are leading international authorities in their fields. The lectures have been hosted for over twenty-five years and form one of the key events in the Cambridge calendar. Most of the series of lectures have been published as books and the more recent series are also available as videos for free live-streaming and download. Past speakers at the Darwin Lecture Series have included Sir Walter Bodmer, Rose George, Andrew Fabian, and historian David Olusoga. The inaugural lecture was given by Karl Popper.

The college has a 24-hour library and study centre overlooking the River Cam and provides extensive punting for its students.

In sports, Darwin College Boat Club is a popular student society at Darwin College, as well as Darwin College Football Club who play in the long established Cambridge University Association Football League (CUAFL), representing the only graduate college within CUAFL. The club plays throughout the year in and out of term.

The college has regular formal dinners with students and fellows and also holds annual May Balls during Cambridge&#x27;s May Week. In 2023, Darwin College became the first University of Cambridge college to have a fully plant-based May Ball.

Every Darwinian is automatically a member of the Darwin College Student Association (DCSA). The DCSA committee comprises 20 students, organising events and parties, supporting societies, and helping students make the most of their time in Cambridge.

The Darwin College University Challenge team achieved some success on University Challenge in the 2018-2019 season reaching the semi-finals of the competition led by captain Jason Golfinos. The college team reached the first-round of the 2020-21 season of University Challenge.

==Notable alumni==
Darwin College is associated with a number of distinguished alumni including former students, fellows of the college and past masters. Darwinians have achieved great success in a wide variety of careers including as scientists, lawyers, politicians, academics, civil servants, diplomats, and representatives of international organisations.

Elizabeth Blackburn, the 2009 Nobel laureate in medicine, studied for her PhD at Darwin. Eric Maskin, the 2007 Nobel laureate in economics, was a visiting student in 1975–76.

Conservationists Jane Goodall and Dian Fossey, Brian Gibson, Seamus O&#x27;Regan and Sir Ian Wilmut, the leader of the research group that first cloned the sheep Dolly, a mammal from an adult somatic cell, are alumni/ae.

Paul Clement, the former United States Solicitor General, read for an MPhil in Politics and Economics at Darwin in 1988–89. Elliott Belgrave, the Governor-General and High Court Judge of Barbados was an alumnus of the college.

Eyimofe Atake, Senior Advocate of Nigeria (SAN) read for a PhD degree in Law from 1984-87

Paul Kalanithi, the Pulitzer Prize nominated Stanford neurosurgeon and author of the New York Times Best Seller &#x27;When Breath Becomes Air&#x27;, was an MPhil student at Darwin.

The philosopher Huw Price, current Bertrand Russell Professor of Philosophy at Cambridge, studied for his PhD in philosophy at Darwin under the philosopher Hugh Mellor, an erstwhile fellow of the college. The philosopher Nigel Warburton also studied for his PhD at Darwin. British nutritionist Professor Ann Prentice is also an alumnus of the university.

British architect and founder of van Heyningen and Haward Architects Joanna Van Heyningen is an alumnus of the college.

Alumni who became notable in sport include Helen McFie, a Scottish rower who as a member of the Cambridge University Boat Club won the 1971 and 1972 Boat Races and who competed for Great Britain at the 1975 World Rowing Championships. The Sri Lankan first-class cricketer Gajan Pathmanathan studied at Darwin College in 1982 and played first-class cricket at Cambridge.

Three current or former masters of Cambridge colleges are Darwin alumnae: Professor Mary Fowler (Darwin), Nicola Padfield (Fitzwilliam), and Professor Dame Jean Thomas (St. Catharine&#x27;s).

== Fellows ==
César Milstein, who received the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, was a Fellow of Darwin College from 1980 to 2002. Richard Henderson, winner of the 2017 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, has been a Fellow since 1981.

Sir Karl Popper and the Nobel Prize winner Max Perutz were Honorary Fellows, as are Amartya Sen and Martin Rees. Oliver Letwin was a research Fellow from 1981 to 1982.

Nick Phillips, Baron Phillips of Worth Matravers, the inaugural president of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and Tom Bingham, Baron Bingham of Cornhill, a Lords of Appeal in Ordinary were visiting professors at Darwin College in 1996 and between 2005 and 2008 

== See also ==
* Malting House School
* Masters of Darwin College, Cambridge
* Colleges of the University of Cambridge
*List of Honorary Fellows of Darwin College, Cambridge

==References==
== External links ==
* Darwin lectures
* Darwin College Boat Club
* Darwin College Football Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q675110" start="0" end="14" title="Darwin College, Cambridge" label="Darwin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055028" start="20" end="39" title="Colleges of the University of Cambridge" label="constituent college"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="47" end="70" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="310" end="324" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262174" start="379" end="393" title="Newnham Grange" label="Newnham Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="495" end="498" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527520" start="502" end="507" title="Master of Philosophy" label="MPhil"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="538" end="546" title="sciences" label="sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="548" end="558" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="564" end="567" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="758" end="775" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007225" start="779" end="794" title="Wolfson College, Oxford" label="Wolfson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q184746" start="1065" end="1077" title="Jane Goodall" label="Jane Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q234224" start="1104" end="1115" title="Dian Fossey" label="Dian Fossey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717754" start="1144" end="1160" title="Elliott Belgrave" label="Elliott Belgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q26321" start="1181" end="1200" title="Elizabeth Blackburn" label="Elizabeth Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q233051" start="1221" end="1232" title="Eric Maskin" label="Eric Maskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356377" start="1273" end="1285" title="Paul Clement" label="Paul Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q744056" start="1287" end="1306" title="Global Energy Prize" label="Global Energy Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q16421762" start="1325" end="1348" title="Thorsteinn I. Sigfusson" label="Thorsteinn I. Sigfusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="1354" end="1368" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087287" start="1392" end="1406" title="Paul Kalanithi" label="Paul Kalanithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353638" start="1413" end="1423" title="Ian Wilmut" label="Ian Wilmut"/>
<link wikidata="Q171433" start="1549" end="1554" title="Dolly (sheep)" label="Dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="1632" end="1643" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335213" start="1663" end="1674" title="Martin Rees" label="Martin Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q333480" start="1750" end="1763" title="Oliver Letwin" label="Oliver Letwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678456" start="1784" end="1801" title="Richard Henderson (biologist)" label="Richard Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="1811" end="1826" title="Nobel Laureates" label="Nobel Laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="1847" end="1875" title="Fellows of the Royal Society" label="Fellows of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152230" start="1936" end="1953" title="Jane Francis" label="Dame Jane Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="2217" end="2232" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="2234" end="2256" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q863940" start="2262" end="2288" title="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge" label="Gonville and Caius College"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="2429" end="2438" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q765642" start="2449" end="2469" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="2495" end="2508" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="2588" end="2601" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q325016" start="2740" end="2753" title="George Darwin" label="George Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913170" start="3064" end="3077" title="coal merchant" label="coal merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064506" start="3171" end="3196" title="Charles Galton Darwin" label="Sir Charles Galton Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168616" start="3692" end="3727" title="Period Piece (book)" label="Period Piece: A Cambridge Childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q532958" start="3772" end="3784" title="Gwen Raverat" label="Gwen Raverat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="4106" end="4114" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="4119" end="4128" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="4205" end="4214" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516424" start="4228" end="4241" title="Silver Street, Cambridge" label="Silver Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270093" start="4246" end="4258" title="Newnham Road, Cambridge" label="Newnham Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902633" start="4294" end="4316" title="Darwin College Bridges" label="Darwin College Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795163" start="4673" end="4689" title="Max Rayne" label="Rayne Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795163" start="4705" end="4718" title="Max Rayne" label="Sir Max Rayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4722" end="4728" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744904" start="5333" end="5353" title="Malting House School" label="Malting House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117577" start="5499" end="5536" title="Church of St Mary the Less, Cambridge" label="Church of St Mary the Less, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222044" start="5677" end="5689" title="River Granta" label="River Granta"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="5926" end="5934" title="sciences" label="sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="5936" end="5939" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="5945" end="5955" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441207" start="6127" end="6141" title="Tompkins Table" label="Tompkins Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055028" start="6153" end="6171" title="Cambridge colleges" label="Cambridge colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964332" start="6876" end="6889" title="Walter Bodmer" label="Walter Bodmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949823" start="6891" end="6902" title="Rose George" label="Rose George"/>
<link wikidata="Q363059" start="6904" end="6917" title="Andrew Fabian" label="Andrew Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086136" start="6933" end="6946" title="David Olusoga" label="David Olusoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="6983" end="6994" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="7064" end="7073" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q572738" start="7097" end="7104" title="Punt (boat)" label="punting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225950" start="7135" end="7159" title="Darwin College Boat Club" label="Darwin College Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025574" start="7281" end="7329" title="Cambridge University Association Football League" label="Cambridge University Association Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853147" start="7535" end="7544" title="May Balls" label="May Balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796607" start="7552" end="7577" title="May Week" label="Cambridge&amp;#x27;s May Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201457" start="7668" end="7679" title="Plant-based diet" label="plant-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q287137" start="8012" end="8032" title="University Challenge" label="University Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392245" start="8040" end="8049" title="University Challenge 2018–19" label="2018-2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q97187760" start="8180" end="8218" title="University Challenge 2020–21" label="2020-21 season of University Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q26321" start="8581" end="8600" title="Elizabeth Blackburn" label="Elizabeth Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q233051" start="8670" end="8681" title="Eric Maskin" label="Eric Maskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184746" start="8774" end="8786" title="Jane Goodall" label="Jane Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q234224" start="8791" end="8802" title="Dian Fossey" label="Dian Fossey"/>
<link wikidata="Q912217" start="8804" end="8816" title="Brian Gibson (director)" label="Brian Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440780" start="8818" end="8837" title="Seamus O&amp;#x27;Regan" label="Seamus O&amp;#x27;Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353638" start="8846" end="8856" title="Ian Wilmut" label="Ian Wilmut"/>
<link wikidata="Q171433" start="8919" end="8924" title="Dolly (sheep)" label="Dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356377" start="8979" end="8991" title="Paul Clement" label="Paul Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="9004" end="9035" title="United States Solicitor General" label="United States Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717754" start="9103" end="9119" title="Elliott Belgrave" label="Elliott Belgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="9125" end="9141" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="9166" end="9174" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q99754295" start="9207" end="9220" title="Eyimofe Atake" label="Eyimofe Atake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450655" start="9222" end="9248" title="Senior Advocate of Nigeria" label="Senior Advocate of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087287" start="9298" end="9312" title="Paul Kalanithi" label="Paul Kalanithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710343" start="9496" end="9505" title="Huw Price" label="Huw Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787447" start="9636" end="9647" title="Hugh Mellor" label="Hugh Mellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085691" start="9701" end="9716" title="Nigel Warburton" label="Nigel Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643461" start="9784" end="9796" title="Ann Prentice" label="Ann Prentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913401" start="9869" end="9925" title="Van Heyningen and Haward Architects" label="van Heyningen and Haward Architects Joanna Van Heyningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q99735895" start="10000" end="10011" title="Helen McFie" label="Helen McFie"/>
<link wikidata="Q784593" start="10053" end="10083" title="Cambridge University Boat Club" label="Cambridge University Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125343" start="10092" end="10096" title="The Boat Race 1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125344" start="10101" end="10116" title="The Boat Race 1972" label="1972 Boat Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856167" start="10159" end="10190" title="1975 World Rowing Championships" label="1975 World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q67152219" start="10229" end="10247" title="Gajan Pathmanathan" label="Gajan Pathmanathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843653" start="10412" end="10423" title="Mary Fowler (geologist)" label="Mary Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887733" start="10434" end="10449" title="Nicola Padfield" label="Nicola Padfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171595" start="10479" end="10495" title="Dame Jean Thomas" label="Dame Jean Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q155525" start="10535" end="10549" title="César Milstein" label="César Milstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="10573" end="10610" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678456" start="10662" end="10679" title="Richard Henderson (biologist)" label="Richard Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10700" end="10724" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="10757" end="10772" title="Sir Karl Popper" label="Sir Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q78480" start="10800" end="10810" title="Max Perutz" label="Max Perutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="10841" end="10852" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335213" start="10857" end="10868" title="Martin Rees" label="Martin Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q333480" start="10870" end="10883" title="Oliver Letwin" label="Oliver Letwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q335951" start="10926" end="10974" title="Nick Phillips, Baron Phillips of Worth Matravers" label="Nick Phillips, Baron Phillips of Worth Matravers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241377" start="10980" end="10999" title="President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="inaugural president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="11007" end="11042" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424692" start="11047" end="11085" title="Tom Bingham, Baron Bingham of Cornhill" label="Tom Bingham, Baron Bingham of Cornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q610320" start="11089" end="11116" title="Senior Law Lord" label="Lords of Appeal in Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744904" start="11213" end="11233" title="Malting House School" label="Malting House School"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11236" end="11272" title=":Category:Masters of Darwin College, Cambridge" label="Masters of Darwin College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055028" start="11275" end="11314" title="Colleges of the University of Cambridge" label="Colleges of the University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990129" start="11316" end="11369" title="List of Honorary Fellows of Darwin College, Cambridge" label="List of Honorary Fellows of Darwin College, Cambridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498928" wikidata="Q7049578" url="?curid=498928" title="Nonscience">
<text>Nonscience is a 1971 book which claims to have the longest and most complex title in publishing history.

Its full title is , London: Wolfe Publishing (). The book was updated and reissued in 2020 as &quot;Nonscience Returns&quot; by the Curtis Press.

Its author Brian J. Ford pokes fun at those who conceal their lack of real expertise by using long and complicated words, whilst making the serious point that many people are fooled by these so-called experts. Some consider the book prescient, thinking that modern society, where decisions are taken by unseen experts, is much as Ford predicted.

==Spanish edition==
In the Spanish edition the title was rendered as &quot;&quot; [translation by Oscar Muslera], Libertad y Cambio, Buenos Aires: Granica Editor.

==Reviews==
In Britain, the book was reviewed in the following publications:
*The &quot;Times Higher Education Supplement&quot;, October 22, 1971
*Atticus Column, &quot;Sunday Times&quot;, October 24, 1971
*&quot;Irish Press&quot;, October 30, 1971
*&quot;Time Out&quot; magazine, November 12, 1971.
*&quot;New Statesman&quot;, November 12, 1971.
*&quot;Nature&quot;: 234, December 3, 1971
*The &quot;Times Educational Supplement&quot;, December 3, 1971
*&quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot;, January 21, 1972
*&quot;Mensa Journal&quot;, January 22, 1972

The book was also featured on the BBC television show &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World&quot;.

==See also==
* &quot;Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals&#x27; Abuse of Science&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*The author&#x27;s website page on this book</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4964156" start="264" end="277" title="Brian J. Ford" label="Brian J. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475036" start="852" end="885" title="Times Higher Education Supplement" label="Times Higher Education Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="933" end="945" title="Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q958406" start="977" end="988" title="Irish Press" label="Irish Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039753" start="1020" end="1028" title="Time Out (company)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="1071" end="1084" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="1118" end="1124" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q184194" start="1282" end="1287" title="Mensa International" label="Mensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1355" end="1358" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820221" start="1381" end="1402" title="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World" label="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633985" start="1432" end="1452" title="Fashionable Nonsense" label="Fashionable Nonsense"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498931" wikidata="Q16883730" url="?curid=498931" title="St. Edmund's College">
<text>St. Edmund&#x27;s College may refer to:

*St Edmund&#x27;s College, Cambridge, a constituent college of the University of Cambridge
*St Edmund&#x27;s College, Salisbury, England, a collegiate church and later St Edmund&#x27;s Church, Salisbury
*St Edmund&#x27;s College, Ware, a public school in Hertfordshire, England
*St. Edmund&#x27;s College, Liverpool, a former Church of England School in Liverpool, England
*St Edmund&#x27;s College, Canberra, a Catholic school in Australia
*St. Edmund&#x27;s College, Shillong, a Catholic school in Meghalaya, India

==See also==
* St Edmund Hall, Oxford, a constituent college of the University of Oxford
* St Edmund&#x27;s School (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16883730" start="0" end="25" title="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q779334" start="42" end="77" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979676" start="209" end="243" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Church, Salisbury" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Church, Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587793" start="245" end="275" title="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Ware" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Ware"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="320" end="356" title="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Liverpool" label="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592993" start="415" end="449" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Canberra" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587792" start="483" end="518" title="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Shillong" label="St. Edmund&amp;#x27;s College, Shillong"/>
<link wikidata="Q973884" start="574" end="596" title="St Edmund Hall, Oxford" label="St Edmund Hall, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883717" start="650" end="690" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s School (disambiguation)" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s School (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498934" wikidata="Q284312" url="?curid=498934" title="ARts">
<text>aRts (which stands for analog real time synthesizer) is an audio framework that is no longer under development. It was best known for previously being used in K Desktop Environment 2 and 3 to simulate an analog synthesizer.

A key component of aRts was the sound server which mixes several sound streams in real time. The sound server, called artsd (d for daemon), was also utilized as the standard sound server for K Desktop Environment 2–3. However, the sound server was not dependent on K Desktop Environment and can be used in other projects. It was a direct competitor to PulseAudio, another sound server, and an indirect competitor to the Enlightened Sound Daemon (ESD). It is now common to use PulseAudio instead of artsd.

The aRts platform also includes aRts Builder — an application for building custom layouts and configurations for audio mixers, sequencers, synthesizers and other audio schema via a user-friendly graphical user interface. aRts is free software, distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.

== End of project ==
On December 2, 2004 aRts&#x27; creator and primary developer Stefan Westerfeld announced he was leaving the project due to a variety of fundamental development and technical issues with aRts.

In KDE Software Compilation 4 developers chose to replace aRts with a new multimedia API known as Phonon. Phonon provides a common interface on top of other systems, usually VLC media player or GStreamer, to avoid being dependent on a single multimedia framework.

== See also ==

* JACK Audio Connection Kit – prevailing sound server for professional audio production

== References ==
== External links ==
* – The aRts project website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q284312" start="0" end="4" title="ARts" label="aRts"/>
<link wikidata="Q284312" start="23" end="51" title="ARts" label="analog real time synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241625" start="159" end="182" title="K Desktop Environment 2" label="K Desktop Environment 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191636" start="187" end="188" title="K Desktop Environment" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268757" start="204" end="222" title="analog synthesizer" label="analog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551207" start="257" end="269" title="sound server" label="sound server"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="290" end="302" title="streaming media" label="sound stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="307" end="316" title="Real-time computing" label="real time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551207" start="322" end="334" title="sound server" label="sound server"/>
<link wikidata="Q284312" start="343" end="348" title="ARts" label="artsd"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="356" end="362" title="daemon (computer software)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466320" start="577" end="587" title="PulseAudio" label="PulseAudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167965" start="645" end="669" title="Enlightened Sound Daemon" label="Enlightened Sound Daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q284312" start="735" end="739" title="ARts" label="aRts"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="740" end="748" title="Platform (computing)" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="781" end="792" title="application software" label="application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045991" start="899" end="905" title="Electrical schematic" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="926" end="950" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="960" end="973" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="1010" end="1036" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346625" start="1256" end="1282" title="KDE Software Compilation 4" label="KDE Software Compilation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857280" start="1351" end="1357" title="Phonon (KDE)" label="Phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171477" start="1427" end="1443" title="VLC media player" label="VLC media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q860213" start="1447" end="1456" title="GStreamer" label="GStreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412909" start="1536" end="1561" title="JACK Audio Connection Kit" label="JACK Audio Connection Kit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498937" wikidata="Q1916586" url="?curid=498937" title="Elsloo, Limburg">
<text>Elsloo is a village in the Dutch province of Limburg. It is located in the municipality of Stein, about 2 km south of the town of Stein itself. Beek-Elsloo railway station serves Elsloo. 

== History ==
The village was first mentioned in 855 (CL I, 23; RI I, 1277), than 1002 as Elisla, and means &quot;forest with alder trees&quot;. Elsloo developed in the Early Middle Ages in the valley of the Maas. The Maas flooded the village several times, and in 1459 the church was moved to higher grounds.

Elsloo Castle was built in the 12th century and was flooded in the early-17th century. The brewery was converted into a castle and extended. It suffered from fires in 1835 and 1885. A Gothic Revival style corner tower was added in 1838.

The Catholic St Augustinus Church is a three aisled church built between 1848 and 1849 as a replacement of the 1459 church.

Elsloo was home to 495 people in 1840. Until 1982, when it was merged with Stein, Elsloo was a separate municipality, also incorporating the smaller villages of Meers and Catsop.

The first artificially inseminated calf in the Netherlands was born on 5 December 1935 at the farm of Jan Werner in Elsloo. The father was Sjors from Lierop who later fathered many children.

== Gallery ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1916586" start="0" end="6" title="Elsloo, Limburg" label="Elsloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="27" end="32" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093" start="45" end="52" title="Limburg (Netherlands)" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9780" start="91" end="96" title="Stein, Limburg" label="Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162451" start="144" end="171" title="Beek-Elsloo railway station" label="Beek-Elsloo railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="315" end="320" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="397" end="401" title="Meuse" label="Maas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="684" end="698" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="1053" end="1077" title="Artificial insemination" label="artificially inseminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238229" start="1193" end="1199" title="Lierop" label="Lierop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498940" wikidata="Q1175042" url="?curid=498940" title="Supervision">
<text>Supervision is an act or instance of directing, managing, or oversight.

==Etymology ==
The English noun &quot;supervision&quot; derives from the two Latin words &quot;super&quot; (above) and &quot;videre&quot; (see, observe).

==Spelling==

The spelling is &quot;Supervision&quot; in Standard English of all English linguistic varieties, including North American English.

==Definitions==
Supervision is the act or function of overseeing something or somebody. It is the process that involves guiding, instructing and correcting someone.

A person who performs supervision is a &quot;supervisor&quot;, but does not always have the formal title of supervisor. A person who is getting supervision is the &quot;supervisee&quot;.

==Theoretical scope==
Generally, supervision contains elements of providing knowledge, helping to organize tasks, enhance motivation, and monitoring activity and results; the amount of each element is varying in different contexts.

==Nature of supervision==

===Academia===
In academia, supervision is the aiding and guiding of a university student in their research project; offering both moral support and scientific insight and guidance. The supervisor is often a senior scientist or scholar, and in some countries called doctoral advisor.

===Business===
In business, supervision is overseeing the work of staff. The person performing supervision could lack a formal title or carry the title supervisor or manager, where the latter has wider authority.

===Counseling===
In clinical supervision, the psychologist or psychiatrist has talk sessions with another professional in the field to debrief and mentally process the patient work.
===Society===
In society, supervision could be performed by the state or corporate entities to monitor and control its citizens. Public entities often do supervision of different activities in the nation, such as bank supervision.

==See also==
* Clinical supervision
* Management
* Supervisor

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1175042" start="0" end="11" title="Supervision" label="Supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="92" end="99" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="150" end="155" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240788" start="648" end="658" title="supervisor" label="supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="1006" end="1014" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q363802" start="1254" end="1270" title="doctoral advisor" label="doctoral advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="1291" end="1299" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240788" start="1425" end="1435" title="supervisor" label="supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="1439" end="1446" title="manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q903385" start="1507" end="1527" title="clinical supervision" label="clinical supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="1533" end="1545" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="1549" end="1561" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="1686" end="1693" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="1788" end="1796" title="Citizenship" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q173800" start="1882" end="1898" title="Bank regulation" label="bank supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q903385" start="1916" end="1936" title="Clinical supervision" label="Clinical supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="1939" end="1949" title="Management" label="Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240788" start="1952" end="1962" title="Supervisor" label="Supervisor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498942" wikidata="Q954318" url="?curid=498942" title="Walewice">
<text>Walewice is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Bielawy, within Łowicz County, Łódź Voivodeship, in central Poland, on the Bzura River. It lies approximately west of Łowicz and north of the regional capital Łódź.

It is the site of a 19th-century palace that belonged to Anastazy Colonna-Walewski, who was chamberlain of King Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski. Walewice attracts tourists because Napoleon Bonaparte had a love affair with Countess Walewska, who bore their son, Alexandre Walewski, at the palace in Walewice.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q954318" start="0" end="8" title="Walewice" label="Walewice"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="14" end="21" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457726" start="56" end="69" title="Gmina Bielawy" label="Gmina Bielawy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144093" start="78" end="91" title="Łowicz County" label="Łowicz County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54158" start="93" end="109" title="Łódź Voivodeship" label="Łódź Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="122" end="128" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q656640" start="137" end="148" title="Bzura River" label="Bzura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q109992" start="180" end="186" title="Łowicz" label="Łowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="221" end="225" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="285" end="310" title="Anastazy Colonna-Walewski" label="Anastazy Colonna-Walewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="340" end="371" title="Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski" label="Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="408" end="426" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q237931" start="450" end="467" title="Marie, Countess Walewski" label="Countess Walewska"/>
<link wikidata="Q435375" start="489" end="507" title="Alexandre Walewski" label="Alexandre Walewski"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498944" wikidata="Q645905" url="?curid=498944" title="Battle of Cedynia">
<text>In the Battle of Cedynia or Zehden, an army of Mieszko I of Poland defeated forces of Hodo or Odo I of Lusatia on 24 June 972, near the Oder river. Whether or not the battle actually took place near the modern-day town of Cedynia is disputed in modern scholarship.

Mieszko I, Poland&#x27;s first documented ruler based in Greater Poland, had successfully campaigned in the Cedynia area, then a West Slavic tribal territory also coveted by Holy Roman Emperor Otto I and German nobles. While Mieszko&#x27;s differences with Otto I were settled by an alliance and payment of tribute to the latter, the nobles whom Otto I had invested with the former Saxon Eastern March, most notably Odo I, challenged Mieszko&#x27;s gains. The battle was to determine the possession of the area between Mieszko and Odo. Records of the battle are sparse, it was briefly described by the chronicler Thietmar of Merseburg (975−1018), whose father participated in the battle (&quot;Chronicon&quot; II.19).

==Background==
About 937 the Saxon margrave Gero had conquered vast territories east of the Elbe River, where he subdued the tribes of the Polabian Slavs. The German forces thereby reached the Oder River and the western border of the young Polish country. After several clashes of arms the conflict for the present was settled by an agreement in 963 whereafter Duke Mieszko had to pay a recurrent tribute to Emperor Otto.

Upon Gero&#x27;s death in 965, his vast Marca Geronis was divided into several smaller marches, while the power in the area was exercised by unchecked warlords. Duke Mieszko took the occasion to capture the lightly defended and economically important estuary of the Oder on the Baltic Sea, in order to secure his influence in Pomerania up to Wolin. In turn Odo I had been vested with the Saxon Eastern March (the later March of Lusatia) by Emperor Otto I and was responsible for gathering tribute of the tribes which were Mieszko&#x27;s point of interest.

The margrave wanted to extend his territory and influence, he finally gathered his forces and decided to attack. He was sure of victory; his raid was a private conflict, against the agreements made by the Emperor, who at the same time struggled to secure his rule in the Kingdom of Italy. However, against Odo&#x27;s expectations, the battle was won by Mieszko.

==The battle as reported by Thietmar==
The only more-or-less contemporary account of the battle is chapter 19 of the second book of Thietmar of Merseburg&#x27;s &quot;Chronicon&quot;, consisting of three sentences:

==Aftermath==

After Emperor Otto I returned to Germany, he mediated a truce between the belligerents at the &quot;Hoftag&quot; diet of 973 in Quedlinburg, according to which Mieszko was obliged to transfer his minor son Bolesław as a hostage to the Imperial court. Nevertheless, the Emperor died a few weeks later and the conflict with the Saxon margraves continued to smoulder. After Mieszko had interfered in the conflict of Otto&#x27;s son and successor Emperor Otto II with the Bavarian duke Henry the Wrangler, German forces again attacked Poland without success in 979.

The relations with the Empire improved upon Mieszko&#x27;s marriage with Oda of Haldensleben, daughter of Margrave Dietrich of the Northern March.

==Modern era==

In 1945, the implementation of the Oder-Neisse line resulted in the transfer of the town of &quot;Zehden&quot; from the German province of Brandenburg to the People&#x27;s Republic of Poland. The town was renamed Cedynia. Contemporary Polish historiography, tasked to justify the post-war borders, turned the encounter of 972 into the first medieval battle between Poles and Germans.

Largely unknown in Poland before World War II, the battle was instrumentalized by post-war Polish propaganda to justify the Oder-Neisse line, which in 1945 made former German Cedynia Poland&#x27;s westernmost town, and rendered into a German-Polish battle to underline the doctrine of &quot;eternal German-Polish enmity&quot;. Several memorials were erected in Cedynia to that effect, including a tall concrete statue of a Polish eagle on a sword overseeing town and Oder river from a hilltop. With the fall of Communism, the propagandistic approach was discarded, yet the battle retained some prominence and is included in modern Polish curricula.

Several battle memorials were installed in the small town: walls were covered with mosaics depicting medieval battle scenarios, wooden statues of knights were placed in the town, the hotel was named &quot;Piast&quot; after the dynasty founded by Mieszko I. A hill near the town was converted into the battle memorial &quot;Victory at Cedynia&quot;, with a tall concrete statue on the hilltop, showing a Polish eagle sitting on a sword rammed in the hill, the face turned west overseeing town and Oder river. The mosaics on the hill&#x27;s foot show white knights encircling and defeating black knights. The monument was erected in 1972 to commemorate the 1000th anniversary of the battle, which was celebrated in the town by people from all regions of Poland, including high-ranking politicians, and accompanied by a large youth festival, &quot;Cedynia 72&quot;.

The lower Oder area, Cedynia and the associated battle in particular, had also played a prominent role in the 1000th anniversary of the Polish state in 1966. The story of the battle was popularized by various means: rallies, monuments, press reports, popular science, travel guides, prosaic and lyrical works, movies, a dedicated medal, post stamps and envelope editions, even special match box designs.

Recent reassessment has resulted in doubts whether the battle had taken place near modern-day Cedynia. According to Pawel Migdalski, &quot;Cedynia has lost its propagandistic value and is now just one of several small border towns&quot;. The memory of the battle is now upheld in a non-political fashion, by an annual festival and re-enactments.

The Battle of Cedynia is commemorated on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, Warsaw, with the inscription &quot;CEDYNIA 24 VI 972&quot;

==See also==
* History of Poland
* Battles of Medieval Poland
* Ostsiedlung

==Sources==

===References===
===Bibliography===
*

==External links==
*Cedynia, Poland website (till 1945 Zehden), showing earlier spellings of town
*Battle of Cidini by Thietmar on Cedynia website – Polish language</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645905" start="7" end="24" title="Battle of Cedynia" label="Battle of Cedynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q645905" start="28" end="34" title="Battle of Cedynia" label="Zehden"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="47" end="66" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q551419" start="94" end="110" title="Odo I, Margrave of the Saxon Ostmark" label="Odo I of Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="136" end="140" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q954143" start="222" end="229" title="Cedynia" label="Cedynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="323" end="337" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="395" end="406" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="440" end="465" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q703390" start="648" end="667" title="Saxon Eastern March" label="Saxon Eastern March"/>
<link wikidata="Q275425" start="879" end="900" title="Thietmar of Merseburg" label="Thietmar of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="1014" end="1019" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63166" start="1029" end="1033" title="Gero" label="Gero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="1077" end="1081" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="1124" end="1138" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="1144" end="1150" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="1178" end="1182" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408539" start="1448" end="1461" title="Marca Geronis" label="Marca Geronis"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1686" end="1696" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="1734" end="1743" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q148505" start="1750" end="1755" title="Wolin" label="Wolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q551419" start="1765" end="1770" title="Odo I, Margrave of the Saxon Ostmark" label="Odo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q703390" start="1796" end="1815" title="Saxon Eastern March" label="Saxon Eastern March"/>
<link wikidata="Q677501" start="1827" end="1843" title="March of Lusatia" label="March of Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="2236" end="2252" title="Kingdom of Italy (medieval)" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275425" start="2460" end="2481" title="Thietmar of Merseburg" label="Thietmar of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q118335" start="2659" end="2665" title="Hoftag" label="Hoftag"/>
<link wikidata="Q40623" start="2687" end="2698" title="Quedlinburg" label="Quedlinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="2765" end="2773" title="Bolesław I Chrobry" label="Bolesław"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="3010" end="3017" title="Otto II" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q260260" start="3027" end="3035" title="History of Bavaria" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q454304" start="3041" end="3059" title="Henry II, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry the Wrangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q289511" start="3195" end="3214" title="Oda of Haldensleben" label="Oda of Haldensleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q570504" start="3237" end="3245" title="Dietrich of Haldensleben" label="Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q701627" start="3253" end="3267" title="Northern March" label="Northern March"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="3321" end="3337" title="Oder-Neisse line" label="Oder-Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q700264" start="3413" end="3436" title="province of Brandenburg" label="province of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="3444" end="3476" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q974251" start="3753" end="3768" title="History of Poland (1945–1989)" label="post-war Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="3795" end="3811" title="Oder-Neisse line" label="Oder-Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="3819" end="3831" title="Recovered Territories" label="in 1945 made"/>
<link wikidata="Q700842" start="3832" end="3845" title="Former eastern territories of Germany" label="former German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170496" start="4094" end="4106" title="Polish eagle" label="Polish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="4526" end="4531" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q170496" start="4724" end="4736" title="Polish eagle" label="Polish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540926" start="5982" end="6017" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, Warsaw" label="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q199569" start="6086" end="6103" title="History of Poland" label="History of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969327" start="6106" end="6132" title="Battles of Medieval Poland" label="Battles of Medieval Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170346" start="6135" end="6146" title="Ostsiedlung" label="Ostsiedlung"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498947" wikidata="Q1543744" url="?curid=498947" title="Portland Pirates">
<text>The Portland Pirates were a minor league professional ice hockey team in the American Hockey League (AHL). Their home arena was the Cross Insurance Arena in downtown Portland, Maine. The franchise was previously known as the Baltimore Skipjacks from 1982 to 1993.

The Pirates were affiliated with the Washington Capitals (1993–2005), the Anaheim Ducks (2005–2008), the Buffalo Sabres (2008–2011), Arizona Coyotes (2011–2015), and the Florida Panthers (2015–2016). The organization hosted the AHL All-Star Classic in 2003 and 2010.

On May 4, 2016, the Pirates announced it had signed a letter of intent with an outside buyer to sell and relocate the franchise for the 2016–17 season. It was reported that the team would be relocated to Springfield, Massachusetts following the pending sale and relocation of the Springfield Falcons franchise to Tucson, Arizona. The transaction was approved by the AHL on May 23, 2016, and the franchise became the Springfield Thunderbirds.

==History==

===Capitals era===
Tom Ebright, owner of the Baltimore Skipjacks, had a daughter who was an intern at the East Coast Hockey League&#x27;s Nashville Knights. Liking the way the Knights did business, Ebright contacted Knights owner, W. Godfrey Wood, asking to relocate the Skipjacks to a better market. Wood relocated the team to his home region of Portland, Maine, leading to the creation of the Portland Pirates in 1993 with an affiliation to the Washington Capitals. The Pirates filled the void made by the Maine Mariners who had departed to become the Providence Bruins a year earlier. On August 4, 1993, forward Eric Fenton was signed to a professional contract to become the very first member of the Portland Pirates team.

Under general manager and CEO Wood, who invested in management and creative marketing, the Pirates led the AHL in tickets sold, sponsorships, and sellouts for their first 3 years. The Pirates first season proved to be their most successful as they won the Calder Cup with a 43–27–10 record and was third overall in attendance with an average of 5,872 fans. Their next season they had 104 points but were upset in the 1st round of the playoffs. In the 1995–96 season they again reached the Calder Cup Finals, despite a sub-par record of 32–34–10, but lost to the Rochester Americans. For the first four seasons, the head coach was Barry Trotz, who later became a long-time NHL head coach and won a Stanley Cup.

Since then, the Pirates had mixed success, routinely making the playoffs and being eliminated early on. This included an excellent 100 point season in 1999–00 only to be eliminated from the playoffs in the first round. The Capitals affiliation ended after 12 seasons in 2005.

===Ducks era===
In 2005, the Pirates announced a five-year lease extension at the Cross Insurance Arena, ending speculation that the team might relocate. The Pirates also signed a three-year affiliation agreement with the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim.

With the Ducks, the Pirates had more mixed success. The team qualified for the 2006 Calder Cup playoffs and made it to the Calder Cup conference finals, only to be defeated by the eventual Calder Cup-winning Hershey Bears in seven games. The team then missed the 2007 playoff. Then the Pirates again made it to the Calder Cup conference finals again in 2008 before being eliminated by the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins in seven games.

===Sabres era===
On June 3, 2008, the Anaheim Ducks announced they were affiliating with the Iowa Chops instead of renewing the agreement with the Pirates. On June 10, 2008, the Pirates and the Buffalo Sabres announced that they had reached a new affiliation agreement, ending several months of speculation.

On August 5, 2008, the team announced that Kevin Dineen has been retained as head coach.

On February 10, 2009, the team played in Buffalo at HSBC Arena for the first time before a crowd of 11,144. The Pirates lost 4-3 in a shootout to the Albany River Rats. The Sabres&#x27; faithful were pleased with the aggressive play and numerous fights during the game. It was then announced that the Pirates would play in Buffalo twice in 2009–10. The first game would be played on November 12 and the second would be March 7; both games would be against the Rochester Americans (the Sabres&#x27; then previous AHL affiliate).

On March 17, 2010, the Pirates signed a two-year lease extension with the Cross Insurance Arena. The agreement prevented any further Pirates home games from being played outside the arena.

In May 2011, the Sabres had indicated a willingness to break from its affiliation agreement with the Pirates and re-affiliate with the Rochester Americans, with Sabres owner Terry Pegula intending to buy the Amerks. The Pirates had to sign off on the agreement, since their agreement with the Sabres ran through 2014. On June 24, 2011, the American Hockey League approved the sale of the Rochester Americans to Pegula; it also included the buyout of the affiliation contract with the Portland Pirates.

===Coyotes era===
On June 27, 2011, the Phoenix Coyotes announced that the franchise had entered into a five-year player development contract with the Pirates. WMTW-TV mentioned that during the announcement of the Coyotes being the Pirates affiliate that two of the four teams that were negotiating with the Pirates wanted the Pirates to change the team name and logo, but the Pirates agreed to the deal with Phoenix in order to keep their name and logo and because the Coyotes &quot;wanted it the most&quot;.

During the 2012–13 season, the Pirates played six games at the Androscoggin Bank Colisee in Lewiston, Maine in preparation of renovations at the Cross Insurance Arena. On April 17, 2013, the Pirates and Cumberland County announced a five-year lease, with the option for another five years, to stay at the Cross Insurance Arena in Portland, though that was thrown into question due to a dispute over revenue from food sales (see lease dispute section below). Due to the dispute, the Pirates played their entire 2013-14 home schedule in Lewiston.

The Pirates were forced to play their final game of the 2013–14 season at their 400-seat practice facility in Saco, due to the Colisée being double booked with the game and a circus. The Pirates promised refunds to those who had bought tickets for the game in Lewiston, and stated that all ticket proceeds from the Saco game would go to the Barbara Bush Children&#x27;s Hospital in Portland.

On May 7, 2014, they announced a one-year extension of the affiliation agreement and a small increase in ticket prices as part of the changes the team was doing to rebuild confidence with the community. Ron Cain, the new majority owner stated he was not concerned about getting a new affiliation agreement with the Coyotes for 2015–16 because it seemed likely that they were going to move their affiliate closer to Glendale, Arizona.

====2013 lease dispute====
In 2013, the Pirates negotiated a new lease agreement with arena trustees, but refused to sign it after they determined that the percentage of food sales they were to receive under the lease would not result in the same amount of money as previously agreed terms calling for the Pirates to get a percentage of food and alcohol sales, which was ruled illegal by the State (as alcohol sales can only be controlled by the property owner).

The Pirates then announced that they would look for another arena to play their 2013–14 season in, most likely the Androscoggin Bank Colisee in Lewiston, where they were already playing the start of the season due to renovations at the arena. Arena trustees stated there would be no Pirates hockey at the arena that year and began seeking other tenants for the dates originally given to the Pirates. They further claimed to only break even on the presence of the Pirates and that their expenses would actually be less without them. The Pirates responded by filing a lawsuit against the arena seeking enforcement of the original unsigned agreement outline and an injunction to prevent the arena from reassigning dates for Pirates home games to other events.

The Pirates announced on September 26, 2013, that they would indeed play their entire 2013–14 home schedule at the Colisée. The dates for four games had to be changed from the original schedule. A spokesman for the AHL said that the Pirates had the rights to the Portland market and could play anywhere within a 50-mile radius of the city. The Phoenix Coyotes said they were prepared to move forward despite having hoped differences with the arena would be resolved. The Chairman of the Cross Insurance Arena Board of Trustees criticized the Pirates for demanding more of a &quot;subsidy&quot; for themselves and stated their desired lease agreement would cost county taxpayers money. The Pirates also stated they would continue their lawsuit against the arena with the hopes of playing there in the future.

On October 24, 2013, it was announced that the team had taken out an option on city-owned land in Saco for possibly building a $40 million arena with 5,000 seats as a new home. The team stated, though, that doing so was not the cheapest option for them and that they would prefer to return to Portland.

After obtaining a majority share of the team, former minority owner Ron Cain stated on December 17 that should an agreement with arena trustees not be reached within a month, that he would consider moving the team to the aforementioned Saco land or even out of state if necessary. Continued requests for negotiation were rebuffed by the trustees. Two days later, Cain announced that the team dropped its lawsuit and that arena trustees would resume negotiations, both seeking &quot;to strike a balance between the team&#x27;s business needs and the arena&#x27;s financial obligations&quot; according to Cain. The chairman of the trustees stated that he found Cain&#x27;s comments on the issue &quot;constructive&quot; and he thus was willing to restart talks.

Maine Senate President Justin Alfond, who is from Portland, announced that he submitted emergency legislation to the Maine Legislature to allow the Pirates to receive a share of alcohol revenue, as the original agreement had called for. Cain said that Alfond&#x27;s efforts did not play a role in their decision on the lawsuit, but could help the team going forward.

On February 4, 2014, arena trustees and the Pirates announced that a five-year lease agreement had been reached and that the team would return to the Cross Insurance Arena for the 2014–15 season and should the team make the 2014 playoffs, it is possible they could return for those games, though Pirates ownership joked that with the team at the bottom of the division that day making such a scenario unlikely. The agreement included the sharing of concessions revenue the Pirates sought, which may or may not have included alcohol sales pending passage of Sen. Alfond&#x27;s bill. Owner Ron Cain also revealed that he had explored the possibility of moving the team to Glens Falls, New York to replace the departing Adirondack Phantoms, going so far as to send CEO Brian Petrovek to Glens Falls for discussions, but that he wanted the Pirates to remain in Maine too much to do so.

===Panthers era and final season===
On March 18, 2015, the Pirates announced an affiliation agreement with the Florida Panthers to begin in the 2015–16 season and that Eric Joyce, the general manager of Florida&#x27;s previous AHL affiliate, the San Antonio Rampage, would take over the same position in Portland. On May 4, 2016, the Pirates announced it had signed a letter of intent with an outside buyer to sell and relocate the franchise for the 2016–17 season. On May 23, the franchise was relocated to Springfield, Massachusetts, following the sale and relocation of the Springfield Falcons franchise to Tucson, Arizona. On June 15, the franchise&#x27;s new name was announced as the Springfield Thunderbirds.

A team of investors headed by former Pirates executives W. Godfrey Wood and Brad Church—the latter a former Portland player as well—announced their intentions to put an ECHL team in Portland to fill the void, joining as early as 2017. However, progress to attain a franchise by the Portland group stalled until four groups, none of which involved Wood, submitted their own proposals at the end of February 2017. By March 8, the arena owners had narrowed their choices to the proposals submitted by Spectra and National Sports Services, with both groups having been involved with managing ECHL teams in their past. In June 2017, Comcast Spectacor, the operators of the Cross Insurance Arena and the NHL&#x27;s Philadelphia Flyers, purchased the franchise rights of the recently dormant Alaska Aces of the ECHL. The league approved of the sale and relocation of the franchise to Portland on June 15.

The market was previously home to:
*Maine Mariners (1977–1992): American Hockey League

The franchise was replaced by:
* Maine Mariners (2018–): ECHL

==Season-by-season results==
The results from the 23 seasons played by the Portland Pirates.
==Players==

===Team captains===
===Pirates Hall of Fame===
Officially only #50 has been retired by the Portland Pirates. However a banner still hangs in the rafters in tribute to the 5 Maine Mariners who had their number retired before moving to Providence.

*Broadcaster Tom Caron (1993-95) Inducted 2014

==AHL awards and trophies==

Calder Cup
* 1993–94

Richard F. Canning Trophy
* 1993–94, 1995–96

Frank Mathers Trophy
* 2005–06

Emile Francis Trophy
* 2005–06
* 2010–11

Harry &quot;Hap&quot; Holmes Memorial Award
* Olaf Kolzig and Byron Dafoe: 1993–94

Louis A. R. Pieri Memorial Award
* Barry Trotz: 1993–94
* Glen Hanlon: 1999–00
* Kevin Dineen: 2005–06

James C. Hendy Memorial Award
* Tom Ebright: 1993–94

Jack A. Butterfield Trophy
* Olaf Kolzig: 1993–94

Eddie Shore Award
* Marc-Andre Gragnani: 2010–11

Dudley &quot;Red&quot; Garrett Memorial Award
* Jim Carey: 1994–95
* Jaroslav Svejkovsky: 1995–96
* Nathan Gerbe: 2008–09
* Tyler Ennis: 2009–10
* Luke Adam: 2010–11

Aldege &quot;Baz&quot; Bastien Memorial Award
* Jim Carey: 1994–95
* Martin Brochu: 1999–00

Les Cunningham Award
* Martin Brochu: 1999–00

Fred T. Hunt Memorial Award
* Kent Hulst: 2000–01
* Chris Ferraro: 2002–03

James H. Ellery Memorial Awards
* Dave Ahlers: 2002–03
==Team records==

===Single season===
:Goals: Michel Picard, 41 (1993–94)
:Assists: Jeff Nelson, 73 (1993–94)
:Points: Jeff Nelson, 107 (1993–94)
:Points (By a Defenseman): Marc-Andre Gragnani, 60 (2010–11)
:Penalty minutes: Mark Major 355 (1997–98)
:GAA: Maxime Ouellet, 1.99 (2003–04)
:SV%: Maxime Ouellet, .930 (2003–04)

===Career===
:Career goals: Kent Hulst, 147 (1993–2001)
:Career assists: Andrew Brunette, 224 (1993–98)
:Career points: Kent Hulst, 360 (1993–2001)
:Career penalty minutes: Kevin Kaminski, 797 (1994–95, 98)
:Career goaltending wins: Mike McKenna, 84 (2007–08, 2014–16)
:Career shutouts: Maxime Ouellet, 17 (2002–05)
:Career games: Kent Hulst, 473 (1993–2001)

==References==
==External links==
*The Internet Hockey Database - Portland Pirates</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1543744" start="4" end="20" title="Portland Pirates" label="Portland Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="54" end="64" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="77" end="99" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q145530" start="132" end="153" title="Cross Insurance Arena" label="Cross Insurance Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="166" end="181" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q805746" start="225" end="244" title="Baltimore Skipjacks" label="Baltimore Skipjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="302" end="321" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="339" end="352" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="370" end="384" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="398" end="413" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="435" end="451" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="493" end="513" title="AHL All-Star Classic" label="AHL All-Star Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909463" start="669" end="683" title="2016–17 AHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="737" end="763" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474509" start="813" end="832" title="Springfield Falcons" label="Springfield Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="846" end="861" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q20338131" start="949" end="973" title="Springfield Thunderbirds" label="Springfield Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q805746" start="1034" end="1053" title="Baltimore Skipjacks" label="Baltimore Skipjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="1095" end="1119" title="East Coast Hockey League" label="East Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q163409" start="1127" end="1144" title="Nashville Knights" label="Nashville Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965743" start="1220" end="1235" title="W. Godfrey Wood" label="W. Godfrey Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="1336" end="1351" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="1404" end="1408" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="1436" end="1455" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q739899" start="1497" end="1511" title="Maine Mariners (AHL)" label="Maine Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442862" start="1543" end="1560" title="Providence Bruins" label="Providence Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386474" start="1604" end="1615" title="Eric Fenton" label="Eric Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="1973" end="1983" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640548" start="2279" end="2298" title="Rochester Americans" label="Rochester Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q608839" start="2347" end="2358" title="Barry Trotz" label="Barry Trotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2414" end="2425" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q145530" start="2787" end="2808" title="Cross Insurance Arena" label="Cross Insurance Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="2927" end="2950" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605899" start="3032" end="3056" title="2006 Calder Cup playoffs" label="2006 Calder Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q569225" start="3161" end="3174" title="Hershey Bears" label="Hershey Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610683" start="3306" end="3310" title="2008 Calder Cup playoffs" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550804" start="3342" end="3372" title="Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins" label="Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q252293" start="3483" end="3493" title="Iowa Chops" label="Iowa Chops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="3584" end="3598" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740138" start="3742" end="3754" title="Kevin Dineen" label="Kevin Dineen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110789" start="3841" end="3851" title="HSBC Arena (Buffalo)" label="HSBC Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752575" start="3939" end="3956" title="Albany River Rats" label="Albany River Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640548" start="4249" end="4268" title="Rochester Americans" label="Rochester Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640548" start="4643" end="4662" title="Rochester Americans" label="Rochester Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381789" start="4682" end="4694" title="Terry Pegula" label="Terry Pegula"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="5051" end="5066" title="Phoenix Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953108" start="5171" end="5178" title="WMTW (TV)" label="WMTW-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759531" start="5585" end="5610" title="Androscoggin Bank Colisee" label="Androscoggin Bank Colisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q501170" start="5614" end="5629" title="Lewiston, Maine" label="Lewiston, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="6876" end="6893" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759531" start="7475" end="7500" title="Androscoggin Bank Colisee" label="Androscoggin Bank Colisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q501170" start="7504" end="7512" title="Lewiston, Maine" label="Lewiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="8333" end="8336" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001891" start="9025" end="9029" title="Saco, Maine" label="Saco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594802" start="9992" end="10014" title="List of Presidents of the Maine Senate" label="Maine Senate President"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147040" start="10015" end="10028" title="Justin Alfond" label="Justin Alfond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749841" start="10109" end="10126" title="Maine Legislature" label="Maine Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379621" start="11030" end="11051" title="Glens Falls, New York" label="Glens Falls, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q357557" start="11077" end="11096" title="Adirondack Phantoms" label="Adirondack Phantoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914112" start="11126" end="11140" title="Brian Petrovek" label="Brian Petrovek"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="11354" end="11370" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863713" start="11387" end="11401" title="2015–16 AHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q27580" start="11489" end="11508" title="San Antonio Rampage" label="San Antonio Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474509" start="11820" end="11839" title="Springfield Falcons" label="Springfield Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="11853" end="11868" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q20338131" start="11933" end="11957" title="Springfield Thunderbirds" label="Springfield Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965743" start="12016" end="12031" title="W. Godfrey Wood" label="W. Godfrey Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953839" start="12036" end="12047" title="Brad Church" label="Brad Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="12129" end="12133" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036429" start="12458" end="12465" title="Comcast Spectacor" label="Spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="12548" end="12552" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036429" start="12588" end="12605" title="Comcast Spectacor" label="Comcast Spectacor"/>
<link wikidata="Q145530" start="12628" end="12649" title="Cross Insurance Arena" label="Cross Insurance Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="12669" end="12688" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q478447" start="12745" end="12756" title="Alaska Aces (ECHL)" label="Alaska Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="12764" end="12768" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q739899" start="12895" end="12909" title="Maine Mariners (AHL)" label="Maine Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645477" start="12980" end="12994" title="Maine Mariners (ECHL)" label="Maine Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="13440" end="13450" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="13453" end="13460" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814806" start="13462" end="13487" title="Richard F. Canning Trophy" label="Richard F. Canning Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="13490" end="13497" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602000" start="13499" end="13506" title="1995–96 AHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444102" start="13508" end="13528" title="Frank Mathers Trophy" label="Frank Mathers Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q667582" start="13531" end="13538" title="2005–06 AHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q663307" start="13540" end="13560" title="Emile Francis Trophy" label="Emile Francis Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q667582" start="13563" end="13570" title="2005–06 AHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601934" start="13573" end="13580" title="2010–11 AHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586953" start="13582" end="13625" title="Harry &amp;quot;Hap&amp;quot; Holmes Memorial Award" label="Harry &amp;quot;Hap&amp;quot; Holmes Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q510526" start="13628" end="13639" title="Olaf Kölzig" label="Olaf Kolzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q327662" start="13644" end="13655" title="Byron Dafoe" label="Byron Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="13657" end="13664" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515405" start="13666" end="13698" title="Louis A. R. Pieri Memorial Award" label="Louis A. R. Pieri Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q608839" start="13701" end="13712" title="Barry Trotz" label="Barry Trotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="13714" end="13721" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382715" start="13724" end="13735" title="Glen Hanlon" label="Glen Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602245" start="13737" end="13744" title="1999–2000 AHL season" label="1999–00"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740138" start="13747" end="13759" title="Kevin Dineen" label="Kevin Dineen"/>
<link wikidata="Q667582" start="13761" end="13768" title="2005–06 AHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130734" start="13770" end="13799" title="James C. Hendy Memorial Award" label="James C. Hendy Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="13815" end="13822" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676957" start="13824" end="13850" title="Jack A. Butterfield Trophy" label="Jack A. Butterfield Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q510526" start="13853" end="13864" title="Olaf Kölzig" label="Olaf Kolzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668059" start="13866" end="13873" title="1993–94 AHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282979" start="13875" end="13892" title="Eddie Shore Award" label="Eddie Shore Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392196" start="13895" end="13914" title="Marc-André Gragnani" label="Marc-Andre Gragnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601934" start="13916" end="13923" title="2010–11 AHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263786" start="13925" end="13970" title="Dudley &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Garrett Memorial Award" label="Dudley &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Garrett Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689062" start="13973" end="13982" title="Jim Carey (ice hockey)" label="Jim Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602234" start="13984" end="13991" title="1994–95 AHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162774" start="13994" end="14013" title="Jaroslav Svejkovský" label="Jaroslav Svejkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602000" start="14015" end="14022" title="1995–96 AHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q127323" start="14025" end="14037" title="Nathan Gerbe" label="Nathan Gerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622226" start="14039" end="14046" title="2008–09 AHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q129210" start="14049" end="14060" title="Tyler Ennis (ice hockey)" label="Tyler Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q951333" start="14062" end="14069" title="2009–10 AHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q518939" start="14072" end="14081" title="Luke Adam" label="Luke Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601934" start="14083" end="14090" title="2010–11 AHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760537" start="14092" end="14137" title="Aldege &amp;quot;Baz&amp;quot; Bastien Memorial Award" label="Aldege &amp;quot;Baz&amp;quot; Bastien Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689062" start="14140" end="14149" title="Jim Carey (ice hockey)" label="Jim Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602234" start="14151" end="14158" title="1994–95 AHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295357" start="14161" end="14174" title="Martin Brochu" label="Martin Brochu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602245" start="14176" end="14183" title="1999–2000 AHL season" label="1999–00"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469432" start="14185" end="14205" title="Les Cunningham Award" label="Les Cunningham Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295357" start="14208" end="14221" title="Martin Brochu" label="Martin Brochu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602245" start="14223" end="14230" title="1999–2000 AHL season" label="1999–00"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452530" start="14232" end="14259" title="Fred T. Hunt Memorial Award" label="Fred T. Hunt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676122" start="14274" end="14281" title="2000–01 AHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964713" start="14284" end="14297" title="Chris Ferraro" label="Chris Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622485" start="14299" end="14306" title="2002–03 AHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135144" start="14308" end="14339" title="James H. Ellery Memorial Awards" label="James H. Ellery Memorial Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622485" start="14355" end="14362" title="2002–03 AHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734842" start="14409" end="14422" title="Michel Picard (ice hockey)" label="Michel Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807790" start="14447" end="14458" title="Jeff Nelson (ice hockey)" label="Jeff Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392196" start="14536" end="14555" title="Marc-Andre Gragnani" label="Marc-Andre Gragnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381087" start="14588" end="14598" title="Mark Major" label="Mark Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774558" start="14619" end="14633" title="Maxime Ouellet" label="Maxime Ouellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381331" start="14716" end="14726" title="Kent Hulst" label="Kent Hulst"/>
<link wikidata="Q503954" start="14761" end="14776" title="Andrew Brunette" label="Andrew Brunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195726" start="14861" end="14875" title="Kevin Kaminski" label="Kevin Kaminski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313440" start="14921" end="14933" title="Mike McKenna (ice hockey)" label="Mike McKenna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498949" wikidata="Q207532" url="?curid=498949" title="Giuseppe Torelli">
<text>Giuseppe Torelli (22 April 1658 Verona – 8 February 1709) was an Italian violinist, teacher and composer of the middle Baroque era.

Brother of the painter Felice Torelli, he is most remembered for contributing to the development of the concerto, especially the solo concerto, and for his music for string instruments and trumpet.

==Life==
Torelli was born in Verona. It is not known with whom he studied violin, although it has been speculated that he was a pupil of Leonardo Brugnoli or Bartolomeo Laurenti, but it is certain that he studied composition with Giacomo Antonio Perti. On 27 June 1684, at the age of 26, he became a member of the Accademia Filarmonica as &quot;suonatore di violino&quot;. He was employed as a viola player at the San Petronio basilica beginning in 1686, where he stayed until 1695. or January 1696. when the orchestra was discontinued because of financial constraints. On 1687 Giuseppe Corsi da Celano played Torelli&#x27;s music, from Op. 3, in Parma at the Sanctuary of Santa Maria della Steccata. By 1698 he was &quot;maestro di concerto&quot; at the court of Georg Friedrich II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, where he conducted the orchestra for &quot;Le pazzie d&#x27;amore e dell&#x27;interesse&quot;, an &quot;idea drammatica&quot; composed by the &quot;maestro di cappella&quot;, and the castrato Francesco Antonio Pistocchi, before leaving for Vienna in December 1699. He returned to Bologna sometime before February 1701, when he is listed as a violinist in the newly re-formed &quot;cappella musicale&quot; at San Petronio, directed by his former composition teacher Perti.

He died at age 50 on 8 February 1709 in Bologna, where his manuscripts are conserved in the San Petronio archives.

Giuseppe&#x27;s brother, Felice Torelli, was a Bolognese painter of modest reputation, who went on to be a founding member of the Accademia Clementina. The most notable amongst Giuseppe&#x27;s many pupils was Francesco Manfredini.

==Selected works==
*10 &quot;Sonate a 3&quot;, with basso continuo, Op. 1 (1686).
*12 &quot;Concerto da camera&quot;, for 2 violins and basso continuo, Op. 2 (1686).
*12 &quot;Sinfonie&quot;, for 2–4 instruments, Op. 3 (1687).
*12 &quot;Concertino per camera&quot; for violin and cello, Op. 4 (1688).
*12 &quot;Sinfonie a 3 e concerti a 4&quot;, Op. 5 (1692).
*12 &quot;Concerti musicali a quattro&quot;, Op. 6 (1698).
*12 &quot;Concerti grossi con una pastorale per il Santissimo Natale&quot;, Op. 8 (1709).
*More than 30 concertos for 1 to 4 trumpets, including a &quot;Sinfonia à 4&quot;, composed after 1702. and unpublished during his lifetime, which is a concerto for four trumpets, with an orchestra requiring a minimum of four oboes, two bassoons, trombone, timpani, four violins, two violas, four cellos, two double basses, and continuo.

==Selected recordings==
*Cantata &quot;Lumi dolenti lumi&quot; on &quot;Agitata&quot; Delphine Galou, Accademia Bizantina, Ottavio Dantone, Alpha. 2017

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 

===Further reading===
*Passadore, Francesco. 2007. &quot;Catalogo tematico delle composizioni di Giuseppe Torelli (1658–1709)&quot;. Padua: Edizioni de I Solisti Veneti 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207532" start="0" end="16" title="Giuseppe Torelli" label="Giuseppe Torelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="73" end="79" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="84" end="91" title="teacher" label="teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="96" end="104" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="119" end="126" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q712531" start="156" end="170" title="Felice Torelli" label="Felice Torelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="237" end="245" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852234" start="262" end="275" title="solo concerto" label="solo concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="299" end="316" title="string instrument" label="string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="322" end="329" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="361" end="367" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q545451" start="562" end="583" title="Giacomo Antonio Perti" label="Giacomo Antonio Perti"/>
<link wikidata="Q338339" start="646" end="667" title="Accademia Filarmonica of Bologna" label="Accademia Filarmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q810103" start="746" end="767" title="San Petronio, Bologna" label="San Petronio basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517642" start="910" end="934" title="Giuseppe Corsi da Celano" label="Giuseppe Corsi da Celano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160800" start="992" end="1031" title="Sanctuary of Santa Maria della Steccata" label="Sanctuary of Santa Maria della Steccata"/>
<link wikidata="Q567159" start="1096" end="1147" title="Georg Friedrich II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Georg Friedrich II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q359289" start="1341" end="1368" title="Francesco Antonio Pistocchi" label="Francesco Antonio Pistocchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q712531" start="1763" end="1777" title="Felice Torelli" label="Felice Torelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822373" start="1868" end="1888" title="Accademia Clementina" label="Accademia Clementina"/>
<link wikidata="Q116337" start="1947" end="1967" title="Francesco Manfredini" label="Francesco Manfredini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254425" start="2904" end="2918" title="Delphine Galou" label="Delphine Galou"/>
<link wikidata="Q963831" start="2920" end="2939" title="Accademia Bizantina" label="Accademia Bizantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q963831" start="2941" end="2956" title="Ottavio Dantone" label="Ottavio Dantone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498950" wikidata="Q3655446" url="?curid=498950" title="GC-45 howitzer">
<text>The GC-45 (&quot;Gun, Canada, 45-calibre&quot;) is a 155 mm howitzer designed by Gerald Bull&#x27;s Space Research Corporation (SRC) in the 1970s. Versions were produced by a number of companies during the 1980s, notably in Austria and South Africa.

The most publicized use of the design was in Iraq, where the GHN-45 variant used by some Iraqi artillery units had a longer range than any coalition cannon systems. This initially caused considerable worry on the part of the allied forces in the Persian Gulf War.

==Design history==
The GC-45&#x27;s general design followed several decades of work by Bull with fin-stabilized artillery shells, starting at the Canadian Armament Research and Development Establishment (CARDE) and later at Project HARP. In these efforts accuracy was not a huge concern, the objective was muzzle velocity, and the test articles were finned darts representing missiles, a low-cost alternative to wind tunnels. Yet with the removal of the rifling and the soft-metal driving band on the shell itself, the shell could be designed purely for ballistics, as opposed to having the external constraint of the driving band. A system combining some sort of rifling for accuracy without a driving band would result in a longer-range weapon. However, such a design was never achieved.

After years of research at his Quebec firing range, Bull could never settle on to a solution. The resulting Extended Range, Full Bore (ERFB) ammunition was key to SRC&#x27;s designs: a &quot;pointy&quot; looking shell with much lower drag at supersonic speeds. For longer range applications he added a base bleed system (invented in Sweden) that could be screwed onto the standard shell, as well as an even longer-ranged system with a rocket booster.

The gun designed to fire it had a chamber, a 45-calibre rifled barrel with 1/20 right hand twist fitted with a conventional muzzle brake. Its breech was a conventional screw with interrupted thread.

Key performance data, from the Firing Table are:
* ERFB-BB shell, weight , M11 Zone 10 muzzle velocity , QE 898 mils, time of flight 112 s, range . Probable error in range , in line .
* ERFB shell, weight , M11 Zone 10 muzzle velocity , QE 881 mils, time of flight 99 s, range . Probable error in range , in line .
* HE M107 shell, weight , M119 Zone 8 muzzle velocity , QE 764 mils, time of flight 65 s, range . Probable error in range , in line .

The dispersion of the EFRB shell is more than three times that of the FH-70 field howitzer at its maximum range of only 5 km less, and is twice as great as FH-70s at . Its maximum range with the M107 projectile is the same as any 39 calibre 155-mm gun and its dispersion about the same. (The &quot;dispersion&quot; figure means that 50% of shells will fall up to the stated distance either side of the mean point of impact, but 100% will fall within 4 times the probable error either side.) Dispersion of this magnitude significantly reduces the tactical value of the equipment.

In 1977, Bull&#x27;s work put him in touch with (what is today) the Denel SOC Ltd company of South Africa. Denel designed a new mobile mounting that was able to handle the increased recoil. It used a sole-plate to lift the carriage to take the four wheels off the ground. The chassis had the option of being powered by a small diesel engine acting as an auxiliary power unit, driving hydraulics that could set up the gun in two minutes, and move it short distances. This feature had previously been included in the 1960s design FH-70 carriage by Vickers. Bull, meanwhile, started production of $30 million worth of rounds, shipping them via Spain to avoid the international arms embargo against South Africa.

At first, the U.S. chose to overlook Bull&#x27;s actions and, according to him, the Central Intelligence Agency actively mediated the deal between Space Research and the South Africans. However, when the Carter administration joined the international efforts to sanction South Africa&#x27;s apartheid government, Bull was arrested by U.S. Customs agents in 1980. The investigation did not go far, and active work on the case was ended by direct intervention of the White House. Bull pleaded guilty and was sentenced to a year in prison, serving six months. Having expected some sort of &quot;slap on the wrist&quot;, he was embittered and made statements to different newspapers that he would never set foot in North America again. He left Canada and moved to Brussels where he continued his work.

==Production==
Armscor continued work on their version of the gun, and these were put into service in South Africa in 1982 as the G5. They started replacing a variety of older guns, such as locally-built World War II-era Ordnance QF 25 pounders. The G5s saw service against Cuban and People&#x27;s Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola forces in the Angolan conflict, where they were used very effectively.

Noricum, the arms division of the Austrian steel company Voest-Alpine, purchased the design rights to the GC-45 after SRC moved to Europe. They made a number of detail changes to improve mass production, resulting in the GHN-45 (Gun, Howitzer, Noricum), which was offered in a variety of options like the APU and fire control systems. The first foreign sale was an order for eighteen guns with ammunition to the Royal Thai Navy for use by their Marine Corps. Other &quot;aboveboard&quot; customers included China, Singapore and Israel. All of these companies worked on local production under a variety of names, the Soltam 845P in Israel, ODE FH-88 from Singapore, and PLL01/WA021 in China.

Once out of prison, Bull was soon contacted by China. The Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army also used the Noricum version, producing it as the PLL01, which entered service in 1987. They also mounted it on a locally designed tracked chassis to produce the PLZ-45 (also known as the Type 88), along with an ammo-carrier based on the same chassis. The PLZ-45 did not enter service with the PLA primarily because their existing artillery was all based on Soviet-standard 152 mm ammunition. However, two major batches of PLZ-45s were sold to the Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.

Also Bull was contacted by Iraq, which was constantly being attacked by Iranian artillery during the Iran–Iraq War. Iraq placed a US$300 million contract for 110 guns from Noricum in Austria and 41,000 rounds subcontracted by SRC to PRB in Belgium. Deliveries were made in 1984 and 1985. The number of guns was eventually raised to 200. Iran and Iraq were under arms embargo at the time, so the guns were shipped to Jordan, and from there to Iraq. These sales led to the &quot;Noricum affair&quot; in 1990, when eighteen of Noricum&#x27;s managers were placed on trial for illegal arms sales. A further 100 guns were manufactured in South Africa.

In Iraq the guns had a similar effect on the ongoing Iran–Iraq War as the G5 had in Angola, stopping any push by the Iranians deeper into Iraq. They became desperate to get more of these guns into the field as soon as possible, and requested that Bull improve deliveries any way he could. Bull then arranged a deal to deliver the G5, which fired the same ammunition as the GHN-45, from South Africa. By the time of the Gulf War, about 124 of these weapons had been added to the Iraqi long-range artillery, supplanting their older 130 mm M-46s and chaotic mix of other weapons. Bull and Saddam Hussein became partners in a number of future ventures. These ventures are generally believed to be the cause of Bull&#x27;s assassination, for which the Israeli Mossad or Iranian agencies are the prime suspects.

During the Gulf War, however, the GHN-45s proved less effective than anticipated by either side. Air strikes had disrupted the Iraqi command and control facilities, and because most of their gun tractors had been withdrawn to serve with logistics units in an attempt to re-supply the front line troops, they were unable to withdraw when under fire. Immobile and unsupported, the majority of the guns were destroyed at their positions either by air strikes or Multiple Launch Rocket Systems (MLRS) counter-battery fire.

Bull continued work on the GC-45, producing a much more practical version known as the FGH-155. In addition to a number of detail changes and deeper rifling, the FGH-155 allowed standard M107 ammunition to be fired using a plastic adaptor ring. Bull also felt that the FGH-155&#x27;s carriage was suitable for a larger gun, and worked on the FGH-203, an 8&quot; (203 mm) gun adapted from U.S. standards in a fashion similar to the original GC-45 work. The increase in projectile weight gave the new weapon a range of over 50,000 meters with normal ERFB-BB ammunition, making it one of the longest-range artillery pieces in the world. The gun was also purchased by the Iraqis, who mounted it in a self-propelled form to create the Al-Fao.

The Denel G5 version has also seen continued development. The gun has been placed on an OMC 6x6 chassis as the G6 howitzer, and won major export sales to the United Arab Emirates and Oman. In response to an Indian requirement, the G5 was mounted on a 4x4 truck, resulting in the T5, though none had been ordered. It is also fitted into a turret that can fit on any suitable vehicle. The turret is marketed as the T6 which has already been fitted on the T-72. Denel also used the basic ERFB ammunition concept to develop a 105 mm gun, the G7 howitzer, which allows artillery to be downsized to improve mobility.

Bharat Forge, an Indian firm of Kalyani Group, has recently purchased Noricum and brought the entire manufacturing workshop to India. It has made Bharat-52, a 52 caliber variant of the 155mm howitzer to meet the Indian Army&#x27;s long delayed field artillery requirement.

==Operators==
===Current operators===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==See also==
* List of artillery

==References==
==External links==
*Jane&#x27;s Defence info on GC-45
*A general survey of recent artillery developments</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3655446" start="4" end="9" title="GC-45 howitzer" label="GC-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019825" start="33" end="40" title="Caliber (artillery)" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="60" end="68" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q364988" start="81" end="92" title="Gerald Bull" label="Gerald Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572472" start="100" end="126" title="Space Research Corporation" label="Space Research Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="296" end="300" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="497" end="513" title="Persian Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206023" start="662" end="718" title="DRDC Valcartier" label="Canadian Armament Research and Development Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322029" start="740" end="752" title="Project HARP" label="Project HARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q920165" start="822" end="837" title="muzzle velocity" label="muzzle velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="928" end="939" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="970" end="977" title="rifling" label="rifling"/>
<link wikidata="Q253898" start="997" end="1009" title="driving band" label="driving band"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1338" end="1344" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1415" end="1440" title="Rifling#Extended range, full bore" label="Extended Range, Full Bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="1541" end="1545" title="drag coefficient" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="1549" end="1559" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q809816" start="1609" end="1619" title="base bleed" label="base bleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="1742" end="1748" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q840773" start="1883" end="1895" title="muzzle brake" label="muzzle brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246885" start="2107" end="2121" title="Probable error" label="Probable error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388247" start="2479" end="2484" title="FH-70" label="FH-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353870" start="2604" end="2619" title="M107 (projectile)" label="M107 projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187008" start="3057" end="3070" title="Denel" label="Denel SOC Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="3316" end="3329" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q908333" start="3343" end="3363" title="auxiliary power unit" label="auxiliary power unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="3373" end="3383" title="hydraulics" label="hydraulics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388247" start="3517" end="3522" title="FH-70" label="FH-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="3535" end="3542" title="Vickers" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121785" start="3663" end="3696" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 418" label="arms embargo against South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="3783" end="3810" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="3903" end="3924" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Carter administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="3990" end="4010" title="South Africa under apartheid" label="apartheid government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331518" start="4033" end="4045" title="United States Customs Service" label="U.S. Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="4164" end="4175" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="4459" end="4467" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685228" start="4513" end="4520" title="Armscor (South Africa)" label="Armscor"/>
<link wikidata="Q392144" start="4628" end="4630" title="G5 howitzer" label="G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479591" start="4719" end="4741" title="Ordnance QF 25 pounder" label="Ordnance QF 25 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="4772" end="4776" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q10284326" start="4782" end="4837" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q386051" start="4852" end="4868" title="Battle of Cuito Cuanavale" label="Angolan conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906883" start="4910" end="4917" title="Maschinenfabrik Liezen und Gießerei" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q689750" start="4967" end="4979" title="Voestalpine" label="Voest-Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427907" start="5322" end="5337" title="Royal Thai Navy" label="Royal Thai Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007425" start="5549" end="5558" title="FH-88" label="ODE FH-88"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210689" start="5579" end="5590" title="WAC-21" label="PLL01/WA021"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="5668" end="5697" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q119476" start="5861" end="5867" title="PLZ-45" label="PLZ-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="6147" end="6153" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="6158" end="6170" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="6200" end="6204" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="6274" end="6287" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="6303" end="6306" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="6589" end="6595" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238116" start="6650" end="6664" title="Noricum affair" label="Noricum affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="6874" end="6887" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292297" start="7351" end="7363" title="130 mm towed field gun M1954 (M-46)" label="130 mm M-46s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="7407" end="7421" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708479" start="7453" end="7468" title="Project Babylon" label="future ventures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7527" end="7552" title="Gerald Bull#Assassination" label="Bull&amp;#x27;s assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="7576" end="7582" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7611" end="7625" title="Gerald Bull#Possible assassins" label="prime suspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="7761" end="7780" title="command and control (military)" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q328978" start="8087" end="8116" title="M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System" label="Multiple Launch Rocket System"/>
<link wikidata="Q712918" start="8125" end="8145" title="counter-battery fire" label="counter-battery fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509210" start="8878" end="8884" title="Al-Fao" label="Al-Fao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483977" start="8975" end="8978" title="Land Systems OMC" label="OMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="8979" end="8982" title="four wheel drive" label="6x6"/>
<link wikidata="Q391924" start="8998" end="9009" title="G6 howitzer" label="G6 howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="9045" end="9065" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="9070" end="9074" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="9340" end="9344" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q260812" start="9425" end="9436" title="G7 howitzer" label="G7 howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901117" start="9499" end="9511" title="Bharat Forge" label="Bharat Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354966" start="9531" end="9544" title="Kalyani Group" label="Kalyani Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852124" start="9645" end="9654" title="Bharat-52" label="Bharat-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="9711" end="9722" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272708" start="9841" end="9858" title="List of artillery" label="List of artillery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498953" wikidata="Q731607" url="?curid=498953" title="Battiadae">
<text>The Battiadae, or Battiads (), were the ruling dynasty of the Greek city-state of Cyrene, in modern Libya. Battus I, who founded Cyrene in 631 BC, was also the founder of the dynasty. The Battiads were overthrown in 440 BC.

== List of members ==
&quot;The kings of Cyrene are shown in bold, all dates BC.&quot;
* Battus I (c. 631–600 BC), founder of Cyrene.
* Arcesilaus I (c. 600–583 BC), son of Battus I.
* Battus II &quot;the Blessed&quot; (c. 583–560 BC), son of Arcesilaus I.
* Arcesilaus II &quot;the Cruel&quot; (c. 560–550 BC), son of Battus II.
* Perseus, younger brother of Arcesilaus II, he rebelled against him and left Cyrene to found Barke in c.560 with three other brothers.
* Zacynthius, younger brother of Arcesilaus II, he rebelled against him and left Cyrene to found Barke in c.560 with three other brothers.
* Aristomedon, younger brother of Arcesilaus II, he rebelled against him and left Cyrene to found Barke in c.560 with three other brothers.
* Lycus, younger brother of Arcesilaus II, he rebelled against him and left Cyrene to found Barke in c.560 with three other brothers.
* Learchus, younger brother of Arcesilaus II. Unlike his other brothers, he remained in Cyrene, but murdered Arcesilaus II and ruled as regent. He was murdered by Eryxo, Arcesilaus II&#x27;s widow. According to Plutarch, he was only a friend of Arcesilaus II.
* Eryxo, wife of Arcesilaus II, she murdered Learchus.
* Battus III &quot;the Lame&quot; (c. 550–530 BC). During his reign, most of the royal prerogatives were transferred to citizens by the reformer Demonax of Mantinea.
* Pheretima, wife of Battus III, mother of Arcesilaus III.
* Arcesilaus III (c. 530–515 BC), son of Battus III and Pheretima.
* Battus IV (c. 515–465 BC)
* Arcesilaus IV (c. 465–440 BC)

A famous descendant of Battus and thus one of the Battiadae was Callimachus, the Greek poet whose style was a chief inspiration for the Latin Neoteroi.

==References==
== Bibliography ==

* David Asheri, Alan Lloyd, Aldo Corcella, &quot;A Commentary on Herodotus Books I-IV&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2007. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q731607" start="4" end="13" title="Battiadae" label="Battiadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q731607" start="18" end="26" title="Battiadae" label="Battiads"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="68" end="78" title="Polis" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="82" end="88" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="100" end="105" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q409834" start="314" end="322" title="Battus I of Cyrene" label="Battus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q673432" start="361" end="373" title="Arcesilaus I of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q705386" start="410" end="419" title="Battus II of Cyrene" label="Battus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q673458" start="484" end="497" title="Arcesilaus II of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11931282" start="1106" end="1114" title="Learchus (regicide)" label="Learchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="1315" end="1323" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396560" start="1366" end="1371" title="Eryxo" label="Eryxo"/>
<link wikidata="Q811035" start="1421" end="1431" title="Battus III of Cyrene" label="Battus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256238" start="1564" end="1571" title="Demonax (lawmaker)" label="Demonax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181463" start="1587" end="1596" title="Pheretima (Cyrenaean queen)" label="Pheretima"/>
<link wikidata="Q673451" start="1646" end="1660" title="Arcesilaus III of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q811036" start="1713" end="1722" title="Battus IV of Cyrene" label="Battus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q673475" start="1741" end="1754" title="Arcesilaus IV of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="1836" end="1847" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="1859" end="1863" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q266459" start="1914" end="1922" title="Neoteroi" label="Neoteroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129881" start="1962" end="1974" title="David Asheri" label="David Asheri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498958" wikidata="Q30701870" url="?curid=498958" title="Formal sum">
<text>In mathematics, a formal sum, formal series, or formal linear combination may be:
*In group theory, an element of a free abelian group, a sum of finitely many elements from a given basis set multiplied by integer coefficients.
*In linear algebra, an element of a vector space, a sum of finitely many elements from a given basis set multiplied by real, complex, or other numerical coefficients.
*In the study of series (mathematics), a sum of an infinite sequence of numbers or other quantities, considered as an abstract mathematical object regardless of whether the sum converges.
*In the study of power series, a sum of infinitely many monomials with distinct positive integer exponents, again considered as an abstract object regardless of convergence.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1454111" start="116" end="134" title="free abelian group" label="free abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="263" end="275" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="411" end="431" title="series (mathematics)" label="series (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="599" end="611" title="power series" label="power series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498959" wikidata="Q208609" url="?curid=498959" title="Orsha">
<text>Orsha (; , ; ) is a city in Vitebsk Region, Belarus. It is situated on the fork of the Dnieper River and Arshytsa River, and it serves as the administrative center of Orsha District. As of 2024, it has a population of 102,759.

==History==

Orsha was first mentioned in 1067 as Rsha, making it one of the oldest towns in Belarus. The town was named after the river, which was originally also named Rsha, probably from a Baltic root *&quot;rus&quot; &#x27;slowly flowing.&#x27;

In 1320, Orsha became a part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Between 1398–1407, the Orsha castle was built. On 8 September 1514 the famous Battle of Orsha occurred, between allied Grand Duchy of Lithuania with Kingdom of Poland and Muscovite army. The Muscovites suffered significant defeat; however, the victorious Grand Duchy of Lithuania did not fully avail its victory.

In 1555, Mikołaj &quot;the Black&quot; Radziwiłł founded a Calvinist (Protestant) order in Orsha, one of the first in the Belarusian lands. From the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries Orsha was a notable religious centre, with dozens of Orthodox, Protestant and Catholic churches and orders. The town was also home to a large Jewish population.

Orsha was granted Magdeburg Rights in 1620. In 1630, Spiridon Sobol opened the first printing house at the Kuciejna monastery, which became a well-known centre of Cyrillic-alphabet publishing. The town was damaged during the Russo-Polish War (1654-1667), which was a disaster for the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. During the First Polish partition the city was taken over by the Russian Empire in 1772, and became part of the Mogilyov Gubernia. Under Russian rule, it was stripped of its Magdeburg Rights in 1776 and went into cultural and economic decline. The population dropped sharply to just about 2,000 inhabitants. The city symbol in 1781 was changed to one which included the symbol of the Russian empire and five arrows.

In 1812, the city was badly burned during Napoleon&#x27;s invasion. At the time of Orsha had been taken under control of French troops, there was a French writer Marie-Henri Beyle (also known under the pen name Stendhal) in a rank of intendant.
According to the census of 1897, on a total population of 13,161, about 7,000 are Jews.
During the First World War, the city was occupied by German forces in February–October 1918. From 2 February 1919, Orsha became a part of Homyel region (Vitebsk region, 1920) of Soviet Russia. After the formation of the Soviet Union, it was transferred to the Byelorussian SSR in 1924.

The population before World War II was about 37,000. The city was occupied by Germany on 16 July 1941. The occupiers founded several concentration camps in the city, where an estimated 19,000 people were killed.
Orsha was one of the centers of the Belarusian strikes in April 1991. Hundreds of thousands of coal miners had been on strike across the Soviet Union since March 1. On April 3, the day after the central government had imposed consumer price increases, workers at several Minsk factories walked out raising the miners&#x27; demand for wages indexed to inflation. Virtually the entire labor force of that city followed on the 4th, joined soon thereafter by strikes across the Belarusian SSR. Mass demonstrations voted for additional demands (including the dissolution of the Union and Belarusian governments and the end of the Communist Party&#x27;s privileges) and elected delegates from each enterprise to citywide strike committees, which in turn sent representatives to a central Belarusian Strike Committee (SKB). On April 23, the SKB resumed the general strike after the deadline for its demands to be met had passed. The next morning, Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and leaders of eight of the other Soviet republics published a joint declaration in the papers agreeing to democratic elections for the Soviet parliament and the presidency, a new union treaty that would &quot;radically increase the role of the union republics,&quot; and measures to soften the impact of the price increase, but also the introduction of a &quot;special work regime&quot; in many industries.

In response, the Orsha strike committee issued a proposal for all local workers to block the railway junction, strategically located on the line linking Moscow and Leningrad to Eastern and Western Europe. This was quickly endorsed by votes to &quot;lie down on the rails&quot; at a citywide meeting at the railway station. On the 25th, the Belarusian authorities concentrated the republic&#x27;s KGB and riot police forces on Orsha, but were resisted by the strikers who sent fuel trains primed to explode down the tracks. Gorbachev mobilized the nearby military forces in Pskov with instructions to restore order over the railway; however many officers declared their refusal to comply, and brigade commander Gennady Sidorov professed a &quot;lack of understanding&quot; of the mission. Meanwhile, workers in other cities throughout Belarus held rallies threatening to retaliate if a drop of blood was shed in Orsha.
Fearing a clash, and seizing on the government&#x27;s offer to negotiate with its representatives and grant it radio and air time, the SKB suspended the general strike that evening.

===Sports===
The bandy club Start has produced players for the Belarus national bandy team.

=== Population change ===
* 16th-17th century: est. 5,000
* 1776: less than 2,000
* 1939: 37,000
* 1970: 100,000
* 2004: 125,000

==Climate==
== Transportation ==
Orsha became an important transportation center after the construction of a Dnieper River port. The coming of railway lines in the second half of the nineteenth century greatly contributed to the city growth:

* 1871: Moscow–Minsk–Brest
* 1902: Zhlobin–Mogilev–Vitebsk
* 1923: Orsha-Krychaw
* 1927: Orsha-Lepel

Today, Orsha is a major railway node where the Minsk–Moscow crosses the northern Vitebsk line, which branches south to Mogilev and Krychaw. All trains from Moscow and Saint-Petersburg bound for Western Europe pass through Orsha.

The city is also a junction of the important motorways: The M1 (E30) Moscow-Brest and the M8/M20 (E95) Saint Petersburg - Odessa.

== Military ==
OSGOEINT reported on the 571st Aircraft Repair Plant (ARP) located at Orsha Airfield (Balbasovo Air Base). Accordingly, the 571st ARP repairs Mi-8-17 HIP, Mi-24-35 HIND, as well as the Tu-134 CRUSTY and possibly the IL-76 CANDID. The report goes on to mention recent investment agreements with Ukraine where private firms planned on providing $12 million to finance facility upgrades during the 2012-2016 period. Press reporting stated that the investors planned on building a modern warehouse terminal as well as office buildings for customs services, banking, and a leasing company.

==Notable people==
*Francis Dzierozynski, Jesuit
* Piotra Holub (Golub Petr Semionovich) (1913–1953), artist, author of many well-known Soviet propaganda posters, such as &quot;Болтун находка для шпиона&quot; and many others
* Uladzimir Karatkievich, Belarusian writer
* Mikhail Marynich, opposition politician, who was imprisoned in Orsha 
* Georgy Mondzolevsky, 2-time Olympic volleyball champion
* Gershon Shufman, Hebrew author, known as &#x27;Gimel Shufman&#x27;
* Frida Vigdorova, Soviet writer and journalist, famous for writing &quot;White book&quot; after Joseph Brodsky trial, in support of human rights in USSR (:ru:Вигдорова, Фрида Абрамовна)
* Lev Vygotsky (1896–1934), psychologist 
* Nathan Zarkhi (1900–1935), Soviet playwright and film writer
* Faina Chiang, became first lady of the Republic of China in 1978.
* Igor Zhelezovsky, Olympic medalist speed skater
* Alina Talay (born 1989), track and field athlete
* Vyacheslav Zarenkov (born 1951), Belarusian entrepreneur

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Orsha is twinned with:

* Asha, Russia
* Bălți, Moldova
* Bondeno, Italy
* Cherkasy, Ukraine
* Dubna, Russia
* Gagarin, Russia
* Ivanovo, Russia
* Ivanteyevka, Russia
* Kardymovsky District, Russia
* Koptevo (Moscow), Russia
* Krasnogvardeysky (Saint Petersburg), Russia
* Mārupe, Latvia

* Pernik, Bulgaria
* Pushkin, Russia
* Qingdao, China
* Shishou, China
* Silifke, Turkey
* Smolensk, Russia
* Spitak, Armenia
* Telšiai, Lithuania
* Tver, Russia
* Vaulx-en-Velin, France
* Volgodonsk, Russia
* Vyazma, Russia
* Yiwu, China
* Zapadnoye Degunino (Moscow), Russia
==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==

* RUPE &quot;Machine-tool plant &quot;Krasny borets&quot;
* Orsha - city
* Photos on Radzima.org
* Map of Orsha
* Memories from a childhood in Orsha
* Jewish Encyclopedia
* Орша - город мой! Orsha is my city
* Travel Guide to Orsha
* Belarus tries to raise restive Orsha from the ashes Belarus Digest</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208609" start="0" end="5" title="Orsha" label="Orsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q185700" start="28" end="42" title="Vitebsk Region" label="Vitebsk Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="44" end="51" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="87" end="100" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105" end="113" title="Arshytsa" label="Arshytsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245303" start="167" end="181" title="Orsha District" label="Orsha District"/>
<link wikidata="Q33136" start="420" end="426" title="Baltic languages" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="514" end="538" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207310" start="618" end="633" title="Battle of Orsha" label="Battle of Orsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="659" end="683" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="689" end="706" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="711" end="720" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q967015" start="863" end="902" title="Mikołaj &amp;quot;the Black&amp;quot; Radziwiłł" label="Mikołaj &amp;quot;the Black&amp;quot; Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="913" end="922" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1179" end="1182" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="1217" end="1233" title="Magdeburg Rights" label="Magdeburg Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470628" start="1252" end="1266" title="Spiridon Sobol" label="Spiridon Sobol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1306" end="1314" title="Kuciejna" label="Kuciejna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1362" end="1379" title="Cyrillic-alphabet" label="Cyrillic-alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="1424" end="1452" title="Russo-Polish War (1654-1667)" label="Russo-Polish War (1654-1667)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="1520" end="1542" title="Partitions of Poland" label="First Polish partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1574" end="1588" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154835" start="1621" end="1629" title="Mogilev" label="Mogilyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q86622" start="1630" end="1638" title="Guberniya" label="Gubernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1893" end="1907" title="Russian empire" label="Russian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="1968" end="1992" title="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s Invasion of Russia" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="2088" end="2105" title="Marie-Henri Beyle" label="Marie-Henri Beyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="2128" end="2136" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="2137" end="2145" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="2160" end="2169" title="intendant" label="intendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2270" end="2285" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="2437" end="2450" title="Russian SFSR" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="2519" end="2535" title="Byelorussian SSR" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2568" end="2580" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q106352136" start="2794" end="2812" title="1991 Belarusian strikes" label="Belarusian strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="3029" end="3034" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="3383" end="3405" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="3698" end="3707" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="3709" end="3716" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="3752" end="3768" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="4280" end="4286" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="4291" end="4300" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218" start="4700" end="4705" title="Pskov Oblast" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="5245" end="5250" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5256" end="5261" title="Start (Orsha bandy club)" label="Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576699" start="5291" end="5318" title="Belarus national bandy team" label="Belarus national bandy team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="5594" end="5601" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5702" end="5708" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="5709" end="5714" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="5715" end="5720" title="Brest, Belarus" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q837765" start="5729" end="5736" title="Zhlobin" label="Zhlobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154835" start="5737" end="5744" title="Mogilev" label="Mogilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q102217" start="5745" end="5752" title="Vitebsk" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q954914" start="5767" end="5774" title="Krychaw" label="Krychaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q954132" start="5789" end="5794" title="Lepel" label="Lepel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154835" start="5915" end="5922" title="Mogilev" label="Mogilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q954914" start="5927" end="5934" title="Krychaw" label="Krychaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5963" end="5979" title="Saint-Petersburg" label="Saint-Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5990" end="6004" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165682" start="6124" end="6127" title="European route E95" label="E95"/>
<link wikidata="Q24635004" start="6258" end="6276" title="Balbasovo Air Base" label="Balbasovo Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6466" end="6473" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919530" start="6778" end="6798" title="Francis Dzierozynski" label="Francis Dzierozynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="6800" end="6806" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628560" start="6894" end="6911" title="Soviet propaganda" label="Soviet propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q508975" start="6985" end="7007" title="Uladzimir Karatkievich" label="Uladzimir Karatkievich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388490" start="7029" end="7045" title="Mikhail Marynich" label="Mikhail Marynich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660848" start="7101" end="7120" title="Georgy Mondzolevsky" label="Georgy Mondzolevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405013" start="7159" end="7174" title="Gershon Shufman" label="Gershon Shufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110536" start="7228" end="7243" title="Frida Vigdorova" label="Frida Vigdorova"/>
<link wikidata="Q862" start="7323" end="7337" title="Joseph Brodsky" label="Joseph Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7381" end="7411" title=":ru:Вигдорова, Фрида Абрамовна" label=":ru:Вигдорова, Фрида Абрамовна"/>
<link wikidata="Q180819" start="7415" end="7427" title="Lev Vygotsky" label="Lev Vygotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q274363" start="7520" end="7532" title="Faina Chiang" label="Faina Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="7559" end="7576" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267921" start="7588" end="7604" title="Igor Zhelezovsky" label="Igor Zhelezovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q454602" start="7638" end="7649" title="Alina Talay" label="Alina Talay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="7663" end="7678" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q65132750" start="7689" end="7708" title="Vyacheslav Zarenkov" label="Vyacheslav Zarenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104262" start="7804" end="7808" title="Asha, Russia" label="Asha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="7819" end="7824" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q95093" start="7836" end="7843" title="Bondeno" label="Bondeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q157055" start="7853" end="7861" title="Cherkasy" label="Cherkasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135466" start="7873" end="7878" title="Dubna" label="Dubna"/>
<link wikidata="Q134318" start="7889" end="7896" title="Gagarin, Smolensk Oblast" label="Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630" start="7907" end="7914" title="Ivanovo" label="Ivanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q141538" start="7925" end="7936" title="Ivanteyevka, Moscow Oblast" label="Ivanteyevka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638827" start="7947" end="7967" title="Kardymovsky District" label="Kardymovsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366877" start="7978" end="7994" title="Koptevo District" label="Koptevo (Moscow)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142579" start="8005" end="8040" title="Krasnogvardeysky District, Saint Petersburg" label="Krasnogvardeysky (Saint Petersburg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232200" start="8051" end="8057" title="Mārupe Municipality" label="Mārupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351615" start="8069" end="8075" title="Pernik Municipality" label="Pernik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947" start="8088" end="8095" title="Pushkin, Saint Petersburg" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="8106" end="8113" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359319" start="8123" end="8130" title="Shishou" label="Shishou"/>
<link wikidata="Q650630" start="8140" end="8147" title="Silifke" label="Silifke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="8158" end="8166" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q280755" start="8177" end="8183" title="Spitak" label="Spitak"/>
<link wikidata="Q588916" start="8195" end="8202" title="Telšiai District Municipality" label="Telšiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288" start="8216" end="8220" title="Tver" label="Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q13596" start="8231" end="8245" title="Vaulx-en-Velin" label="Vaulx-en-Velin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133175" start="8256" end="8266" title="Volgodonsk" label="Volgodonsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q102307" start="8277" end="8283" title="Vyazma" label="Vyazma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011138" start="8294" end="8298" title="Yiwu" label="Yiwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626861" start="8308" end="8335" title="Zapadnoye Degunino District" label="Zapadnoye Degunino (Moscow)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498963" wikidata="Q7995101" url="?curid=498963" title="White Nationalist Party">
<text>The White Nationalist Party (WNP) was a British neo-Nazi political party, founded in May 2002 as &quot;the British political wing of Aryan Unity&quot;.

==Development==

The party was formed by Eddy Morrison, and Kevin Watmough &quot;a key figure in Combat 18&quot; and webmaster of Redwatch; the new party was effectively the Yorkshire branch of the National Front, and the party conducted most of its activities in Yorkshire. The national youth leader of the White Nationalist Party was Ronnie Cooper, a teen from the South Yorkshire area who was exposed for his fascist beliefs by the &quot;Sunday People&quot; newspaper in 2003. Cooper is now understood to be a serving member of the Royal Navy.

Although largely Yorkshire-based it also sought to expand elsewhere. In 2003 the group applied to march in Glasgow but it was rejected by the city council.

The WNP also sought to campaign in amongst loyalists in Northern Ireland, posting stickers and delivering leaflets in Ballymena, Coleraine, Antrim town and Ballymoney in the run-up to the Twelfth in 2003. The group, which emphasised its anti-Irish republican nature by using slogans such as &quot;hang IRA scum&quot; in its literature, claimed to have 80 members in the province in May of that year. In a move condemned by local politicians WNP flags were also placed on lampposts in Ballymena around the same time. Most of the party&#x27;s stickers and flags were removed by parties of residents organised in opposition by the left wing loyalist Progressive Unionist Party, which publicly condemned racism.

In 2004 the party also revealed plans to host a Blood &amp; Honour music festival in Northern Ireland although a counter-campaign was organised to encourage venues to turn down the booking. The proposed gigs did not take place however.

The WNP was severely weakened in 2004 when the England First Party (EFP) broke away under Mark Cotterill. The WNP had intended to use that name when the Electoral Commission refused to register WNP as an official name; but after a dispute between Cotterill on the one side and Eddy Morrison and John G. Wood (the WNP&#x27;s national organiser) on the other, the EFP group broke away to become a separate, English nationalist, party.

The WNP under Morrison and John G. Wood courted John Tyndall, although he refused to join as he did not feel that divisions were helpful. Eventually Eddy Morrison left the party and with John G. Wood and Kevin Watmough in 2005 formed the similar British People&#x27;s Party.

==Policies and ideology==

The White Nationalist Party&#x27;s inspiration was &quot;unashamedly nationalist socialist&quot; and opposed to &quot;all democracy&quot;. The WP had a list of 32 policies, based on principles which included repatriation, opposition to populism, Zionism and homosexuality, and adherence to David Lane&#x27;s fourteen words. The group is now vehemently opposed to the British National Party, viewing them as race traitors.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7995101" start="4" end="27" title="White Nationalist Party" label="White Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995101" start="29" end="32" title="White Nationalist Party" label="WNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="48" end="56" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="57" end="72" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336679" start="194" end="207" title="Eddy Morrison" label="Eddy Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="213" end="227" title="Kevin Watmough" label="Kevin Watmough"/>
<link wikidata="Q937662" start="250" end="259" title="Combat 18" label="Combat 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q634562" start="283" end="291" title="Redwatch" label="Redwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="327" end="336" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="351" end="365" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="520" end="535" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253247" start="594" end="607" title="The Sunday People" label="Sunday People"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="808" end="815" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="901" end="910" title="Ulster loyalism" label="loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="914" end="930" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q805451" start="976" end="985" title="Ballymena" label="Ballymena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108185" start="987" end="996" title="Coleraine" label="Coleraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130733977" start="998" end="1009" title="Antrim town" label="Antrim town"/>
<link wikidata="Q805450" start="1014" end="1024" title="Ballymoney" label="Ballymoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400710" start="1042" end="1053" title="the Twelfth" label="the Twelfth"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="1100" end="1116" title="Irish republican" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817613" start="1505" end="1531" title="Progressive Unionist Party" label="Progressive Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q607100" start="1615" end="1633" title="Blood &amp;amp; Honour" label="Blood &amp;amp; Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377975" start="1851" end="1870" title="England First Party" label="England First Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767165" start="1894" end="1908" title="Mark Cotterill" label="Mark Cotterill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354978" start="1957" end="1977" title="Electoral Commission (United Kingdom)" label="Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336679" start="2081" end="2094" title="Eddy Morrison" label="Eddy Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730122" start="2099" end="2111" title="John G. Wood" label="John G. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749419" start="2286" end="2298" title="John Tyndall (politician)" label="John Tyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970600" start="2484" end="2511" title="British Peoples Party (2005)" label="British People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="2777" end="2785" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="2787" end="2794" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="2799" end="2812" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q175788" start="2831" end="2841" title="David Lane (white nationalist)" label="David Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q745028" start="2849" end="2863" title="fourteen words" label="fourteen words"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="2908" end="2930" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278981" start="2948" end="2960" title="race traitor" label="race traitor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498968" wikidata="Q7963173" url="?curid=498968" title="Walloomsac River">
<text>The Walloomsac River () from the Native American name, Wal-loom-sac is a tributary of the Hoosic River in the northeastern United States. It rises in southwestern Vermont, in the Green Mountains east of the town of Bennington in Woodford Hollow at the confluence of Bolles Brook and City Stream where it is labeled Walloomsac Brook on maps but is locally known as &quot;The Roaring Branch&quot;. The river then flows west toward Bennington and passes the downtown area to the north. For many years this section was intermittent due to the water having been diverted to power mills in town (ca. 1810). This divergence gave the name Walloomsac to a portion of the river flowing through town on the present course of South Stream. The combined Walloomsac / South Stream joins the Roaring Branch northwest of town. From here the river flows westward as the Walloomsac River and joins the Hoosic River below Hoosick Falls, New York.

==Bridges==
The river is crossed by the following roads / railroads via bridges.

===Vermont===
;Walloomsac Brook
* - &quot;Woodford Bridge&quot;, west of Long Trail/Appalachian Trail trailhead, washed away in flood waters related to Hurricane Irene in August 2011, and another bridge east of downtown Bennington

;The Roaring Branch
* just north of its eastern terminus and SPUI interchange at Route 9 (2 one-way bridges)
*North Branch Street - the bridge there is known locally as the Brooklyn Bridge
*Park Street
*Railroad bridge between US Route 7 and Benmont Avenue

;Walloomsac River
*Benmont Avenue
*Hunt Street foot bridge (washed away in flood waters related to Hurricane Irene in August 2011)
* via the western leg of the &quot;Bennington Bypass&quot;
*Silk Road via the Silk Covered Bridge
*Murphy Road via two bridges at Paper Mill Village including the Paper Mill Village Covered Bridge
*River Road via the Burt Henry Covered Bridge

===New York===
*Cottrell Road in two places
*Caretakers Road
*Factory Hill Road
*Railroad bridges in three places

==Tributaries==
Traveling upstream from the confluence with the Hoosic River, the following tributaries feed the Walloomsac:
*Little White Creek
*Paran Creek
*Walloomsac River (original path through downtown Bennington, name ends at confluence of Roaring Brook and South Stream):
**Roaring Brook
**Barney Brook
**South Stream
***Jewett Brook
***Roaring Branch (of South Stream)
*Roaring Branch of the Walloomsac River (so named on maps from US 7 to VT 9, locally this name continues to Bolles Brook)
**Furnace Brook
***Stratton Brook
***Basin Brook
**Walloomsac Brook (so named on maps from VT 9 to confluence of Bolles Brook and City Stream)
***Bolles Brook
****Bickford Hollow Brook
****Hell Hollow Brook
***City Stream
****Stamford Stream

==See also==
*List of rivers of New York
*List of rivers of Vermont
*Hoosic River

==References==
==External links==
* USGS water flow statistics near North Bennington
* NOAA Advanced Hydrologic Prediction Service, Walloomsac River</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7963173" start="4" end="20" title="Walloomsac River" label="Walloomsac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133035" start="90" end="102" title="Hoosic River" label="Hoosic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="123" end="136" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="163" end="170" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q41507" start="179" end="194" title="Green Mountains" label="Green Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q817921" start="215" end="225" title="Bennington, Vermont" label="Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943692" start="229" end="244" title="Woodford, Vermont" label="Woodford Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004012" start="903" end="926" title="Hoosick Falls, New York" label="Hoosick Falls, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673311" start="1084" end="1094" title="Long Trail" label="Long Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="1095" end="1112" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="1163" end="1178" title="Hurricane Irene (2011)" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515172" start="1710" end="1729" title="Silk Covered Bridge" label="Silk Covered Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132639" start="1795" end="1828" title="Paper Mill Village Bridge" label="Paper Mill Village Covered Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000700" start="1849" end="1874" title="Burt Henry Covered Bridge" label="Burt Henry Covered Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820017" start="2748" end="2774" title="List of rivers of New York" label="List of rivers of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422601" start="2776" end="2801" title="List of rivers of Vermont" label="List of rivers of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133035" start="2803" end="2815" title="Hoosic River" label="Hoosic River"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498969" wikidata="Q551252" url="?curid=498969" title="Daniel J. Boorstin">
<text>Daniel Joseph Boorstin (October 1, 1914 – February 28, 2004) was an American historian at the University of Chicago who wrote on many topics in American and world history. He was appointed the twelfth Librarian of the United States Congress in 1975 and served until 1987. He was instrumental in the creation of the Center for the Book at the Library of Congress.

Repudiating his youthful membership in the Communist Party, Boorstin became a political conservative and a prominent exponent of consensus history. He argued in &quot;The Genius of American Politics&quot; (1953) that ideology, propaganda, and political theory are foreign to America. His writings were often seen, along with those of historians such as Richard Hofstadter, Louis Hartz and Clinton Rossiter, as belonging to the &quot;consensus school&quot;, which emphasized the unity of the American people and downplayed class and social conflict. Boorstin especially praised inventors and entrepreneurs as central to the American success story.

== Biography ==
Boorstin was born in 1914, in Atlanta, Georgia, into a Jewish family. His father, Samuel, was a lawyer who participated in the defense of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory superintendent who was accused and convicted of the rape and murder of a 13-year-old girl. After Frank&#x27;s 1915 lynching led to a surge of anti-Semitic sentiment in Georgia, the family moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma, where Boorstin was raised. He graduated from Tulsa&#x27;s Central High School in 1930, at the age of 15.

Although Samuel wanted his son to go to the University of Oklahoma, become an attorney and join his own law firm, Daniel wanted to go to Harvard Law School. He graduated with highest honors (&quot;summa cum laude&quot;) from Harvard College in 1934, then studied at Balliol College, Oxford, as a Rhodes Scholar, receiving BA and BCL degrees in 1936 and 1937. The American National Biography Online states that he joined the Communist Party in 1938 then left it in 1939, when Russia and Germany invaded Poland. In 1940, he earned an SJD degree at Yale University.

Boorstin moved away from his earlier leftist views. In 1953, after being subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee, Boorstin became a cooperating witness and gave the committee the names of other Party members in his cell. His lectures were later boycotted by some students due to his testimony to the HUAC.

Boorstin was hired as an assistant professor at Swarthmore College in 1942, where he stayed for two years. In 1944, he was hired by the University of Chicago, where he was a professor until 1969. He was the Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions at the University of Cambridge in 1964. He served as director and senior historian of the National Museum of History and Technology of the Smithsonian Institution (now known as the National Museum of American History, Behring Center) from 1969 to 1975. During this period, Boorstin became an active participant in the Republican Party, rubbing shoulders with high-profile politicians such as Spiro Agnew and Henry Kissinger, and speaking at the party&#x27;s national platform committee at its annual convention in 1972. Boorstin served on President Nixon&#x27;s Commission on the American Revolution Bicentennial in 1968-69. President Gerald Ford nominated Boorstin to be Librarian of Congress, in 1975. On April 9, 1941, he married a Wellesley College graduate, Ruth Carolyn Frankel (1917–2013). She quickly became his partner and editor for his first book, &quot;The Mysterious Science of the Law&quot;, published in the same year. In his “Author’s Note” for &quot;The Daniel J. Boorstin Reader&quot; (Modern Library, 1995), he wrote, “Essential to my life and work as a writer was my marriage in 1941 to Ruth Frankel who has ever since been my companion and editor for all my books.” Her obituary in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; (December 6, 2013) quotes Boorstin as saying, “Without her, I think my works would have been twice as long and half as readable.”

Boorstin, with Ruth as his regular collaborator, wrote more than 20 books, including two major trilogies, one on the American experience and the other on world intellectual history. The first trilogy was entitled &quot;The Americans&quot; with three volumes: on the &quot;colonial experience,&quot; on the &quot;national experience,&quot; and on the &quot;democratic experience.&quot; The books were largely celebratory of cultural, social and technological developments in American history, and featured striking story-telling about figures such as Frederic Tudor, the so-called &quot;Ice King&quot; of the early nineteenth century. They exemplified Boorstin&#x27;s attempts to write for a general audience rather than his academic peers.&quot;The Americans: The Democratic Experience&quot;, the final book in the trilogy, received the 1974 Pulitzer Prize in history. Boorstin&#x27;s second trilogy, &quot;The Discoverers&quot;, &quot;The Creators&quot; and &quot;The Seekers,&quot; examines the scientific, artistic and philosophic histories of humanity, respectively.

Within the discipline of social theory, Boorstin&#x27;s 1961 book &quot;The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-events in America&quot; is an early description of aspects of American life that were later termed hyperreality and postmodernity. In &quot;The Image&quot;, Boorstin describes shifts in American culture – mainly due to advertising – where the reproduction or simulation of an event becomes more important or &quot;real&quot; than the event itself. He goes on to coin the term pseudo-event, which describes events or activities that serve little to no purpose other than to be reproduced through advertisements or other forms of publicity. This book also describes the type of false stories that came to be called &quot;fake news&quot; in the 2010s. The idea of pseudo-events anticipates later work by Jean Baudrillard and Guy Debord. The work is an often-used text in American sociology courses, and Boorstin&#x27;s concerns about the social effects of technology remain influential.

Boorstin has been credited with saying, &quot;Ideas need no passports from their place of origin, nor visas for the countries they enter... We, the librarians of the world, are servants of an indivisible world ... Books and ideas make a boundless world.&quot;

When President Ford nominated Boorstin to be Librarian of Congress in 1975, the nomination was supported by the Authors Guild but opposed by liberals, who objected to his perceived conservatism and his opposition to the social revolution of the late 1960s and early 1970s. He was attacked by the American Library Association because Boorstin &quot;was not a library administrator&quot;. The Senate confirmed the nomination without debate.

Boorstin retired in 1987, saying that he wanted to do full-time writing. He died of pneumonia February 28, 2004, in Washington D.C. He was survived by Ruth, his three sons, Paul, Jonathan and David, six grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. David Levy, a history professor at the University of Oklahoma, said humorously in one of his lectures after Boorstin&#x27;s death: &quot;One can only imagine what he might have achieved, if he had only listened to his father’s advice about where to go to college.&quot;

=== Boorstin&#x27;s approach to history ===
Professor Levy delivered a lecture about Boorstin in April 2014 at an Oklahoma University event, the President&#x27;s Day of Learning. He had several observations about Boorstin&#x27;s approach to American history that seem to explain why many contemporary historians opposed his appointment to head the Library of Congress. According to Levy:
* Boorstin believed that the main points of American history were made by what the people agreed upon, rather than what they fought over.
* He emphasized continuities in history, rather than radical changes.
* He distrusted doctrinaire thinking; his writings minimized the role of pure thinkers and emphasized the role of problem solvers.
* He was conservative in politics and his approach to culture, and was revolted by what he saw as vulgarities in American life and advertising.
* He observed the transformative power of seemingly mundane cultural advances as air conditioning, telephones, catalog shopping, canned food and typewriters.

== Smithsonian Institution Career ==
Boorstin became director of the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s National Museum of History and Technology (MHT) on October 1 1969, after its founding director Frank A. Taylor assumed a pan-institutional role as Director General of Museums. Boorstin stepped down as director of MHT in 1973 to assume the position of Senior Historian, &quot;so that he could devote more time to research and writing.&quot; He served the Smithsonian until his 1975 presidential appointment as Librarian of Congress.

As MHT director, Boorstin presided over several landmark exhibitions, including the 1970 show, “Do it the Hard Way: Rube Goldberg and Modern Times,” honoring the illustrator and artist, Rube Goldberg. Boorstin conceived of the exhibition, one of his first as MHT director. At a preview of the show, Boorstin remarked: “There have been exhibits of Einstein and Dr. Salk and Isaac Newton, but the exhibits here show us not only how to enrich and deepen man, but how to amuse him. This show is about the ways we&#x27;ve discovered to give ourselves a headache. It tells us where technology leads us and misleads us, and touches the life of every American. Rube Goldberg foresaw the road to the electric toothbrush.”

One of Boorstin&#x27;s most influential public programs at MHT were the Frank Nelson Doubleday Lectures, which began in 1972 focusing on &#x27;technology and the frontiers of knowledge&#x27; and featured speakers such as writers Saul Bellow, Isaac Asimov, and Arthur C. Clarke, and technologists like Sony&#x27;s founder Akio Morita. 

Completed during his Smithsonian tenure and published in June 1973, &quot;The Americans: The Democratic Experience&quot; was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in early 1974. Boorstin was the first Smithsonian employee to receive the award.

== Impact on the Library of Congress ==
John Y. Cole, in the obituary of Boorstin he wrote for the &quot;American Antiquarian&quot;, credited Boorstin with bringing new intellectual energy to the Library of Congress (LOC), opening the institution to, &quot;the public, to scholars, and to new constituencies.

In 1976, Boorstin held a press conference to announce that he had discovered the contents of President Lincoln&#x27;s pockets when he was assassinated in 1865. They had been in a wall safe in the Librarian&#x27;s office. Boorstin had these artifacts put on public display, where they have become the most popular attraction for tourists visiting the American Treasures of the Library of Congress exhibition in the Library&#x27;s Jefferson Building. He was instrumental in creating the American Folklife Center in 1976, and the Center for the Book in the Library of Congress in 1977.

In 1979, the LOC and the Kennedy Center opened a Performing Arts Library in the Kennedy Center. In 1980, Boorstin set up the Council of Scholars, a new link between the LOC and the world of scholarship. Another major event during Boorstin&#x27;s tenure at the LOC was the construction and implementation of LOC&#x27;s James Madison Memorial Building during 1980-1982. He obtained private contributions to open the Mary Pickford Theater in the Madison Building in 1983. The theater was intended to increase public awareness of the LOC&#x27;s large collection of motion pictures.

In 1984, Boorstin and Architect of the Capitol George White teamed up to persuade Congress to appropriate $81.5 million for rehabilitating two of the LOC&#x27;s older structures, the Jefferson (1897) and Adams (1939) Buildings. In 1986, Boorstin appeared before Congress to oppose legislation that would have made drastic cuts in the LOC budget. His pleas resulted in substantially restoring the proposed cuts. It also resulted in his being called, &quot;an intellectual Paul Revere.&quot;

Overall, Boorstin proved so persuasive that the Federal appropriation increased from $116 million to more than $250 million during his administration.

== Honors ==
His book, &quot;The Americans: The Colonial Experience&quot; (1958) won the Bancroft Prize for best book on history. The Society of American Historians awarded Boorstin the Francis Parkman Prize for &quot;The Americans: The National Experience (1965)&quot;. Boorstin was awarded the Order of the Sacred Treasure, First Class, by the Japanese government in 1986. He received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1986. He was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for writing &quot;The Americans: The Democratic Experience&quot; (1973).

He was a member of both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society.

He was inducted into the Tulsa Hall of Fame in 1989, and received the Oklahoma Book Award in 1993 for &quot;The Creators&quot;. He was posthumously inducted into the Georgia Writers Hall of Fame in 2023.

He held twenty honorary degrees, including an honorary Doctor of Laws from the University of Tulsa and Doctor of Letters from Oglethorpe University in 1994.

== Books ==
* &quot;The Mysterious Science of the Law: An Essay on Blackstone&#x27;s Commentaries&quot; (1941)
* &quot;The Lost World of Thomas Jefferson&quot; (1948)
* &quot;The Genius of American Politics&quot; (University of Chicago Press, 1953) 
* &quot;The Americans: The Colonial Experience&quot; (1958)
* &quot;America and the Image of Europe: Reflections on American Thought&quot; (1960)
* &quot;A Lady&#x27;s Life In The Rocky Mountains: Introduction&quot; (1960)
* &quot;The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-events in America&quot; (1962)
* &quot;The Americans: The National Experience&quot; (1965)
* &quot;The Landmark History of the American People: From Plymouth to Appomattox&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The Decline of Radicalism: Reflections of America Today&quot; (1969)
* &quot;The Landmark History of the American People: From Appomattox to the Moon&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Sociology of the Absurd: Or, the Application of Professor X&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Americans: The Democratic Experience&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Democracy and Its Discontents: Reflections on Everyday America&quot; (1974)
* &quot;The Exploring Spirit: America and the World, Then and Now&quot; (1976)
* &quot;The Republic of Technology&quot; (1978)
* &quot;A History of the United States&quot; with Brooks M. Kelley and Ruth Frankel (1981)
* &quot;The Discoverers: A History of Man&#x27;s Search to Know His World and Himself&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Hidden History&quot; (1987)
* &quot;The Creators: A History of Heroes of the Imagination&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Cleopatra&#x27;s Nose: Essays on the Unexpected&quot; (1994)
* &quot;The Seekers: The Story of Man&#x27;s Continuing Quest to Understand His World&quot; (1998)

==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Diggins, John P. &quot;The Perils of Naturalism: Some Reflections on Daniel J. Boorstin&#x27;s Approach to American History.&quot; &quot;American Quarterly&quot; (1971): 153–180. in JSTOR
* Morgan, Edmund S. &quot;Daniel J. Boorstin, 1 October 1914 · 28 February 2004,&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society&quot; (2006) 150#2 pp. 347–351 in JSTOR
* Pole, J. R. &quot;Daniel J. Boorstin.&quot; in &quot;Past-masters: Some Essays on American Historians&quot; edited by Marcus, Cunliffe and Robin Winks (Harper &amp; Row, 1969). pp to 10-38
* King, Wayne and Warren Weaver Jr. &quot;Briefing: Boorstin and the Emperor&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, May 2, 1986.
* Wilson, Clyde N. &quot;Twentieth-Century American Historians&quot; (Gale: 1983, Dictionary of Literary Biography, volume 17, ) pp 79–85
* Witham, Nick (2023). Popularizing the Past: Historians, Publishers, and Readers in Postwar America. University of Chicago Press.

== External links ==

* United States Library of Congress official site
* founded in 1977 by Boorstin
* &quot;Daniel J. Boorstin Papers, 1882–1995&quot;
* Obituary in &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* Obituary in &quot;The Economist&quot;
* Robert D. McFadden, &quot;Daniel Boorstin, 89, Former Librarian of Congress Who Won Pulitzer in History, Dies&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, March 1, 2004
* &quot;Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture&quot; – Boorstin, Daniel J. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q551252" start="0" end="22" title="Daniel J. Boorstin" label="Daniel Joseph Boorstin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="94" end="115" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542448" start="201" end="240" title="Librarian of Congress" label="Librarian of the United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059939" start="315" end="334" title="Center for the Book" label="Center for the Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="342" end="361" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="407" end="422" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206156" start="493" end="510" title="consensus history" label="consensus history"/>
<link wikidata="Q982698" start="717" end="735" title="Richard Hofstadter" label="Richard Hofstadter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496151" start="737" end="748" title="Louis Hartz" label="Louis Hartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460114" start="753" end="769" title="Clinton Rossiter" label="Clinton Rossiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="1058" end="1065" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q130973" start="1166" end="1175" title="Leo Frank" label="Leo Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="1309" end="1317" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="1336" end="1348" title="anti-Semitic" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="1391" end="1406" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061205" start="1466" end="1485" title="Central High School (Tulsa, Oklahoma)" label="Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="1558" end="1580" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="1651" end="1669" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="1739" end="1754" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="1780" end="1803" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1810" end="1824" title="Rhodes Scholar" label="Rhodes Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878265" start="1843" end="1846" title="Bachelor of Civil Laws" label="BCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033568" start="2046" end="2049" title="Doctor of Juridical Science" label="SJD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2060" end="2075" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="2169" end="2207" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378320" start="2450" end="2468" title="Swarthmore College" label="Swarthmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2538" end="2559" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199081" start="2609" end="2660" title="Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions" label="Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2668" end="2691" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="2751" end="2792" title="National Museum of History and Technology" label="National Museum of History and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="2800" end="2823" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="3296" end="3307" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542448" start="3333" end="3354" title="Librarian of Congress" label="Librarian of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="3396" end="3413" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452758" start="4577" end="4591" title="Frederic Tudor" label="Frederic Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4772" end="4812" title="The Americans: The Democratic Experience" label="The Americans: The Democratic Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576216" start="4864" end="4868" title="1974 Pulitzer Prize" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q599254" start="4869" end="4894" title="Pulitzer Prize in history" label="Pulitzer Prize in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905056" start="4934" end="4949" title="The Discoverers" label="The Discoverers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727998" start="4963" end="4975" title="The Creators" label="The Creators"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155451" start="4992" end="5003" title="The Seekers (book)" label="The Seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990987" start="5124" end="5137" title="social theory" label="social theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479785" start="5299" end="5311" title="hyperreality" label="hyperreality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249769" start="5316" end="5329" title="postmodernity" label="postmodernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457237" start="5576" end="5588" title="pseudo-event" label="pseudo-event"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549308" start="5819" end="5828" title="fake news" label="fake news"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="5901" end="5917" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q298075" start="5922" end="5932" title="Guy Debord" label="Guy Debord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679136" start="6458" end="6471" title="Authors Guild" label="Authors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="6642" end="6670" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="7073" end="7095" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="8404" end="8427" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="8435" end="8476" title="Museum of History and Technology" label="National Museum of History and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542448" start="8844" end="8865" title="Librarian of Congress" label="Librarian of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q505850" start="9054" end="9067" title="Rube Goldberg" label="Rube Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="9215" end="9223" title="Albert Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q200101" start="9228" end="9236" title="Jonas Salk" label="Dr. Salk"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="9241" end="9253" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9654" end="9685" title="Frank Nelson Doubleday Lectures" label="Frank Nelson Doubleday Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="9811" end="9822" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="9824" end="9836" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="9842" end="9858" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q310845" start="9903" end="9914" title="Akio Morita" label="Akio Morita"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9992" end="10032" title="The Americans: The Democratic Experience" label="The Americans: The Democratic Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048580" start="10192" end="10204" title="John Y. Cole" label="John Y. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743795" start="10947" end="10971" title="American Folklife Center" label="American Folklife Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059939" start="10989" end="11008" title="Center for the Book" label="Center for the Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="11071" end="11085" title="Kennedy Center" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161243" start="11364" end="11395" title="James Madison Memorial Building" label="James Madison Memorial Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780512" start="11460" end="11481" title="Mary Pickford Theater" label="Mary Pickford Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886701" start="11672" end="11684" title="George M. White" label="George White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615945" start="11808" end="11817" title="Thomas Jefferson Building" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337907" start="11829" end="11834" title="John Adams Building" label="Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q724144" start="12357" end="12371" title="Bancroft Prize" label="Bancroft Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482142" start="12454" end="12475" title="Francis Parkman Prize" label="Francis Parkman Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066052" start="12564" end="12605" title="Order of the Sacred Treasure" label="Order of the Sacred Treasure, First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="12685" end="12716" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="12743" end="12757" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="12860" end="12897" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="12906" end="12936" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q90688951" start="13105" end="13133" title="Georgia Writers Hall of Fame" label="Georgia Writers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848657" start="13223" end="13242" title="University of Tulsa" label="University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400868" start="13270" end="13291" title="Oglethorpe University" label="Oglethorpe University"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13322" end="13399" title="The Mysterious Science of the Law: An Essay on Blackstone&amp;#x27;s Commentaries" label="The Mysterious Science of the Law: An Essay on Blackstone&amp;#x27;s Commentaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13477" end="13508" title="The Genius of American Politics" label="The Genius of American Politics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13560" end="13598" title="The Americans: The Colonial Experience" label="The Americans: The Colonial Experience"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13620" end="13684" title="America and the Image of Europe: Reflections on American Thought" label="America and the Image of Europe: Reflections on American Thought"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13706" end="13761" title="A Lady&amp;#x27;s Life In The Rocky Mountains: Introduction" label="A Lady&amp;#x27;s Life In The Rocky Mountains: Introduction"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13783" end="13829" title="The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-events in America" label="The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-events in America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13851" end="13889" title="The Americans: The National Experience" label="The Americans: The National Experience"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13911" end="13983" title="The Landmark History of the American People: From Plymouth to Appomattox" label="The Landmark History of the American People: From Plymouth to Appomattox"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14005" end="14060" title="The Decline of Radicalism: Reflections of America Today" label="The Decline of Radicalism: Reflections of America Today"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14082" end="14154" title="The Landmark History of the American People: From Appomattox to the Moon" label="The Landmark History of the American People: From Appomattox to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14261" end="14301" title="The Americans: The Democratic Experience" label="The Americans: The Democratic Experience"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14323" end="14385" title="Democracy and Its Discontents: Reflections on Everyday America" label="Democracy and Its Discontents: Reflections on Everyday America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14407" end="14464" title="The Exploring Spirit: America and the World, Then and Now" label="The Exploring Spirit: America and the World, Then and Now"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14486" end="14512" title="The Republic of Technology" label="The Republic of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14534" end="14564" title="A History of the United States" label="A History of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905056" start="14625" end="14702" title="The Discoverers" label="The Discoverers: A History of Man&amp;#x27;s Search to Know His World and Himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727998" start="14760" end="14812" title="The Creators" label="The Creators: A History of Heroes of the Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14834" end="14881" title="Cleopatra&amp;#x27;s Nose: Essays on the Unexpected" label="Cleopatra&amp;#x27;s Nose: Essays on the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155451" start="14903" end="14980" title="The Seekers (book)" label="The Seekers: The Story of Man&amp;#x27;s Continuing Quest to Understand His World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744777" start="15181" end="15199" title="American Quarterly" label="American Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087079" start="15325" end="15374" title="Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society" label="Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525365" start="15417" end="15428" title="Jack Pole" label="Pole, J. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="15569" end="15585" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15696" end="15714" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077283" start="15805" end="15809" title="Gale (publisher)" label="Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="16178" end="16190" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="16217" end="16230" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343324" start="16239" end="16257" title="Robert D. McFadden" label="Robert D. McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16362" end="16380" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498971" wikidata="Q541283" url="?curid=498971" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy">
<text>The Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show, which was broadcast live on February 1, 2004, from Houston, Texas, on the CBS television network, is notable for a moment in which Janet Jackson&#x27;s right breast and nipple—adorned with a nipple shield—was exposed by Justin Timberlake to the viewing public. The incident, sometimes referred to as Nipplegate or Janetgate, led to an immediate crackdown and widespread discourse on perceived indecency in broadcasting.

The halftime show was produced by MTV and was focused on the network&#x27;s &quot;Choose or Lose&quot; campaign (the year 2004 was a presidential election year in the United States). The exposure was broadcast to a total audience of 150 million viewers. Following the incident, the National Football League (NFL) excluded MTV, which had also produced the halftime show for Super Bowl XXXV, from future halftime shows. In addition, CBS parent company Viacom and its co-owned subsidiaries, MTV and Infinity Broadcasting, enforced a blacklist of Jackson&#x27;s singles and music videos on many radio formats and music channels worldwide. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) fined CBS for an indecency violation of $27,500 and increased it to $325,000. They eventually fined CBS a record $550,000 for the incident, but that fine was ultimately voided by the Third Circuit Court of Appeals in 2011, and a case to reinstate the fine was refused in 2012.

The incident was ridiculed both within the United States and abroad, with a number of commentators opining that it was a planned publicity stunt. The next week, Timberlake apologized at the Grammy Awards ceremony, saying Jackson&#x27;s nipple was accidentally exposed and was meant to be covered by a bright red brassiere. Some American commentators, including Jackson herself, argued it was being used as a means to distract the public from the ongoing Iraq War. The increased regulation of broadcasting raised concerns regarding censorship and free speech in the United States. YouTube co-founder Jawed Karim credits the incident with leading to the creation of the video sharing website. The incident also made Janet Jackson the most-searched person and term of 2004 and 2005, and it broke the record for &quot;most-searched event over one day.&quot; It also became the most-watched, recorded, and replayed television moment in TiVo history and &quot;enticed an estimated 35,000 new [TiVo] subscribers to sign up.&quot; The term &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot; was coined as a result of the incident, and eventually added to the &quot;Merriam-Webster&#x27;s Collegiate Dictionary&quot;.

In April 2021, celebrity stylist Wayne Scot Lukas claimed that the incident was planned by Timberlake, who sought to upstage his ex-girlfriend Britney Spears&#x27; MTV Video Music Awards appearance at which she kissed Madonna. This version of events was bolstered by &quot;USA Today&quot;, which reported in 2018 that Lukas was seen purchasing a sunburst nipple shield the weekend prior to the Super Bowl while allegedly stating to the artist he purchased it from, &quot;OK, watch the halftime show...There&#x27;s going to be a surprise at the end.&quot; In 2015, Lukas had stated that he was not aware of what happened with Timberlake. In the Hulu documentary &quot;&quot;, released in November 2021, former Superbowl director Beth McCarthy-Miller and producer Salli Frattini confirmed that Timberlake was informed of the new choreography by Jackson&#x27;s team 20 minutes before show time after flying into Houston.

==Background and development==

Janet Jackson was the original choice to perform at the halftime show for Super Bowl XXXVI, but the NFL ultimately selected U2 after a group of NFL owners and officials attended the band&#x27;s concert in New York City shortly after the September 11 attacks. In September 2003, the NFL chose Jackson as the headline performer of the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show. Because the event was occurring during an election year, MTV decided that the show&#x27;s theme would heavily focus on the network&#x27;s &quot;Choose or Lose&quot; campaign, which encouraged younger viewers to be politically active and register to vote.

Timberlake had attended Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Rhythm Nation Tour&quot; as a kid, and Jackson&#x27;s energetic dance routines and daring performing style had made a deep impression on him. While Timberlake was a member of pop group &#x27;N Sync, Jackson selected the boy band as the opening act for many dates of her blockbuster &quot;Velvet Rope World Tour&quot;, which helped promote and introduce the then-relatively unknown group and Timberlake to the public worldwide. While on the tour, Jackson further promoted the group by performing with &#x27;N Sync on several dates, including joining the group for a live a cappella duet of Stevie Wonder&#x27;s &quot;Overjoyed&quot;. Following the tour, Timberlake and Jackson became &quot;good friends&quot;, with Jackson also praising Timberlake. Timberlake recreated Jackson&#x27;s &quot;That&#x27;s the Way Love Goes&quot; video with &#x27;N Sync and was inspired by Jackson&#x27;s performing style. When asked who he thought was &quot;the sexiest woman on the planet&quot;, Timberlake had said &quot;I&#x27;ve thought Janet Jackson has nothing but sex appeal, so I&#x27;d probably say her.&quot; Timberlake later asked Jackson to sing backing vocals on &quot;(And She Said) Take Me Now&quot;, a song from his debut solo album &quot;Justified&quot;.

==Incident==
During the halftime show at Super Bowl XXXVIII on February 1, 2004, Jackson performed a medley of hits, beginning with &quot;All for You&quot;, &quot;Rhythm Nation&quot; and a brief excerpt of &quot;The Knowledge&quot;. Surprise guest Timberlake then appeared onstage to perform a duet of his song &quot;Rock Your Body&quot; with Jackson. The performance contained several suggestive dance moves by both singers. As Timberlake reached his final line of &quot;Rock Your Body&quot; (&quot;Bet I&#x27;ll have you naked by the end of this song&quot;), he pulled off a part of Jackson&#x27;s costume; the move revealed Jackson&#x27;s right breast—adorned by a sun-shaped nipple shield—for less than a second, after which the CBS broadcast immediately cut to a wide shot of the stage for a pyrotechnic effect, then to an aerial view of Reliant Stadium.

==Responses==

The baring of Jackson&#x27;s breast during the Super Bowl performance became referred to as a &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot;.

Following the Super Bowl, both MTV and CBS apologized for the incident and asserted that they had no prior knowledge that Jackson and Timberlake&#x27;s duet would involve partial nudity. MTV&#x27;s CEO Tom Freston claimed in an interview with the Reuters news agency that the exposure was a stunt orchestrated by Jackson. However, an MTV representative confirmed that the costume tear was conceptualized by the MTV staff, but added that nudity was not the intended result. The incident was publicly criticized by NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, FCC Chairman Michael Powell, and NFL Executive Vice President Joe Browne. An hour-long MTV documentary titled &quot;Making the Super Bowl Halftime Show&quot; as part of its &quot;Making the Video&quot; series was pulled from the schedule before it could air.

Jackson&#x27;s representative explained the incident, saying, &quot;Justin was supposed to pull away the rubber bustier to reveal a red lace bra. The garment collapsed and her breast was accidentally revealed.&quot; According to &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, CBS required Jackson to make a public apology for the incident. Jackson released a video apology in which she said, &quot;The decision to have a costume reveal at the end of my halftime show performance was made after final rehearsals. MTV was completely unaware of it. It was not my intention that it go as far as it did. MTV, CBS, [and] the NFL had no knowledge of this whatsoever and, unfortunately, the whole thing went wrong in the end. I apologize to anyone offended, including the audience, MTV, CBS and the NFL.&quot; Speaking to &quot;USA Today&quot;, Jackson said she felt humiliated that tens of millions of people saw her exposed breast, but did not feel the outrage was justified. Regarding continued backlash, she responded, &quot;Who knows...Maybe they&#x27;ll get mad at something that I do in my show, but at least it won&#x27;t be new to me, since I&#x27;ve already gone through all of this. But I feel very positive that things are going to work out just fine. Everything happens for a reason.&quot;

Jackson later briefly discussed the incident on &quot;Good Morning America&quot; and the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;. Jackson&#x27;s outfit was designed by famed designer Alexander McQueen, with Jackson later commenting, &quot;I don&#x27;t blame him; he didn&#x27;t rip it. Alexander is so great at what he does—he&#x27;s a genius.&quot; In January 2018, it was revealed that Jackson asked Marcello Garzon to alter the leather outfit she brought to Houston to wear during the halftime show and signed a confidentiality agreement before altering the garment.

In an interview with Australia&#x27;s &quot;Herald Sun&quot;, producer Jimmy Jam revealed Jackson considered writing a song about the incident for her &quot;Damita Jo&quot; album.

Michael Musto of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; commented on the media&#x27;s reaction to the incident, saying, &quot;Janet became a symbolic Joan of Arc to burn at the stake. I actually do think her breast was used as a diversionary tactic — I&#x27;m not sure to distract from Iraq specifically — but it did distract from important issues, from things we actually should be appalled by. The story got an undue amount of attention when the fact is nobody has proved how her breast harmed anyone.&quot; Speaking to Robert Tannenbaum of &quot;Blender Magazine&quot;, Jackson had strong, if guarded, views on the reactions, reiterating her embarrassment at being exposed but argued that there was no sense in complaining about part of a woman&#x27;s body while world events as grim as war and disease occurred. Jackson declared the reaction to the accidental exposure as &quot;contradictory&quot;, noting it to occur in an era where commercials for beer and Viagra are both &quot;very sexual&quot; and &quot;practically omnipresent&quot;. Jackson also said the mishap was &quot;not intentional&quot; and a &quot;costume accident&quot;, also commenting on some media outlets editing her taped apology, saying, &quot;Sometimes they cut out that I said it was an accident...That&#x27;s what the media does, that&#x27;s the way they are because they want it to be told a different way.&quot; In &quot;Glamour Magazine&quot;, Jackson exclaimed, &quot;It&#x27;s hard to believe that there&#x27;s a war and famine going on in the world and yet people made such a big deal about a breast. People said that it was done intentionally to sell records. Do you know what? I have never pulled a stunt. Why would you do that and have your album come out two months later? It doesn&#x27;t make sense.&quot; In the ensuing months, Jackson felt overwhelmed by the hostility towards her. &quot;People think I&#x27;m immune to being hurt by what&#x27;s said. They ask me questions that shock me. Not everybody is as strong as the next person and words can kill. People push you and you start to think can I handle this? But I know I can.&quot;

Immediately following the incident, Timberlake sounded unapologetic for his actions, telling &quot;Access Hollywood&quot;, &quot;Hey man, we love giving you all something to talk about.&quot; Timberlake later released a statement saying, &quot;I am sorry that anyone was offended by the wardrobe malfunction during the halftime performance of the Super Bowl. It was not intentional and is regrettable.&quot; Timberlake also addressed the incident at the Grammy Awards the following week, saying, &quot;I know it&#x27;s been a rough week on everybody. What occurred was unintentional, completely regrettable and I apologize if you guys are offended.&quot; Timberlake gave an additional interview at the Grammy event and stated, &quot;All I could say was, &#x27;Oh, my God. Oh, my God,&#x27;&quot; Timberlake said. &quot;I looked at her. They brought a towel up on stage. They covered her up. I was completely embarrassed and just walked off the stage as quickly as I could. I&#x27;m frustrated at the whole situation. I&#x27;m frustrated that my character is being questioned.&quot;

===Media diversion theories===
Jackson suspected ulterior motives in the media&#x27;s reaction, expressing, &quot;It was just perfect timing to take people&#x27;s focus off of other things. That&#x27;s what happens, and it happened to me.&quot; Comments from Michael Rich, director of Harvard&#x27;s Center on Media and Child Health; Jay Rosenthal, attorney for the Recording Artists&#x27; Coalition; and Simon Renshaw of management group The Firm expressed similar sentiments. The &quot;Boston Legal&quot; episode &quot;Let Sales Ring&quot; likened the incident to being used as a distraction, portraying a news corporation which used the mishap to attract attention over other important events in the media. Daniel Kreps of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; opined, &quot;For the FCC, Nipplegate provided an opportunity to restore order and flex whatever power they had left. Faced with lax broadcast standards for cable TV and satellite radio, as well as the absolute lawlessness of the Internet, the FCC becomes hell-bent on preserving common decency in the family-friendly realm of network television... While the aftermath of Nipplegate starts to fade, the FCC will continue to carry its torch for the next half-decade.&quot; Cynthia Fuchs of &quot;Popmatters&quot; stated, &quot;It behooves TV producers and consumers to focus their attentions on significant &quot;news&quot;, rather than the daily distractions offered up by politicians, performers, professional spinners, and journalists. Janet is not that person you watch on TV. And neither is anyone else.&quot;

===Powell&#x27;s response===
A decade after the incident, former FCC chairman Michael Powell gave his first interview regarding Jackson&#x27;s performance, saying Jackson was treated unfairly and the controversy, including his own reaction, was completely overblown. Powell stated, &quot;I think we&#x27;ve been removed from this long enough for me to tell you that I had to put my best version of outrage on that I could put on. Part of it was surreal, right? Look, I think it was dumb to happen, and they knew the rules and were flirting with them, and my job is to enforce the rules, but, you know, &#x27;Really? This is what we&#x27;re gonna do?&#x27; ⁠&quot; Powell also said the treatment of Jackson, who was lambasted for causing &quot;an outrageous stunt&quot;, was unfair, and commented on Timberlake not receiving the same backlash. &quot;I personally thought that was really unfair&quot;, he said. &quot;It all turned into being about her. In reality, if you slow the thing down, it&#x27;s Justin ripping off her breastplate.&quot;

==Public reaction==

===United States===
In the United States, the exposure of Jackson&#x27;s breast by Timberlake led to much media attention and headlines. The incident was sometimes referred to as &quot;Nipplegate&quot;. The socially conservative media watchdog group Parents Television Council (PTC) issued a statement condemning the halftime show, and called on PTC members to file indecency complaints with the FCC. In addition, the FCC received nearly 540,000 complaints from Americans, with the PTC claiming responsibility for around 65,000 of them. (In its appeal to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, CBS disputed how many of the complaints were filed by individual, non-organized viewers.) Columnist Phyllis Schlafly also expressed criticism of the halftime show in her weekly column. Democratic senator Zell Miller of Georgia, both on the floor of the United States Senate and in an editorial on Salon.com, denounced the halftime show as an example of declining morality in the United States. The day immediately following the Super Bowl, then-FCC chairman Michael Powell ordered an investigation into the halftime show. However, an Associated Press poll conducted nearly three weeks after the Super Bowl found that although 54% of American adults considered the exposure distasteful, only 18% supported the FCC&#x27;s investigation. Film director Spike Lee, speaking at Kent State University at Stark on February 3, called the incident a &quot;new low&quot; in entertainment. Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean called the FCC&#x27;s investigation &quot;silly&quot;, commenting: &quot;I think the FCC probably has a lot of other things they should be pursuing.&quot;

The Super Bowl controversy was also a subject of humor on late-night talk shows. For example, CBS&#x27;s own &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; mocked the incident all week following the Super Bowl. The day after the Super Bowl, host David Letterman joked that he &quot;was happy to see this thing happen ... because that meant for one night I wasn&#x27;t the biggest boob on CBS&quot;. The next day, he also joked that then-president George W. Bush formed a &quot;Department of Wardrobe Security&quot; to prevent further wardrobe malfunctions. On February 4, Letterman opened his monologue by joking about having a wardrobe malfunction and referenced the incident in this night&#x27;s Top Ten List. Jackson&#x27;s appearance on the &quot;Late Show&quot; the following month increased the show&#x27;s ratings 20% from the program&#x27;s usual weeknight opener. Larry King also stated Jackson jokingly gave him a pair of suspenders with open holes around the nipples, commenting &quot;I wore them once, they were cute.&quot;

The halftime show continued to be a subject of discussion in 2005. The parody newspaper &quot;The Onion&quot; ran a lead article on January 26, 2005 entitled &quot;U.S. Children Still Traumatized One Year After Seeing Partially Exposed Breast On TV&quot;. The article&#x27;s satirical target was the nation&#x27;s reaction to the incident rather than the incident itself. On February 1, 2005, exactly one year after the halftime show, the PTC released a report titled &quot;MTV Smut Peddlers: Targeting Kids with Sex, Drugs, and Alcohol&quot;, covering MTV programming during the network&#x27;s &quot;Spring Break&quot; week from March 20 to 27, 2004, accusing MTV of irresponsibly promoting sex, drugs and alcohol to impressionable youth. In response to the report, MTV network executive Jeannie Kedas argued that the report &quot;underestimates young people&#x27;s intellect and their level of sophistication.&quot; On February 6, &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist Frank Rich argued that censorship on television was becoming more prevalent following the halftime show. Examples he cited included PBS editing obscene language out of certain programs such as the British terrorist drama &quot;Dirty War&quot; and more than 60 ABC-affiliated stations (including those owned by the Sinclair Broadcast Group, E. W. Scripps Company, Hearst-Argyle Television and Cox Broadcasting) refusing to broadcast &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot; due to the profanity prevalent throughout the film. (The latter, which would later be ruled by the FCC to not violate regulations, would air on cable afterwards to avoid controversy.) The ESPN series &quot;Playmakers&quot; was also canceled following the incident. A commercial from Budweiser, which depicted a man opening a beverage on the outfit&#x27;s breastplate and tearing it before it was worn, was intended to be aired during Super Bowl XXXIX the following year, but was pulled before its broadcast.

===Canada===
In Canada, where the Super Bowl telecast was broadcast by the Global Television Network, the incident passed largely without controversy: only about 50 Canadians complained about the incident to the Canadian Broadcast Standards Council (CBSC). The CBSC received roughly twice as many complaints about other aspects of the Super Bowl broadcast, including music and advertising issues (though some were expected complaints about Canadian content/simsub issues preventing viewing of the popular US advertisements, which is a common issue among Canadian viewers of the Super Bowl to the present day). Professor Robert Thompson, director of the Center for the Study of Popular Television at Syracuse University, stated: &quot;I know many people in other countries are scratching their heads and thinking &#x27;What in the world is the big fuss over there?&#x27;&quot;

===New Zealand===
New Zealand&#x27;s news outlets re-broadcast the &quot;nipplegate&quot; moment (some in slow motion) with commentary alleging that US ultra-conservatives had made the incident into a major controversy. The nation&#x27;s largest newspaper, the &quot;New Zealand Herald&quot;, ran an op-ed from a New Zealander living in America detailing his bafflement at his US friends, who had expressed outrage at the glimpse of a nipple while supporting their country&#x27;s invasion of Iraq and being fans of the premium cable and adult-rated HBO series &quot;Sex and the City&quot;.

===Legal action===

On February 4, Terri Carlin, a banker residing in Knoxville, Tennessee, filed a class action lawsuit against Jackson and Timberlake on behalf of &quot;all American citizens who watched the outrageous conduct&quot;. The lawsuit alleged that the halftime show contained &quot;sexually explicit acts solely designed to garner publicity and, ultimately, to increase profits for themselves&quot;. The lawsuit sought maximum punitive and compensatory damages from the performers. Carlin later dropped the lawsuit. Three months later, Eric Stephenson, a lawyer from Farmington, Utah, filed a US$5,000 lawsuit in small-claims court against Viacom for false advertising of the Super Bowl halftime show, as he, the father of three young children, claimed that pre-game advertising led him to believe that the halftime show would consist of marching bands, balloons and a patriotic celebration. The lawsuit was rejected because Stephenson should have filed a federal lawsuit or complaint to the FCC, which was already investigating the halftime show.

America Online, the Internet service provider that sponsored the halftime show, demanded a refund of the approximately US$7.5 million that it paid to sponsor and advertise on the halftime show. However, no other advertisers of the Super Bowl had similar demands.
The incident triggered a rash of fines that the FCC levied soon after the Super Bowl, alleging that the context of the &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot; was intended &quot;to pander, titillate and shock those watching&quot; because it happened within the lyrics within Timberlake&#x27;s performance of &quot;Rock Your Body&quot;: &quot;Hurry up &#x27;cause you&#x27;re taking too long ... gonna have you naked by the end of this song.&quot; In addition, the FCC cited a news article on MTV&#x27;s website (MTV.com) claiming that the halftime show would promise &quot;shocking moments&quot; and that &quot;officials of both CBS and MTV were well aware of the overall sexual nature of the Jackson/Timberlake segment, and fully sanctioned it—indeed, touted it as &#x27;shocking&#x27; to attract potential viewers&quot;. CBS, however, argued that the exposure was unplanned, although in later statements CBS asserted that while the exposure was unplanned by CBS, it was deliberately planned by Timberlake and Jackson &quot;independently and clandestinely&quot;. On September 22, 2004, the FCC fined Viacom the maximum penalty of US$27,500 for each of the 20 CBS-owned television stations (including satellites of WFRV in Green Bay, WCCO in Minneapolis and KUTV in Salt Lake City; current CBS owned-and-operated station KOVR in Sacramento at the time was owned by the Sinclair Broadcast Group) for a fine totaling US$550,000, the largest ever placed against a television broadcaster at that time. However, the Parents Television Council and even some of the FCC commissioners criticized the Commission for fining only 20 CBS stations, not all of them, for the halftime show. 66% of respondents to a March 2005 &quot;Time&quot; magazine poll believed that the FCC overreacted to the halftime show by fining CBS.

On November 24, 2004, Viacom paid out US$3.5 million to settle outstanding indecency complaints and stated that it would challenge the US$550,000 penalty related to the incident, on the grounds that the broadcast was unintentional and thus exempt from indecency regulation. In March 2006, the FCC affirmed that the Super Bowl halftime show was indecent, so CBS paid the FCC&#x27;s issued fine in July 2006 in order to take their appeal against their fine to federal court. CBS appealed the fine on September 17 at the U.S. Third Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia.

On July 21, 2008, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in favor of CBS, voiding the FCC&#x27;s fine on the grounds that the enforcement involved a significant deviation from prior practice that was not issued as a clear policy change. On May 4, 2009, however, the Supreme Court vacated and remanded the case back to the Third Circuit for reconsideration in light of the previously decided See &quot;&quot;FCC v. Fox Television Stations&quot; &quot;(2009)&quot;.

On November 2, 2011, the Third Circuit Court ruled 2–1 that its earlier decision was correct, finding that the broadcast was legal under the FCC&#x27;s then-current policy of allowing &quot;fleeting&quot; indecency on the airwaves, and that it was unfair of the FCC to change the policy retroactively. On June 29, 2012, the Supreme Court declined an FCC appeal.

==Other controversies==

===Commercials===
Prior to the broadcast, CBS rejected the MoveOn.org Super Bowl ad &quot;Bush in 30 Seconds&quot; because it was deemed too controversial. CBS stated that it had a &quot;decades-old&quot; policy of rejecting advertisements regarding &quot;controversial issues of public importance&quot;, although MoveOn charged that the networks had previously accepted similar advertisements from other groups. The Super Bowl broadcast contained numerous commercials for erectile dysfunction medicines and advertisements for Anheuser-Busch&#x27;s Bud Light brand featuring a flatulating horse and a dog attacking male genitalia; however, no politically charged advertisements appeared during the telecast. CBS, which also held the rights to Super Bowl XLIV, later aired a commercial during that game featuring then-Florida Gators quarterback Tim Tebow and his mother that discreetly refer to their anti-abortion viewpoints. The ad, sponsored by the religious-owned Focus on the Family, received similar controversy. In a league-mandated policy meant to clear the airwaves of such advertisements, the NFL banned those types of commercials from Super Bowl broadcasts (the league ended an advertising relationship with Levitra in March 2007 as an official league sponsor).

In January 2005, Fox, the network that carried Super Bowl XXXIX under the NFL&#x27;s alternating network contract for the championship game, rejected an advertisement for the cold remedy Airborne that briefly showed the naked buttocks of veteran actor Mickey Rooney.

===Streaking===
Moments after the Jackson-Timberlake tangle, streaker Mark Roberts added to the controversial halftime by running around the field naked except for a G-string attached to half of a miniature football. Part of Roberts&#x27; stunt was broadcast in the United States before players from both teams tackled him, allowing stadium security and police to take Roberts into custody.

===Other performers===
Aside from Jackson&#x27;s exposure, minor controversy was created when rapper Nelly performed his song &quot;Hot in Herre&quot; when a group of female backup dancers all pulled the top-layer of their costumes off, revealing shorter shorts and smaller shirts underneath. Kid Rock appeared in a poncho made from a slit American flag, which he later threw towards the audience. U.S. Senator Zell Miller complained that Kid Rock&#x27;s outfit was a desecration of the American flag.

==Aftermath and effects==

===Censorship and regulation of broadcasting===
The incident had a major impact on the entertainment industry and resulted in stricter censorship of sexual content and nudity in American media. Website Soap Opera Central speculated that the fallout from this incident may have had a subtle effect on daytime television. These television shows are known for &quot;love in the afternoon&quot; and regularly depict romantic couplings; shortly before the Super Bowl, the Procter &amp; Gamble soap operas &quot;As the World Turns&quot; and &quot;Guiding Light&quot; had gone as far as featuring rear male nudity during sexual scenes. After the Super Bowl controversy, FCC commissioner Michael J. Copps stated that it was time for a crackdown on inappropriate sexual content in daytime television, and indicated that he was reviewing whether soap operas were violating the agency&#x27;s indecency prohibitions. In &quot;The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer&quot;, correspondent Tom Bearden reports the excerpts from hearings today on regulating broadcast decency.

Two other major sporting events that followed the Super Bowl that year also changed their respective halftime shows following the incident. At the Pro Bowl, which would be played on February 8 at Aloha Stadium in Hawaii, singer JC Chasez, a member of boy band &#x27;N Sync as was Timberlake, was to sing the National Anthem before the game and perform his hit song &quot;Blowin&#x27; Me Up (with Her Love)&quot; at halftime. However, the NFL did not allow Chasez to perform during halftime due to the sexually suggestive content of his chosen song (even though the game was carried by ESPN, which is not under the content purview of the FCC as it is a cable network, and therefore only self-regulates content as an advertiser-supported service), replacing it with traditional Hawaiian hula dancers. The 2004 NBA All-Star Game also changed its act, despite being broadcast on TNT (which is not bound by FCC content regulations as a cable network), having halftime performer Beyoncé perform &quot;Crazy in Love&quot; instead of &quot;Naughty Girl&quot;, which they feared would incite controversy given its sexual content. Jackson was in attendance at the game, and dressed conservatively. The networks that were to broadcast the 46th Grammy Awards (CBS) and the 76th Academy Awards (ABC), live events scheduled for February 8 and February 29 respectively, enhanced their broadcast delays to accommodate editing of inappropriate video in addition to audio.

&quot;Guiding Light&quot; edited out nudity from an episode that had already been taped. A week later, the show&#x27;s executive producer John Conboy was fired and replaced by Ellen Wheeler. All nine American network soaps began to impose an unwritten rule of avoiding any sort of risqué adult scenes, and in the months following, editors of soap opera periodical &quot;Soap Opera Digest&quot; wrote about how daytime television was losing its steam. NBC also re-edited a scene from an episode of its medical drama &quot;ER&quot; where paramedics were wheeling an elderly woman into the hospital, and her breast could be seen in the context of her injury and treatment. Even as late as Veterans Day (November 11) of 2004, 65 ABC-affiliated stations pre-empted the uncut network presentation of the film &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot; over concerns about the film&#x27;s violent content and FCC regulations. Benjamin Svetkey of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; quoted L. Brent Bozell III and Peggy Noonan associating the mass pre-emption of the film with the halftime show incident. The annual Victoria&#x27;s Secret Fashion Show was cancelled for that year in reaction to the incident.

A petition was filed by a consortium of broadcasters (which included Viacom) and the RIAA over an FCC indecency ruling, regarding fleeting expletives uttered by Bono of U2 when accepting an award at the 60th Golden Globe Awards in 2003. It argued that the FCC had implemented a standard &quot;that would allow it to censor all kinds of things—anything considered blasphemous, coarse or vulgar&quot;, and observed that many radio stations, especially rock-formatted stations, had been engaging in self-censorship by censoring or removing songs from their libraries, so that they would not run afoul of the stricter regulation. Clear Channel Communications removed talk-radio host Howard Stern from several of its large-market radio stations within a month of the incident, citing the raunchy content of Stern&#x27;s show. The FCC fined Clear Channel over allegedly indecent content on the Bubba the Love Sponge radio show. As a result of the incident, some networks established regulations requiring time delays of as much as five minutes for live broadcasts such as awards shows and sporting events. In late 2004, the United States House of Representatives passed a bill to raise the maximum FCC fine penalty from said US$27,500 to US$500,000 per violation; the United States Senate voted to decrease it to US$275,000 per incident, with a cap of US$3 million per day. By June 2006, the two houses reconciled the differences in fine levels, settling for a fine of US$325,000 per violation in the Broadcast Decency Enforcement Act of 2005.

The incident also prompted tighter control over content by station owners and managers. Viacom, at the center of the controversy, also employed the controversial Howard Stern in its radio division (at the time called Infinity Broadcasting). The expanding control on content is said to be a contributing factor that drove Stern away from terrestrial radio and onto Sirius Satellite Radio, and is sometimes credited as the media figure most responsible for introducing a new era in radio. It has also been reported that some teen-oriented awards shows in the summer of 2004 had also been purged of most sexual and profane content that had been perceived as staples in such awards telecasts in the past, including Fox&#x27;s Teen Choice Awards and MTV&#x27;s self-created Video Music Awards. Author Frederick S. Lane stated in an interview with John Eggerton of &quot;Broadcasting &amp; Cable&quot; magazine that the controversy surrounding the halftime show was the primary inspiration for his 2006 book &quot;The Decency Wars: The Campaign to Cleanse American Culture&quot;, which explains moral controversies in the American media over the years.

Beginning with Super Bowl XXXIX in 2005, the halftime show began to be produced by Don Mischer Productions and White Cherry Entertainment; those shows contained classic rock artists who mainly performed songs from the 1970s and 1980s (with a notable exception being Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band performing their 2008 single &quot;Working on a Dream&quot; during the Super Bowl XLIII halftime show in 2009). This practice ended after Super Bowl XLIV in 2010; beginning with Super Bowl XLV in 2011, the halftime performance returned to having pop artists.

In 2012, during the halftime show for Super Bowl XLVI, rapper M.I.A. pointed up her middle finger during her performance. That incident drew comparisons with the exposure of Janet Jackson&#x27;s breast in the Super Bowl halftime show eight years prior. The Associated Press asserted that people learned what M.I.A. did only when reports surfaced in the media and quoted TV critic James Poniewozik: &quot;I had no idea she even did it until NBC issued an apology for it.&quot; NBC blurred the entire screen albeit a second too late to obscure M.I.A. giving the finger. The NFL ultimately sued M.I.A. for US$1.5 million on breach of contract grounds. The lawsuit was settled in August 2014 and the terms of the settlement remained private. As an indication of the reduced level of complaints, only 222 complaints were filed over the incident.

===Sports broadcasting===
Sports would be greatly affected by the controversy. Three weeks later, NASCAR stiffened penalties on use of improper language or gestures including larger fines, loss of points (if it occurred in a post-race interview or after the driver fell out of a race), ejection of a team from the race, or lap penalties (if in-race) under the circuit&#x27;s &quot;detrimental to NASCAR&quot; rule. Johnny Sauter was fined US$10,000 and 25 points a week after the new rule took effect for obscene language in an interview. Later in 2004, Dale Earnhardt Jr. received a 25-point penalty and a US$50,000 fine when he used an obscenity after winning the 2004 EA Sports 500 at Talladega Superspeedway. He lost the championship lead after that incident and lost the championship by 100 points. In 2007, Tony Stewart received a similar penalty after using an obscenity in a post-race interview following his Brickyard 400 win. Kyle Busch, in November 2010, was fined US$25,000 for an obscene gesture caught on ESPN, along with an in-race two-lap penalty, as the gesture was aimed at a NASCAR official.

The NFL also came under some smaller controversies over its telecasts. The FCC received a complaint about Fox&#x27;s telecast of a January 2005 playoff game between the Green Bay Packers and Minnesota Vikings; the complainant alleged that Minnesota player Randy Moss, who scored a touchdown, apparently made movements appearing to moon the spectators. However, the FCC denied the complaint because Moss was fully clothed at all times, and his gestures were shown for only a few seconds, thus warranting that the display was not indecent; game commentator Joe Buck also immediately condemned the act (and additionally, Moss was fined by the NFL). On January 13, 2007, during Fox&#x27;s coverage of an NFL playoff game between the New Orleans Saints and Philadelphia Eagles, the camera cut to the stands, showing for four seconds a shirt with the words &quot;Fuck DA EAGLES&quot; that was worn by a female spectator. That drew a backlash from the Parents Television Council, which filed complaints with the FCC.

During NBC&#x27;s live broadcast of Super Bowl XLIII on February 1, 2009, the five-year anniversary of the original incident, affiliate KVOA-TV&#x27;s analog broadcast feed (the high definition feed of the station was unaffected) over Comcast&#x27;s Tucson, Arizona system was interrupted by an unknown party, when an excerpt of a film aired by adult cable channel Shorteez was broadcast for 30 seconds to local Comcast subscribers just after Larry Fitzgerald scored his fourth-quarter touchdown to take the Cardinals to a 23–20 lead. Afterwards, 10 seconds of an end credit segment from ClubJenna (which, like Shorteez, is owned by Playboy Enterprises) was shown. Comcast offered a US$10 credit for customers who claimed to have seen the incident, and the Federal Communications Commission investigated the cause of the incident. E! Online columnist Josh Grossberg stated: &quot;This almost makes us nostalgic for the days of Nipplegate.&quot;

===2004 presidential election===

Frederick S. Lane argued in his 2006 book &quot;The Decency Wars&quot; that the Super Bowl halftime show controversy influenced the primary focus on &quot;moral values&quot; and &quot;media decency&quot; in the 2004 Democratic Party primaries. Jackson claimed the incident was used in the media as a diversion for President George W. Bush&#x27;s poor approval ratings and the Iraq War, with Bush and First Lady Laura Bush giving public commentary on the incident rather than focusing on other issues.

===Impact on Jackson===
Viacom CEO Les Moonves ordered that Janet Jackson&#x27;s singles and music videos be blacklisted from all of its properties, including CBS, MTV, and its radio station group Infinity Broadcasting. Jackson was intended to appear at the 46th Grammy Awards, which was being held the following week and televised by CBS, but her invitation was withdrawn due to the incident. Jackson was originally scheduled to appear as a presenter for a tribute to Luther Vandross, performed by Celine Dion, Richard Marx and Alicia Keys, and was chosen due to previously collaborating with Vandross on the number-one hit &quot;The Best Things in Life Are Free&quot;. According to &quot;People Magazine&quot;, Jackson &quot;had been slated to speak before the accolade but was being pressured to bow out gracefully—or face being uninvited&quot;, before later being completely barred from attending. However, Timberlake was still allowed to attend and perform at the event. Both Jackson and Timberlake were initially disinvited and later re-invited under the condition that they agree to apologize on air. The majority of the artists at the ceremony were also asked to comment on Jackson&#x27;s incident. Jackson&#x27;s long-time producer Jimmy Jam during a pre-Grammy party &quot;Last time I talked to her about it, she was up in the air about it&quot;, Jam told CNN. &quot;She was literally sitting on the fence about whether she was going to come or not, or whether she was going to sit back and watch it on TV.&quot;.

Jackson had also been cast to play Lena Horne in a movie about the singer and activist&#x27;s life, which was to be produced by ABC, but was forced to resign following the performance incident. A statue of Mickey Mouse wearing Jackson&#x27;s iconic &quot;Rhythm Nation&quot; outfit was mantled at the Walt Disney World theme park resort the previous year to honor Jackson&#x27;s legacy, but was removed following Jackson&#x27;s controversial performance. A spokesman for Disney said, &quot;Considering all the controversy [the performance] drew, we talked it over for a couple of days and decided it would be best to replace hers with a new one.&quot;

The blacklisting affected promotion of Janet Jackson&#x27;s first album released since the incident &quot;Damita Jo&quot;—her eighth studio album. A majority of the reviews for the album, including those by AllMusic, the BBC, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot; focused on the negative backlash suffered by Jackson as a result of the incident but gave favorable reviews to the album itself. Despite the blacklisting, &quot;Damita Jo&quot; was a success and certified Platinum, selling over three million copies worldwide and also receiving a Grammy nomination. Singles from the album like &quot;Just a Little While&quot; and &quot;All Nite (Don&#x27;t Stop)&quot; reached #1 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart. Although the following albums &quot;20 Y.O.&quot; and &quot;Discipline&quot; received positive reception, their performance was affected by the blacklist. However, &quot;20 Y.O.&quot; managed to sell over 1.5 million copies worldwide, was certified Platinum in the US and received a Grammy nomination. Additionally, &quot;Feedback&quot; reached the top 20 pop hit on the Billboard Hot 100, selling one million copies worldwide. Subsequent releases &quot;Make Me&quot; peaked atop the Hot Dance Club Songs and top 20 internationally; &quot;Nothing&quot; reached #1 on the digital pop and music video charts, also considered for an Oscar nomination.

In her first interview since the incident, Jackson appeared on CBS&#x27;s &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; on March 29, 2004, which increased the show&#x27;s ratings over 20%. In April 2004, Jackson poked fun at herself in an appearance on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, first while playing Condoleezza Rice in a skit, nervously answering a question by exposing her right breast (which was pixelated by NBC), and again by viewing a mock home video from her childhood in which her bathing suit top came off in a wading pool, calling it a &quot;swimsuit malfunction&quot;. An NBC spokesman said Jackson was wearing a bra beneath her blouse during the skit. During a performance on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Good Morning America&quot;, the network promoted Jackson&#x27;s appearance as her &quot;first live performance since the Super Bowl&quot;, hinting at the chance of shock value. In 2006, during an interview on &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot;, Jackson upheld her claim that the Super Bowl scandal was an accident.

===Impact on Timberlake===
&quot;People Magazine&quot; stated Timberlake was referred to as &quot;the Teflon man&quot; at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards because the incident did not affect him as it did Jackson. Media coverage overwhelmingly minimized Timberlake&#x27;s role, largely mentioning him only in passing, if at all. In a 2006 interview with MTV, Timberlake said that compared to the huge backlash Jackson suffered, he himself received only about 10% of the blame; and he accused American society of being both &quot;harsher on women&quot; and &quot;unfairly harsh on ethnic people&quot;. Prior to plans for the Super Bowl performance, Jackson and Timberlake had discussed potentially recording a duet for Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Damita Jo&quot; album, as well as a rumored collaboration for a Quincy Jones album, though neither came to fruition. In November 2013, Timberlake performed a cover of Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Let&#x27;s Wait Awhile&quot; on &quot;The 20/20 Experience World Tour&quot; before transitioning into one of his song which was regarded as a sign of affection or apology to Jackson.

Media commentators stated Jackson was treated too harshly by the media and public, while Timberlake&#x27;s career was not affected much by the incident. Shannon L. Holland in &quot;Women&#x27;s Studies in Communication&quot; argued that the media reaction after the incident focused disproportionately on Jackson, &quot;represent[ing] her as a contemporary Jezebel in that her racial and gendered Otherness was often juxtaposed with the &#x27;normalcy&#x27; of Timberlake&#x27;s white masculinity. That is, she emerged in a public discourse as the primary (if not sole) instigator of the lewd act, a scheming seductress who manipulated Timberlake for her own economic gain.&quot; Rob Sheffield of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; stated &quot;Justin isn&#x27;t exactly Mr. Loyalty—he totally left Janet Jackson to take the heat after the Super Bowl.&#x27;&quot; E! Online also commented &quot;Timberlake wasted no time placing the bulk of the blame for the incident on Jackson. And, of course, the woman takes the blame even though the man stripped her. Pathetically typical.&quot; A reporter for VH1 said &quot;JT still gets a side eye for leaving her out to dry.&quot;

One observer claimed &quot;Despite her &#x27;wardrobe malfunction&#x27;—for which we think Justin Timberlake wasn&#x27;t punished nearly as severely for—Janet put on a pretty amazing show.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; noted &quot;[a]fter her right breast upstaged the Super Bowl, she was criticized by the first lady, vilified by media executives and abandoned by her co-conspirator, Justin Timberlake; less excitable commentators suggested she was merely a shrewd publicity-stunt woman with a new album to promote.&quot; Jackson&#x27;s parents, Joe and Katherine Jackson, also expressed concern that Timberlake did not stand by Janet following the incident, commenting, &quot;What I didn&#x27;t like is there wasn&#x27;t one person on that stage, there were two people. After a while, there was only Janet Jackson. That&#x27;s all there was. Janet Jackson&quot;, adding &quot;Janet don&#x27;t pull that thing open herself. He did it. We were surprised that they didn&#x27;t say anything to Justin about it.&quot;

Timberlake would eventually be given a &quot;second chance&quot;, being invited back to the Super Bowl halftime show when he was named headlining act for the Super Bowl LII halftime show in February 2018. During his performance, Timberlake again sang a portion of &quot;Rock Your Body&quot;, but stopped right before reaching the &quot;Gonna have you naked by the end of this song&quot; lyric, saying &quot;Hold up! Stop!&quot; and smiling, as an apparent reference to the 2004 incident. Timberlake&#x27;s halftime show stint, however, received mixed reviews and ratings decline after losing more than 10 million viewers in the United States from the Lady Gaga-headlined edition the year prior.

On June 12, 2009, in an interview with &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, Timberlake stated his biggest regret of the decade was not defending Janet Jackson more after the media backlash. &quot;I wish I had supported Janet more. I am not sorry I apologised, but I wish I had been there more for Janet,&quot; he said.

On February 12, 2021, after social media backlash from the documentary &quot;Framing Britney Spears&quot; aired, Timberlake publicly apologized to both Britney Spears and Janet Jackson in an Instagram post, pledging to &quot;take accountability&quot; and that &quot;I can do better and I will do better.&quot;

==Popular culture==
Pop singer Katy Perry parodied Jackson&#x27;s Super Bowl incident in the music video for her single &quot;Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)&quot; during a scene where Perry&#x27;s breast is accidentally exposed at a school event. Jackson&#x27;s incident is also recreated in Eminem&#x27;s &quot;Ass Like That&quot; music video. The controversy and sexual nature surrounding Miley Cyrus&#x27; performance of &quot;We Can&#x27;t Stop&quot; and &quot;Blurred Lines&quot;/&quot;Give It 2 U&quot; with guest artist Robin Thicke at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards was likened to Jackson&#x27;s performance with Timberlake at the Super Bowl event.

The term &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot; began to be used by various entertainers when describing accidental public exposures or nudity, or revealing outfits. The term&#x27;s frequent usage also led to numerous entertainment outlets compiling various celebrity &quot;wardrobe malfunctions&quot;, with Jackson included in the lists as the most infamous example and originator of the term.

On the April 10, 2004 episode of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, Janet Jackson as Condoleezza Rice is told by Darrell Hammond as Vice President Dick Cheney that she should show her breast at the 9/11 hearings. It appears that she did, with her breast pixellated, but NBC said Jackson was wearing a bra. Justin Timberlake later referenced the incident when ripping off part of Kristen Wiig&#x27;s outfit during an appearance on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 2009. 

The &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;PTV&quot; was written as a parody of the FCC&#x27;s strict measures and regulations following Jackson&#x27;s Super Bowl halftime show performance controversy. A scene from the episode involving the fictional portrayal of an extreme reaction to actor David Hyde Pierce having a wardrobe malfunction at the Emmy Awards was also a recreation and reference to the incident. Jackson&#x27;s performance is again referenced in a brief scene where Peter Griffin is dressed in Jackson&#x27;s Super Bowl outfit and has his breast exposed by Justin Timberlake during the musical number &quot;The Freaking FCC&quot;. The song itself was introduced when Lois called the FCC in response to Peter&#x27;s TV show antics. The episode received Primetime Emmy Award and Annie Award nominations for its subject matter. Jackson&#x27;s performance also inspired the &quot;South Park&quot; episode &quot;Good Times with Weapons&quot;. In the episode, the show&#x27;s creators draw attention to the media and public&#x27;s unnecessary reaction to Jackson&#x27;s brief exposure while disregarding or accepting extreme acts of violence during a scene where the public is outraged when Eric Cartman is seen naked and having a &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot; on stage, while character Butters Stotch is ignored although he is bleeding and severely injured. Several game shows have also mentioned Jackson&#x27;s performance.

Several presenters at award shows have referenced the incident, including Anna Nicole Smith at the first annual MTV Australia Video Music Awards, Dave Chappelle at the MTV Video Music Awards, and singer Alanis Morissette at the Juno Awards. Morissette also commented: &quot;It&#x27;s disturbing and curious to me to see what came of that. We&#x27;re all sexual beings, and if we don&#x27;t let it out organically, we repress ourselves. If we repress anger, it turns to depression. If we repress our sexuality, it turns to pornography and rape. To think that the country was in an uproar because of a nipple.&quot; Comedian Russell Brand referenced the incident when hosting the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards, saying &quot;I can almost guarantee a Janet Jackson-style Super Bowl nip slip.&quot;

==Legacy==
The performance incident made &quot;Janet Jackson&quot; the most searched term, event and image in Internet history. Jackson was later listed in the 2007 edition of &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; as &quot;Most Searched in Internet History&quot; and the &quot;Most Searched for News Item&quot;. It also broke the record for &quot;most searched event over one day&quot;. &#x27;Janet Jackson&#x27; also became the most searched term and person for 2004 and also of the following year. It also set a record for being the most watched, recorded and replayed moment on TiVo. A company representative stated &quot;The audience measurement guys have never seen anything like it. The audience reaction charts looked like an electrocardiogram.&quot; Monte Burke of &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine reported, &quot;[t]he fleeting moment enticed an estimated 35,000 new [TiVo] subscribers to sign up.&quot; Janet&#x27;s Super Bowl halftime incident also coined the phrase &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot;, which was later officially added to the Webster&#x27;s English Dictionary in 2008. In the immediate aftermath of the incident, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; stated &quot;Radio stations rushed to add Jackson&#x27;s new single, &quot;Just a Little While&quot; to playlists on Monday following the incident [...] And &quot;USA Today&quot; reports that jewelry stores and piercing studios are seeing increased customer interest in silver sunburst-shaped nipple shields.&quot;

YouTube co-founders Jawed Karim, Steve Chen, and Chad Hurley revealed that their frustration at not being able to easily find a video clip of the incident and the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, both hot topics at the time, provided the inspiration for the creation of YouTube. The launch of Facebook commenced three days following the incident, in a potential attempt to capitalize on its publicity through social networking.

&quot;Rolling Stone&quot; stated Jackson&#x27;s Super Bowl performance &quot;is far and away the most famous moment in the history of the Super Bowl halftime show&quot;. &quot;PopCrush&quot; called the performance &quot;one of the most shocking moments in pop culture&quot; as well as a &quot;totally unexpected and unforgettable moment&quot;. &quot;Gawker&quot; ranked the performance among the most recent of the &quot;10 Shows that Advanced Sex on Television&quot;, commenting the set &quot;had all the elements of a huge story&quot; and &quot;within seconds the world searched furtively for pictures&quot;, concluding &quot;it remains so ubiquitous, it&#x27;s impossible to look at a starburst nipple shield without thinking &quot;Janet Jackson&quot;&quot;. &quot;E! Online&quot; ranked it among the top ten most shocking celebrity moments of the prior two decades. A study of television&#x27;s most impactful moments of the last 50 years conducted by Sony Electronics and the Nielsen Television Research Company ranked Jackson&#x27;s Super Bowl performance at #26. The incident was the only Super Bowl event on the list and the highest music and entertainment event aside from the death of Whitney Houston. TV Guide Network ranked it at #2 in a 2010 special listing the &quot;25 Biggest TV Blunders&quot;. &quot;Complex&quot; stated &quot;It&#x27;s the Citizen Kane of televised nip-slips—so unexpected, and on such a large stage, that nothing else will ever come close. If Beyoncé were to whip out both breasts and put on a puppet show with them when she performs this year in New Orleans, it would rate as just the second most shocking Super Boob display. Janet&#x27;s strangely ornamented right nipple is a living legend, and so is Justin Timberlake&#x27;s terrified reaction.&quot; Music channel Fuse listed it as the most controversial Super Bowl halftime show, saying the &quot;revealing performance remains (and will forever remain) the craziest thing to ever happen at a halftime show. Almost immediately after the incident, the FCC received a flood of complaints from parents who just wanted their children to enjoy a nice, wholesome three hours of grown men inflicting damaging and long-lasting pain on each other for sport. Halftime shows would never be the same.&quot; Patrick Gipson of &quot;Bleacher Report&quot; ranked it as #1 in its list of the most &quot;Jaw Dropping Moments of the Last Decade&quot;, stating Janet &quot;changed the landscape of live television forever&quot;. Gipson explained &quot;It prompted a million mothers to cover their eyes, fathers and sons to jump out of their seats in shock and numerous sanctions by the Federal Communications Commission, including a US$550,000 fine against CBS. Talk about a halftime show that will be hard to top.&quot; The incident was also declared &quot;the most memorable Super Bowl halftime show in history&quot;, as well as &quot;the most controversial&quot;, adding &quot;you can&#x27;t talk about this halftime show, or any subsequent halftime show from here to eternity, without mentioning the wardrobe malfunction&quot;.

New York City-based production studio Left/Right began developing a documentary on the incident, &quot;&quot;, which premiered on November 19, 2021, nine months after &quot;Framing Britney Spears&quot;.

==References==
;General


;Specific
==External links==
* Regulation: The FCC Indecency Policy, the Bono Rule, and Indirect Regulation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q85804187" start="4" end="36" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show" label="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q431102" start="58" end="62" title="Live television" label="live"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="89" end="96" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="98" end="103" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="112" end="115" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="169" end="182" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="258" end="275" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="338" end="348" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy" label="Nipplegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="352" end="361" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy" label="Janetgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23749400" start="431" end="440" title="Inappropriateness" label="indecency"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="493" end="496" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="535" end="561" title="MTV#Choose or Lose" label="&amp;quot;Choose or Lose&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="741" end="765" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q625210" start="832" end="847" title="Super Bowl XXXV" label="Super Bowl XXXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="909" end="915" title="Viacom (original)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150752" start="955" end="976" title="Infinity Broadcasting" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="989" end="998" title="blacklisting" label="blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1017" end="1024" title="single (music)" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="1029" end="1040" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="1098" end="1131" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="1321" end="1351" title="Third Circuit Court of Appeals" label="Third Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="1545" end="1560" title="publicity stunt" label="publicity stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="1606" end="1628" title="2004 Grammys" label="Grammy Awards ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="1870" end="1878" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028541" start="1947" end="1957" title="Censorship in the United States" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237850" start="1962" end="1994" title="Freedom of speech in the United States" label="free speech in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="1996" end="2003" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q76694" start="2015" end="2026" title="Jawed Karim" label="Jawed Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191405" start="2347" end="2351" title="TiVo" label="TiVo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825093" start="2454" end="2474" title="wardrobe malfunction" label="wardrobe malfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="2555" end="2599" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s Collegiate Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976596" start="2641" end="2657" title="Wayne Scot Lukas" label="Wayne Scot Lukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="2751" end="2765" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="2826" end="2833" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="2881" end="2890" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897586" start="3336" end="3356" title="Beth McCarthy-Miller" label="Beth McCarthy-Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406798" start="3615" end="3649" title="Super Bowl XXXVI halftime show" label="halftime show for Super Bowl XXXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="3683" end="3685" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3764" end="3777" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="3796" end="3816" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="3965" end="3981" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="an election year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4070" end="4084" title="MTV#Choose or Lose" label="Choose or Lose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970414" start="4227" end="4245" title="Rhythm Nation Tour" label="Rhythm Nation Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="4412" end="4424" title="&amp;#x27;N Sync" label="&amp;#x27;N Sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="4447" end="4455" title="boy band" label="boy band"/>
<link wikidata="Q969842" start="4515" end="4537" title="Velvet Rope Tour" label="Velvet Rope World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="4797" end="4807" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="4816" end="4829" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887677" start="4843" end="4852" title="Overjoyed (Stevie Wonder song)" label="Overjoyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072075" start="5017" end="5046" title="That&amp;#x27;s the Way Love Goes (Janet Jackson song)" label="That&amp;#x27;s the Way Love Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="5279" end="5289" title="sex appeal" label="sex appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q513151" start="5463" end="5472" title="Justified (album)" label="Justified"/>
<link wikidata="Q654263" start="5619" end="5630" title="All for You (Janet Jackson song)" label="All for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q931000" start="5644" end="5657" title="Rhythm Nation" label="Rhythm Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q928863" start="5693" end="5706" title="Rhythm Nation 1814" label="The Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050839" start="5798" end="5812" title="Rock Your Body" label="Rock Your Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058864" start="6324" end="6339" title="NRG Stadium" label="Reliant Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825093" start="6457" end="6477" title="wardrobe malfunction" label="wardrobe malfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815866" start="6688" end="6699" title="Tom Freston" label="Tom Freston"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="6733" end="6740" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q935259" start="7016" end="7030" title="Paul Tagliabue" label="Paul Tagliabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="7032" end="7035" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192186" start="7036" end="7044" title="List of chairmen of the Federal Communications Commission" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562548" start="7045" end="7059" title="Michael Powell (attorney)" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="7069" end="7093" title="Executive Vice President" label="Executive Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208827" start="7094" end="7104" title="Joe Browne" label="Joe Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580618" start="7211" end="7227" title="Making the Video" label="Making the Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q13716" start="7433" end="7436" title="bra" label="bra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="8092" end="8101" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="8622" end="8642" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="8663" end="8693" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207939" start="8754" end="8771" title="Alexander McQueen" label="Alexander McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9163" end="9172" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634594" start="9186" end="9196" title="Herald Sun" label="Herald Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063111" start="9213" end="9222" title="Jimmy Jam" label="Jimmy Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q572543" start="9299" end="9308" title="Damita Jo (album)" label="Damita Jo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405921" start="9323" end="9336" title="Michael Musto" label="Michael Musto"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="9346" end="9363" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="9464" end="9475" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="9600" end="9604" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="9863" end="9879" title="Blender Magazine" label="Blender Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="10268" end="10272" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191521" start="10277" end="10283" title="Viagra" label="Viagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="10716" end="10732" title="Glamour Magazine" label="Glamour Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200690" start="11543" end="11559" title="Access Hollywood" label="Access Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="11898" end="11910" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="12812" end="12819" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931373" start="12893" end="12926" title="Recording Artists&amp;#x27; Coalition" label="Recording Artists&amp;#x27; Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734055" start="12966" end="12974" title="The Firm, Inc." label="The Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q308984" start="13015" end="13027" title="Boston Legal" label="Boston Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13259" end="13272" title="Rolling Stone (magazine)" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="13436" end="13444" title="cable television" label="cable TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090081" start="13449" end="13464" title="satellite radio" label="satellite radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="13774" end="13784" title="Popmatters" label="Popmatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="13990" end="13998" title="Spin (public relations)" label="spinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016165" start="15409" end="15435" title="Parents Television Council" label="Parents Television Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q434669" start="15850" end="15866" title="Phyllis Schlafly" label="Phyllis Schlafly"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="15935" end="15945" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187516" start="15954" end="15965" title="Zell Miller" label="Zell Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="15969" end="15976" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="16003" end="16023" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="16047" end="16056" title="Salon.com" label="Salon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="16284" end="16300" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="16499" end="16508" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391919" start="16522" end="16552" title="Kent State University at Stark" label="Kent State University at Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q337470" start="16662" end="16673" title="Howard Dean" label="Howard Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="16888" end="16908" title="late-night talk show" label="late-night talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="17072" end="17087" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193607" start="17206" end="17210" title="Idiot (usage)" label="boob"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="17273" end="17287" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495351" start="17524" end="17536" title="Top 10 list (David Letterman)" label="Top Ten List"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="17699" end="17709" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q618236" start="17957" end="17966" title="The Onion" label="The Onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18802" end="18816" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489205" start="18833" end="18843" title="Frank Rich" label="Frank Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="18965" end="18968" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281108" start="19060" end="19069" title="Dirty War (film)" label="Dirty War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288792" start="19147" end="19171" title="Sinclair Broadcast Group" label="Sinclair Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="19173" end="19194" title="E. W. Scripps Company" label="E. W. Scripps Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040485" start="19196" end="19220" title="Hearst Television" label="Hearst-Argyle Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179898" start="19225" end="19241" title="Cox Media Group" label="Cox Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="19271" end="19290" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="19308" end="19317" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="19485" end="19489" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565853" start="19503" end="19513" title="Playmakers" label="Playmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="19580" end="19589" title="Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="19731" end="19747" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="Super Bowl XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="19822" end="19828" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="19881" end="19906" title="Global Television Network" label="Global Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993672" start="20018" end="20054" title="Canadian Broadcast Standards Council" label="Canadian Broadcast Standards Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="20246" end="20262" title="Canadian content" label="Canadian content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502680" start="20263" end="20269" title="simultaneous substitution" label="simsub"/>
<link wikidata="Q450024" start="20426" end="20441" title="Robert Thompson (professor)" label="Robert Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="20505" end="20524" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="21232" end="21235" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q35791" start="21249" end="21265" title="Sex and the City" label="Sex and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="21344" end="21364" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="21374" end="21386" title="class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="21713" end="21721" title="punitive damages" label="punitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q483000" start="21853" end="21869" title="Farmington, Utah" label="Farmington, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916251" start="21899" end="21917" title="small-claims court" label="small-claims court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371586" start="21937" end="21954" title="false advertising" label="false advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="22124" end="22137" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="22242" end="22249" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="22335" end="22349" title="AOL" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="22355" end="22380" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="23103" end="23110" title="MTV.com" label="MTV.com"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23792" end="23802" title="broadcast relay station#satellite stations" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949492" start="23806" end="23810" title="WFRV" label="WFRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="23814" end="23823" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947666" start="23825" end="23829" title="WCCO-TV" label="WCCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="23833" end="23844" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339773" start="23849" end="23853" title="KUTV" label="KUTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="23857" end="23871" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335318" start="23912" end="23916" title="KOVR" label="KOVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="23920" end="23930" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288792" start="23960" end="23984" title="Sinclair Broadcast Group" label="Sinclair Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="24308" end="24312" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="24922" end="24957" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" label="U.S. Third Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="24961" end="24973" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="25244" end="25257" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907894" start="25258" end="25265" title="vacated judgment" label="vacated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440072" start="25379" end="25421" title="Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations (2009)" label="&amp;quot;FCC v. Fox Television Stations&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122130" start="25901" end="25914" title="Super Bowl advertising" label="Super Bowl ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001441" start="25921" end="25939" title="Bush in 30 Seconds" label="Bush in 30 Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="26304" end="26324" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="26358" end="26372" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830767" start="26380" end="26389" title="Bud Light" label="Bud Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="26408" end="26419" title="flatulence" label="flatulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="26451" end="26460" title="genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="26574" end="26589" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461394" start="26648" end="26662" title="Florida Gators football" label="Florida Gators"/>
<link wikidata="Q517467" start="26675" end="26684" title="Tim Tebow" label="Tim Tebow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="26731" end="26744" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435085" start="26798" end="26817" title="Focus on the Family" label="Focus on the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q424161" start="27049" end="27056" title="Levitra" label="Levitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="27121" end="27124" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698432" start="27291" end="27299" title="Airborne (dietary supplement)" label="Airborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="27356" end="27369" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064754" start="27433" end="27441" title="Streaking" label="streaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355858" start="27442" end="27454" title="Mark Roberts (streaker)" label="Mark Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426205" start="27538" end="27546" title="G-string" label="G-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q218992" start="27865" end="27870" title="Nelly" label="Nelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473839" start="27896" end="27908" title="Hot in Herre" label="Hot in Herre"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="28057" end="28065" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="28104" end="28117" title="Flag of the United States" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q187516" start="28175" end="28186" title="Zell Miller" label="Zell Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243465" start="28594" end="28612" title="daytime television" label="daytime television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691855" start="28657" end="28678" title="Love in the Afternoon (advertising campaign)" label="love in the afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="28761" end="28781" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="28782" end="28792" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="28800" end="28818" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="28835" end="28848" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957889" start="28974" end="28990" title="Michael J. Copps" label="Michael J. Copps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118447" start="29208" end="29236" title="PBS NewsHour" label="The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="29492" end="29500" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697292" start="29541" end="29554" title="Aloha Stadium" label="Aloha Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q538409" start="29573" end="29582" title="JC Chasez" label="JC Chasez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="29653" end="29668" title="Star-Spangled Banner" label="National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928585" start="29716" end="29750" title="Blowin&amp;#x27; Me Up (with Her Love)" label="Blowin&amp;#x27; Me Up (with Her Love)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321220" start="29760" end="29768" title="halftime" label="halftime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536984" start="30148" end="30170" title="2004 NBA All-Star Game" label="2004 NBA All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="30220" end="30223" title="TNT (U.S. TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="30318" end="30325" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q148511" start="30340" end="30353" title="Crazy in Love" label="Crazy in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q149050" start="30377" end="30389" title="Naughty Girl (Beyoncé song)" label="Naughty Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="30573" end="30591" title="46th Grammy Awards" label="46th Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q458646" start="30606" end="30625" title="76th Academy Awards" label="76th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="30920" end="30938" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226834" start="30939" end="30950" title="John Conboy" label="John Conboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790083" start="30977" end="30990" title="Ellen Wheeler" label="Ellen Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549799" start="31171" end="31188" title="Soap Opera Digest" label="Soap Opera Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="31252" end="31255" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207375" start="31322" end="31324" title="ER (TV series)" label="ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q755999" start="31487" end="31499" title="Veterans Day (United States)" label="Veterans Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456367" start="31769" end="31784" title="L. Brent Bozell III" label="L. Brent Bozell"/>
<link wikidata="Q441938" start="31793" end="31805" title="Peggy Noonan" label="Peggy Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060855" start="31895" end="31930" title="Victoria&amp;#x27;s Secret Fashion Show" label="Victoria&amp;#x27;s Secret Fashion Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458465" start="32119" end="32138" title="fleeting expletives" label="fleeting expletives"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="32150" end="32154" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="32158" end="32160" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027063" start="32192" end="32216" title="60th Golden Globe Awards" label="60th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="32439" end="32443" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="32615" end="32643" title="Clear Channel Communications" label="Clear Channel Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="32668" end="32680" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982181" start="32877" end="32898" title="Bubba the Love Sponge" label="Bubba the Love Sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504495" start="33055" end="33066" title="awards show" label="awards show"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="33107" end="33145" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="33251" end="33271" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972069" start="33484" end="33525" title="Broadcast Decency Enforcement Act of 2005" label="Broadcast Decency Enforcement Act of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150752" start="33745" end="33766" title="Infinity Broadcasting" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="33865" end="33882" title="terrestrial radio" label="terrestrial radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q996079" start="33892" end="33914" title="Sirius Satellite Radio" label="Sirius Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q391629" start="34250" end="34268" title="Teen Choice Awards" label="Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972128" start="34393" end="34417" title="Broadcasting &amp;amp; Cable" label="Broadcasting &amp;amp; Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="34691" end="34707" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="Super Bowl XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295455" start="34759" end="34782" title="Don Mischer" label="Don Mischer Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276681" start="34942" end="34981" title="Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band" label="Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416968" start="35017" end="35035" title="Working on a Dream" label="Working on a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q853768" start="35053" end="35069" title="Super Bowl XLIII" label="Super Bowl XLIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="35120" end="35135" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q371433" start="35160" end="35174" title="Super Bowl XLV" label="Super Bowl XLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="35280" end="35295" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q204019" start="35304" end="35310" title="M.I.A. (artist)" label="M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1137711" start="35311" end="35339" title="Finger (gesture)" label="pointed up her middle finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141354" start="35622" end="35638" title="James Poniewozik" label="James Poniewozik"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="35863" end="35881" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="36182" end="36188" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182972" start="36499" end="36512" title="Johnny Sauter" label="Johnny Sauter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="36638" end="36656" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q474990" start="36755" end="36768" title="EA Sports 500" label="EA Sports 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="36772" end="36795" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega Superspeedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="36897" end="36909" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q913496" start="37001" end="37014" title="Brickyard 400" label="Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="37020" end="37030" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="37365" end="37382" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="37387" end="37404" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q462925" start="37452" end="37462" title="Randy Moss" label="Randy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322151" start="37527" end="37531" title="mooning" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247194" start="37751" end="37759" title="Joe Buck" label="Joe Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="37925" end="37943" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="37948" end="37967" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="38053" end="38057" title="Fuck" label="Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q853768" start="38243" end="38259" title="Super Bowl XLIII" label="Super Bowl XLIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340160" start="38343" end="38350" title="KVOA-TV" label="KVOA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="38442" end="38449" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="38457" end="38472" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q930049" start="38572" end="38580" title="Spice Networks" label="Shorteez"/>
<link wikidata="Q944199" start="38650" end="38666" title="Larry Fitzgerald" label="Larry Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q400" start="38795" end="38804" title="ClubJenna" label="ClubJenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107204" start="38840" end="38859" title="Playboy Enterprises" label="Playboy Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="39038" end="39047" title="E! Online" label="E! Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q832777" start="39398" end="39429" title="Democratic Party (United States) presidential primaries, 2004" label="2004 Democratic Party primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="39563" end="39571" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="39587" end="39597" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="39598" end="39608" title="Laura Bush" label="Laura Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531032" start="39724" end="39735" title="Les Moonves" label="Les Moonves"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="39798" end="39809" title="blacklisting" label="blacklisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150752" start="39886" end="39907" title="Infinity Broadcasting" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="39947" end="39965" title="46th Grammy Awards" label="46th Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q311306" start="40158" end="40173" title="Luther Vandross" label="Luther Vandross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="40188" end="40199" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q311256" start="40201" end="40213" title="Richard Marx" label="Richard Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="40218" end="40229" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q262698" start="40320" end="40352" title="The Best Things in Life Are Free (Luther Vandross and Janet Jackson song)" label="The Best Things in Life Are Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="40379" end="40394" title="People Magazine" label="People Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="41249" end="41259" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="41420" end="41432" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="41515" end="41532" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q572543" start="41973" end="41982" title="Damita Jo (album)" label="Damita Jo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="42074" end="42082" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="42088" end="42091" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="42133" end="42145" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="42392" end="42400" title="Platinum certification" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q221556" start="42520" end="42539" title="Just a Little While" label="Just a Little While"/>
<link wikidata="Q654058" start="42556" end="42582" title="All Nite (Don&amp;#x27;t Stop)" label="All Nite (Don&amp;#x27;t Stop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="42607" end="42627" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="Hot Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q898975" start="42957" end="42965" title="Feedback (Janet Jackson song)" label="Feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="43006" end="43023" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Billboard Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q673920" start="43089" end="43096" title="Make Me (Janet Jackson song)" label="Make Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="43119" end="43139" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="Hot Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218714" start="43174" end="43181" title="Nothing (Janet Jackson song)" label="Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="43265" end="43270" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="43540" end="43559" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="43587" end="43603" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188279" start="43686" end="43695" title="Pixelization" label="pixelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q694106" start="44207" end="44229" title="The Oprah Winfrey Show" label="The Oprah Winfrey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="44410" end="44416" title="Teflon" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="45108" end="45120" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q254150" start="45232" end="45254" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Wait Awhile" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Wait Awhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955941" start="45270" end="45301" title="The 20/20 Experience World Tour" label="The 20/20 Experience World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15750267" start="45597" end="45634" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Studies in Communication" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Studies in Communication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45773" end="45780" title="Stereotypes of African Americans#Jezebel" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="46506" end="46509" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317850" start="47762" end="47790" title="Super Bowl LII halftime show" label="Super Bowl LII halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q28098262" start="48255" end="48274" title="Super Bowl LI halftime show" label="Lady Gaga-headlined"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="48345" end="48365" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105419788" start="48694" end="48716" title="Framing Britney Spears" label="Framing Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="48769" end="48783" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="48948" end="48951" title="Pop music" label="Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="48959" end="48969" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q746875" start="49054" end="49082" title="Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)" label="Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="49218" end="49224" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974267" start="49238" end="49251" title="Ass Like That" label="Ass Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="49317" end="49328" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13372619" start="49356" end="49374" title="We Can&amp;#x27;t Stop" label="We Can&amp;#x27;t Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12207092" start="49391" end="49404" title="Blurred Lines" label="Blurred Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q14845503" start="49417" end="49428" title="Give It 2 U" label="Give It 2 U"/>
<link wikidata="Q467423" start="49453" end="49465" title="Robin Thicke" label="Robin Thicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625200" start="49473" end="49500" title="2013 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2013 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="50014" end="50033" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="50058" end="50074" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755894" start="50086" end="50101" title="Darrell Hammond" label="Darrell Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="50105" end="50119" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="50120" end="50131" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250400" start="50171" end="50184" title="9/11 Commission" label="9/11 hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188279" start="50227" end="50237" title="pixelization" label="pixellated"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="50243" end="50246" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063423" start="50487" end="50490" title="PTV (Family Guy)" label="PTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q373976" start="50737" end="50754" title="David Hyde Pierce" label="David Hyde Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="51213" end="51233" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="51238" end="51249" title="Annie Award" label="Annie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="51337" end="51347" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q898143" start="51368" end="51391" title="Good Times with Weapons" label="Good Times with Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="51415" end="51430" title="Trey Parker" label="the show&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="51431" end="51439" title="Matt Stone" label="creators"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="51825" end="51834" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q180710" start="51959" end="51976" title="Anna Nicole Smith" label="Anna Nicole Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718649" start="51997" end="52029" title="MTV Australia Video Music Awards 2005" label="MTV Australia Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="52088" end="52105" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="52113" end="52124" title="Juno Awards" label="Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="52407" end="52418" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="52423" end="52427" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q296609" start="52508" end="52521" title="Russell Brand" label="Russell Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q745807" start="52563" end="52590" title="2008 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2008 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="52860" end="52882" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191405" start="53256" end="53260" title="TiVo" label="TiVo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="53408" end="53425" title="electrocardiogram" label="electrocardiogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="53454" end="53460" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="54158" end="54165" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q76694" start="54178" end="54189" title="Jawed Karim" label="Jawed Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q379396" start="54191" end="54201" title="Steve Chen" label="Steve Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q370299" start="54207" end="54218" title="Chad Hurley" label="Chad Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="54321" end="54361" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="54460" end="54468" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759027" start="54946" end="54952" title="Gawker" label="Gawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="55552" end="55568" title="Sony Electronics" label="Sony Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="55577" end="55612" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Television Research Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="55791" end="55806" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672341" start="55808" end="55824" title="Pop (U.S. TV network)" label="TV Guide Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156550" start="55913" end="55920" title="Complex (magazine)" label="Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="55954" end="55966" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q126291" start="56166" end="56175" title="Super Bowl XLVII" label="this year"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="56179" end="56190" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="56311" end="56324" title="living legend (person)" label="living legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142959" start="56401" end="56405" title="Fuse (TV channel)" label="Fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906353" start="56906" end="56921" title="Bleacher Report" label="Bleacher Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q105419788" start="57874" end="57896" title="Framing Britney Spears" label="Framing Britney Spears"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498973" wikidata="Q12036" url="?curid=498973" title="Poème symphonique">
<text>Poème symphonique is a 1962 composition by György Ligeti for one hundred mechanical metronomes. It was written during his brief acquaintance with the Fluxus movement.

==Overview==
The piece requires ten &quot;performers&quot;, each one responsible for ten of the hundred metronomes. The metronomes are set up on the performance platform, and they are then all wound to their maximum extent and set to different speeds. Once they are all fully wound, there is a silence of two to six minutes, at the discretion of the conductor; then, at the conductor&#x27;s signal, all of the metronomes are started as simultaneously as possible. The performers then leave the stage. As the metronomes wind down one after another and stop, periodicity becomes noticeable in the sound, and individual metronomes can be more clearly distinguished. The piece typically ends with just one metronome ticking alone for a few beats, followed by silence, and then the performers return to the stage.

The controversy over the first performance was sufficient to cause Dutch Television to cancel a planned broadcast recorded two days earlier at an official reception at Hilversum&#x27;s City Hall on 13 September 1963. &quot;Instead, they showed a soccer game&quot;. Ligeti regarded this work as a critique of the contemporary musical situation, continuing:

&quot;Poème symphonique&quot; was the last of Ligeti&#x27;s event-scores, and marks the end of his brief relationship with Fluxus. The piece has been recorded several times, but performed only occasionally.

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154331" start="43" end="56" title="György Ligeti" label="György Ligeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q156424" start="84" end="93" title="metronome" label="metronome"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="150" end="156" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049478" start="1045" end="1061" title="Television in the Netherlands" label="Dutch Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9934" start="1146" end="1155" title="Hilversum" label="Hilversum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498975" wikidata="Q1050775" url="?curid=498975" title="EWorld">
<text>eWorld was an online service operated by Apple Inc. between June 1994 and March 1996. The services included email (eMail Center), news, software installs and a bulletin board system (Community Center). Users of eWorld were often referred to as &quot;ePeople.&quot;

Based on a similar service from America Online, eWorld was expensive compared to other services and not well marketed, and failed to attract a high number of subscribers. The service was only available on Apple&#x27;s Macintosh and Apple IIGS and had limited support on the Newton MessagePad handheld devices, though a PC version had been planned.

==History==

In the early 1990s, online services were becoming widely popular, just as Apple was looking into replacing their aging online service known as AppleLink. AppleLink had originally been developed at the urging of Jon Ebbs, Apple&#x27;s head of support, who convinced the management that they could lower support costs using an online service. AppleLink had initially been available only to dealers when it launched in 1985, but was later opened to developers and became the de facto internal e-mail service within Apple.

The &quot;back end&quot; of AppleLink was hosted by GE Information Services who charged Apple about $300,000 a year, as well as charging the end users up to $15 for daytime access to the system. Apple had tried to negotiate a better rate on several occasions, but GE knew that switching would cost Apple even more, and refused to lower the costs.

Nevertheless, Apple began to implement changes. Before the advent of eWorld, Apple had started a consumer-oriented online support service known as AppleLink Personal Edition. Related to the older system in name only, this service was run by Quantum Computer Services, who earlier had established the Q-Link online service for the Commodore 64 personal computer. Quantum&#x27;s Steve Case moved to California for three months to convince Apple to let Quantum run their new consumer service. In 1987, Apple allowed Quantum to run the service and granted them use of the Apple logo. Apple received a 10% royalty for all the system&#x27;s users while Quantum generated revenue by running the service.

The ideologies of the companies soon clashed. Quantum wanted to bundle the AppleLink software with new Macs and distribute it through direct marketing. At the time Apple did not believe in giving away non-system software for free. That, coupled with Apple&#x27;s strict design guidelines, caused Quantum to eventually terminate their contract. Steve Case had, however, negotiated a rather beneficial contract, granting Quantum rights to the use of the Apple logo and preventing Apple from marketing its own online service.

In 1991, Quantum was renamed America Online and the service was opened up to PC and Macintosh users. Apple wanted out of their contract with GE, which was costing them far more money than it was saving, and wanted to provide their own Mac-only competition to AOL&#x27;s service. They canceled their GE contract and formed an Online Services Group. The group licensed the original AppleLink Personal Edition software from AOL and developed it into what would be known as eWorld. The group also struck a deal with AOL to help develop the service and spent 1993 working on the new software and various services to be offered. According to an AOL press release on January 5, 1994, eWorld was &quot;created using technology licensed from America Online. The two companies have been collaborating to build the platform for Apple’s online services since December 1992, when America Online granted Apple a non-exclusive license to use the company’s interactive services platform.&quot;

On January 5, 1994, Apple announced eWorld at the 1994 Macworld Conference &amp; Expo, where they invited attendees to become beta testers for the service. On June 20 of that year, the service went into full operation. The eWorld service was a combination of the vast technical and support archives of the previous AppleLink services and a more traditional community service like AOL and CompuServe. The eWorld service was only accessible from Macs and in parts, Newton OS-operated devices. A Windows version was promised to appear in 1995; it never left the early beta stage.

==Features==
The primary portal of the service was the eWorld software. The software was based around a &quot;town hall&quot; metaphor where each of the service’s branches was an individual &quot;building&quot;. Over 400 media and technology companies created information products on the service. Several Mac software and hardware companies opened up virtual forums on the service to provide customer support and general product information to subscribers. The main eWorld portal also encompassed a wide variety of news and information services.

In addition to information access, two heavily used areas of eWorld were the eMail Center and Community Center. The Community Center offered chat rooms and an online BBS where thousands of ePeople (eWorld users) congregated to chat about various subjects. The eMail Center was a virtual post office. The service also housed support and Apple technical documents.

The eWorld Web Browser, introduced in eWorld 1.1 as part of its ‘Internet On-Ramp’ features, let users browse web pages on Internet websites. The browser had features for FTP uploading, web images and settings to configure a default homepage address. Though separate from the main eWorld application, the browser worked only through an eWorld connection, not through any other network or online service.

eWorld&#x27;s unique user experience was developed by Cleo Huggins, manager of human interface group in the development team. Cleo also coined the name eWorld. The signature illustrations were created by Mark Drury. The development team was led by Scott Converse, and the product management team by Richard Gingras. The eWorld project at Apple was led by Peter Friedman.

==Demise==
The service cost $8.95 per month, which included two free night-time or weekend hours. Subsequent hours were $4.95 with weekday hours (6 am–6 pm) costing $7.95. Apple kept the price high originally to keep the demand moderated but never dropped the price when the demand did not materialize. After the first year of service, eWorld had 90,000 subscribers. In 1995, limited Internet service was made available, and as of September 1995 the service had 115,000 subscribers, compared to 3.5 million subscribers of AOL (including one million outside the United States).

Apple&#x27;s marketing and promotion efforts were at best indifferent. The service was only available on the Macintosh, along with e-mail and system update support on the Newton handheld. Apple was in a challenging financial position at the time and CEO Michael Spindler told the Online Services Group that significant marketing for the service could not be provided so eWorld shipped on new Macs with only an icon on the desktop and a brochure in the box. There was also little if anything in the way of media marketing for the service. The promised Windows version of eWorld was not launched following a decision by Apple&#x27;s senior management to position eWorld as a unique service for Macintosh owners.

Apple&#x27;s management decided that the product was doomed to fail in a market where AOL had such a commanding lead. The company was also cutting costs. In June 1995, the company had over $1 billion in backorders and posted a $68 million loss in the fourth quarter of 1995. In January 1996, Spindler was asked to resign as CEO, replaced by former CEO of National Semiconductor Gil Amelio. Several products and projects were scrapped in an effort to put the company back into the black.

On March 31, 1996, at 12:01 am Pacific Time, the service was officially shut down. Remaining eWorld subscribers were offered incentives to switch to AOL, which had already been hosting Macintosh-oriented content within the Mac Forums of its Computing Channel. The eWorld/AppleLink technical support archives moved to Apple&#x27;s website. When the Online Services Group was disbanded, many of its members left Apple. Peter Friedman eventually formed chat community website TalkCity with Chris Christensen and Jenna Woodul. Scott Converse became a senior executive at Paramount Pictures Digital Entertainment Division. James Isaacs joined Danger Inc. (acquired by Microsoft in 2008). Richard Gingras and Jonathan Rosenberg joined the newly formed broadband access venture @Home Network.

As of February 2024, 28 years after its discontinuation, attempting to access the eWorld.com website still automatically redirects to the apple.com homepage.

==See also==
*Microsoft Bob
*Skeuomorph

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1050775" start="0" end="6" title="EWorld" label="eWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="14" end="28" title="internet service provider" label="online service"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="41" end="51" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="160" end="181" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="298" end="312" title="AOL" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="484" end="493" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282269" start="498" end="508" title="Apple IIGS" label="Apple IIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147219" start="540" end="557" title="Newton MessagePad" label="Newton MessagePad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781106" start="771" end="780" title="AppleLink" label="AppleLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515077" start="1200" end="1223" title="GE Information Services" label="GE Information Services"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1737" end="1762" title="AOL#History" label="Quantum Computer Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268995" start="1796" end="1802" title="Quantum Link" label="Q-Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="1826" end="1838" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q562917" start="1873" end="1883" title="Steve Case" label="Steve Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1893" end="1903" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="2747" end="2761" title="America Online" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="2795" end="2797" title="personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421427" start="3752" end="3782" title="Macworld Conference &amp;amp; Expo" label="Macworld Conference &amp;amp; Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="4085" end="4095" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185591" start="4160" end="4169" title="Newton OS" label="Newton OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="4190" end="4197" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="4385" end="4394" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="4471" end="4479" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="4988" end="4991" title="bulletin board system" label="BBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="5109" end="5120" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097532" start="5890" end="5905" title="Richard Gingras" label="Richard Gingras"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="6046" end="6053" title="Workweek" label="weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q420772" start="6712" end="6718" title="Apple Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q64088" start="6795" end="6811" title="Michael Spindler" label="Michael Spindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="7052" end="7061" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="7600" end="7603" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q432492" start="7607" end="7629" title="National Semiconductor" label="National Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q713588" start="7630" end="7640" title="Gil Amelio" label="Gil Amelio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215986" start="8378" end="8388" title="Danger (company)" label="Danger Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570714" start="8511" end="8524" title="@Home Network" label="@Home Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q127141" start="8700" end="8713" title="Microsoft Bob" label="Microsoft Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q607446" start="8715" end="8725" title="Skeuomorph" label="Skeuomorph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498976" wikidata="Q835310" url="?curid=498976" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Hong Kong">
<text>The existing Hong Kong honours system was created after the transfer of government of Hong Kong to the People&#x27;s Republic of China as a special administrative region in 1997. Before that, Hong Kong was a British dependent territory and followed the British honours system.

The Hong Kong SAR government releases an annual Honours List, which is published in the Government Gazette on Establishment Day (1 July).

==Types of awards==

===General awards===

====The Grand Bauhinia Medal====
The Grand Bauhinia Medal, the highest award under the HKSAR honours and awards system, is to recognise the selected person&#x27;s lifelong and highly significant contribution to the well-being of Hong Kong. The awardee is entitled to the postnominal letters GBM and the style &quot;The Honourable&quot;. (Bauhinia, &quot;Bauhinia blakeana&quot;, is the floral emblem of Hong Kong.)

====The Bauhinia Star====
The Order of the Bauhinia Star has three classes: Gold, Silver and Bronze.

The Gold Bauhinia Star (GBS) is awarded to eminent persons who have given very distinguished services to the community or who have rendered public or voluntary services of a very high degree of merit.

The Silver Bauhinia Star (SBS) is awarded to persons who have taken a leading part in public affairs and/or voluntary work over a long period of time.

The Bronze Bauhinia Star (BBS) is awarded to persons who have given outstanding service over a long period of time, but in a more limited field or way than that required for the Silver Bauhinia Star.

====The Medal of Honour====
The Medal of Honour (MH) is the basic award under the honours system and is awarded in recognition of community service in a district or in a particular field over a long period of time. It is also awarded to non-directorate civil servants who have served with distinction.

===Gallantry awards===

====The Medal for Bravery====
The Medal for Bravery is awarded for display of bravery in an incident. It too has three classes, Gold, Silver and Bronze.

The Medal for Bravery (Gold) is awarded for acts of gallantry of the greatest possible heroism or of the most conspicuous courage in circumstances of extreme danger.

The Medal for Bravery (Silver) is awarded for gallantry of an extremely high order.

The Medal for Bravery (Bronze) is awarded for exemplary acts of gallantry of a lesser standard.

===Disciplined Services and ICAC Awards===
The Disciplined Services and ICAC Awards are awarded to officers of the six major disciplined formations as well as the Independent Commission Against Corruption. The disciplined formations are the Hong Kong Police, Hong Kong Fire Services, Hong Kong Immigration Service, Hong Kong Customs and Excise, Hong Kong Correctional Services, and the Government Flying Service. These awards replace the colonial awards issued before July 1997 that had profile of the reigning monarch and different ribbons. There are three types of awards:

====Distinguished service medals====
* Hong Kong Police Medal for Distinguished Service (PDSM) 
* Hong Kong Fire Services Medal for Distinguished Service (FSDSM)
* Hong Kong Immigration Service Medal for Distinguished Service (IDSM) 
* Hong Kong Customs and Excise Medal for Distinguished Service (CDSM) 
* Hong Kong Correctional Services Medal for Distinguished Service (CSDSM) 
* Government Flying Service Medal for Distinguished Service (GDSM) 
* Hong Kong ICAC Medal for Distinguished Service (IDS)

====Meritorious service medals====
* Hong Kong Police Medal for Meritorious Service (PMSM) 
* Hong Kong Fire Services Medal for Meritorious Service (FSMSM) 
* Hong Kong Immigration Service Medal for Meritorious Service (IMSM) 
* Hong Kong Customs and Excise Medal for Meritorious Service (CMSM) 
* Hong Kong Correctional Services Medal for Meritorious Service (CSMSM) 
* Government Flying Service Medal for Meritorious Service (GMSM) 
* Hong Kong ICAC Medal for Meritorious Service (IMS)

====Long service medals and clasps====
* Hong Kong Police long service medals and clasps 
* Hong Kong Auxiliary Police long service medals and clasps 
* Hong Kong Fire Services long service medals and clasps 
* Hong Kong Correctional Services long service medals and clasps 
* Hong Kong Immigration Service long service medals and clasps
* Hong Kong Customs and Excise long service medals and clasps
* Government Flying Service Long Service Medal
* Hong Kong Independent Commission Against Corruption Long Service Medal
* Hong Kong Auxiliary Medical Services long service medals and clasps
* Civil Aid Service long service medals and clasps

===General awards===
These awards consists of a framed certificate with the Emblem of Hong Kong, name of the award in English and Chinese, name of the recipient (Chinese or English) commending their extraordinary contribution to the community, government or public service:

* Chief Executive&#x27;s Commendation for Community Service
* Chief Executive&#x27;s Commendation for Government and Public Service

==Order of precedence==
The order of precedence is listed as follows in postnominals: GBM, GBS, MBG, SBS, MBS, BBS, MBB, MH, JP.

==Nomination and awarding==
The nomination is usually made by SAR Government departments, and evaluated by the Honours Committee. The annual Honours List is published in the Gazette of the SAR Government on the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day (1 July)

==Orders, decorations and medals of British Hong Kong==
List of awards available to people in Hong Kong prior to 30 June 1997:
* See Modern Honours from the United Kingdom
* See Chivalry orders from the United Kingdom
* Hong Kong Disciplined Services Medal – for long service and good conduct in the disciplined services between 1986 and 1997.

===Recipients of colonial Hong Kong gallantry awards===

https://www.gov.uk/guidance/medals-campaigns-descriptions-and-eligibility#decorations-gallantry-and-distinguished-conduct-medals

Orders, Decorations and Medals conferred on Hong Kong residents or in respect of Hong Kong service up to 30 June 1997:
&lt;br&gt;
Victoria Cross (VC)&lt;br&gt;John Robert Osborn (1941)

George Cross (GC)&lt;br&gt;Mateen Ahmed Ansari (1946)&lt;br&gt;Douglas Ford (1946)&lt;br&gt;John Alexander Fraser MC &amp; Bar (1946)&lt;br&gt;Hector Bertram Gray AFM (1946)&lt;br&gt;Lanceray Arthur Newnham (1946)&lt;br&gt;Joseph Hughes (1946)

Distinguished Service Order (DSO)&lt;br&gt;Henry William Moncrieff Stewart OBE, MC (1946)&lt;br&gt;Wells Arnold Bishop (1946)&lt;br&gt;Ernest Hodkinson (1946)&lt;br&gt;Cecil Robert Templer (1946)&lt;br&gt;Evan George Stewart (1946)&lt;br&gt;Arthur John Dewar (1946)

Order of the British Empire (CBE) for Gallantry&lt;br&gt;Alfred Creighton Collinson (1946)&lt;br&gt;Andrew Peffers OBE (1946)

Order of the British Empire (OBE) for Gallantry&lt;br&gt;Osmonde Hedworth Farrar (1930)&lt;br&gt;Lindsay Tasman Ride (1942)&lt;br&gt;Keble Theodore Andrews-Levinge (1946)&lt;br&gt;Eustace Levett (1946)&lt;br&gt;John Herbert Price MC (1946)

Order of the British Empire (MBE) for Gallantry&lt;br&gt;Sher Singh (1945)&lt;br&gt;Victor Stanley Ebbage BEM (1945)&lt;br&gt;Hargraves Milne Howell (1945)&lt;br&gt;William Nichols (1945)&lt;br&gt;Harry Charles Spong(1945)&lt;br&gt;David Louis Strellett (1945)&lt;br&gt;Charles Gentry Turner (1945)&lt;br&gt;Feroze Khan (1945)&lt;br&gt;Sister Elizabeth Mosey (1946)&lt;br&gt;Stanley Gordon Woods (1968)&lt;br&gt;Frederick John Preston (1973)

Indian Order of Merit (IOM)&lt;br&gt;Ali Mohd (1946)&lt;br&gt;Phul Singh (1946)&lt;br&gt;Nawaz Khan (1946)&lt;br&gt;Lakhu Singh (1946)

Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)&lt;br&gt;William Morley Wright (1942)&lt;br&gt;John Christian Bolder DSC &amp; Bar (1942)&lt;br&gt; Arthur Luard Pears (1942)&lt;br&gt;Bruce Graham Clarke (1946)

Royal Red Cross – Member (RRC)&lt;br&gt;Sister Mary Ann Lockerbie Currie (née Davies; 1946)&lt;br&gt;Sister Margaret Anna North (1946)

Military Cross (MC)&lt;br&gt;E.W.M.L. Corbally (1942)&lt;br&gt;R.H.D. Scriven (1942)&lt;br&gt;Ivan Bernard Trevor (1942)&lt;br&gt;David Ronald Holmes (1943)&lt;br&gt;K.A. Munro (1943)&lt;br&gt; P. Steyn (1944)&lt;br&gt;R.A.S. Lane (1944)&lt;br&gt;J.S. McKay (1945)&lt;br&gt;James Allan Ford (1945)&lt;br&gt; Abdul Jabaar (1945)&lt;br&gt;Khan Sherrin (1945)&lt;br&gt;Martin Pryce Weedon (1945)&lt;br&gt;John Stanley Marcus Vintner (1945)&lt;br&gt;Robert Leslie Berridge (1945)&lt;br&gt;Caesar Edward Orway (1945)&lt;br&gt;David Pinkerton (1945)&lt;br&gt;Christopher Mark Maurice Man (1945)&lt;br&gt;Frederick Temple Atkinson (1945)&lt;br&gt;Uriah Laite (1945)&lt;br&gt;Robert William Philip (1945)&lt;br&gt;Thomas Alexander Blackwood (1945)&lt;br&gt;Collison Alexander Blaver (1945)&lt;br&gt;William Francis Nugent (1945)&lt;br&gt;Francis Gavan Power (1945)&lt;br&gt;Michael George Carruthers (1945)&lt;br&gt;B.C. Field (1945)&lt;br&gt;Ivor Phillip Tamworth (1945)&lt;br&gt;E.B. Teesdale (1945)&lt;br&gt;Mehr Khan (1945)&lt;br&gt;Shah Mohamed (1945)&lt;br&gt;Kampta Phasad (1945)&lt;br&gt;Haider Rehman Khan (1945)&lt;br&gt;David Clive Crosby Trench (Solomon Islands; 1946)&lt;br&gt;G.D.M. Williams (1965)

Air Force Cross (AFC)&lt;br&gt;Danny Cheung Kwong (1965)&lt;br&gt;Richard Paul Seymour (1973)&lt;br&gt;Peter Stephen Boyland (1992)&lt;br&gt;Christopher Jeremy Spencer Fynes (1993)&lt;br&gt;Steven Derek Murkin (1993)

Royal Red Cross – Associate (ARRC)&lt;br&gt;Sister Edith Butlin (1946)&lt;br&gt;Sister Gwendoline Colthorpe (1946)&lt;br&gt;Sister Edith Freda Davies (1946)&lt;br&gt;Sister Kathleen Georgina Christie (1946)&lt;br&gt;Sister Anna May Waters (1946)

Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)&lt;br&gt;Kishen Singh (1917)&lt;br&gt;Rur Singh (1917)&lt;br&gt;M.J. Muldowney (1920)&lt;br&gt;Colin Alden Standish (1920)&lt;br&gt;Derek Everard Rix (1920)&lt;br&gt;Arthur David Manning (1920)&lt;br&gt;Albert Edward Miller (1920)&lt;br&gt;Thomas F. Stainton (1920)&lt;br&gt;Charles Albert Clark (1920)&lt;br&gt;Ronald John Routledge (1946)

George Medal (GM)&lt;br&gt;N.G.A. Noble (1947)&lt;br&gt;Ian P. Hyde (Malaya; 1947)&lt;br&gt;Cheung On (1947)&lt;br&gt;Chau Fook (1952)&lt;br&gt;James Hidden (1952)&lt;br&gt;Leung Yiu-tong (1953)&lt;br&gt;P. Muskett (1958)&lt;br&gt;William James Gorman (1960)&lt;br&gt;Edward Louis Hanlon (1964)&lt;br&gt; James Hall Matchett (1968) &lt;br&gt;Choi Chor (1973)&lt;br&gt;James Hogg Bruce (1973)&lt;br&gt;John Caruth Gorman (1973)&lt;br&gt;Leung Shiu-kay (1973)&lt;br&gt;Chiu Yiu-nam (1983)&lt;br&gt;Ng Hung-shek (1994)

King&#x27;s Police Medal for Gallantry (KPM)&lt;br&gt;Timothy Murphy (1923)&lt;br&gt;Kenneth Andrew (1928)&lt;br&gt;Roland Henry John Brooks (1947)&lt;br&gt;David Loie Fook-wing (1947)&lt;br&gt;Duncan George MacPherson (1947)&lt;br&gt;Harold Tiplady (1949)&lt;br&gt;Wong Wai Tsoi (1949)&lt;br&gt;Li Fu (1949)&lt;br&gt; Chiu Ho-ching (1949)

Queen&#x27;s Police Medal for Gallantry (QPM)&lt;br&gt;Cheng Kin Cheung (1955)

Indian Distinguished Service Medal (IDSM)&lt;br&gt;Amanat Ali (1946)

Distinguished Service Medal (DSM)&lt;br&gt;Bernard Charlie Lilley (1946)&lt;br&gt;Albert John White (1946)

Military Medal (MM)&lt;br&gt;Ghulam Mohamad (1917), Nihal Singh (1917), Lab Singh (1918), Ghulam Hussain (1918), Tika Khan (1918), A. Hutchins (1919), Patrick John Sheridan (1942), Francis Lee Yiu-piu (1942), D.I. Bosanquet (1943), W.G. Poy (1944), A.A. Iles (1944), E.G. Jones (1944), Walter Ivan Cook (1946), Charles Douglas Goddard (1946), Arthur Philip Hoxby (1946), Puran Singh (1946), Resham Khan (1946), Tularam Singh (1946), Gordon Edward Williamson (1946), Stanley Walter Wright (1946), Emile Gregory Bernard (1946), Seldon Grant Stoddard (1946), Cecil Thomas Whalen (1946), Murray Thomas Goodenough (1946), Lionel Curtis Speller (1946), Kenneth Stanley Cameron (1946), Ronald Edward Atkinson (1946), Meirion Price (1946), John Leslie Varley (1946), Ernest Irwin Bennett (1946), William Henry Morris (1946), Ban Tsan-chuen (1946), H.V. Pearse (1946), C.L. Salter (1946), C.D. Walker (1946), Victor White (1946), David William Yee (1946), Mohd Amir (1946), Alfred Thomas Goschen Lloyd (1946), Chau Sik-wah (1952), Li Hon To (1960), Lui Tong (1960).&lt;br&gt;(NOTE: Further work required for 1946; see http://www.london-gazette.co.uk/issues/37521/supplements/1672)

Air Force Medal (AFM)&lt;br&gt;Keith George Thomas Sturge (1992)

Sea Gallantry Medal (SGM) (records incomplete here)&lt;br&gt;JOHN CROPPER, Chief Officer, GEORGE REGINALD JENKINS, Third Officer, BOND HUGGINS, Apprentice, WON JAH, HONG KAM, LAM POW, and LEONG YOE, Seamen, of the SS Bowes Castle; THOMAS LLOYD WILLIAMS, Chief Officer, KENNETH HENRY STUART, Second Officer, HAROLD WAINRIGHT, GEORGE ARTHUR PARKER, STANLEY LEONARD GARRETT, JOHN EDWARD SNAITH, Apprentices, GE LING LOW, Quartermaster, SING YUNG SANG, Boatswain, CHING CHIN FONG, LIN AH YOK, LEE VAN CHAN, CHANG CHIN PAN, CHANG PAN FAH and YING AH PAN, Seamen of the SS Egremont Castle; A. LEXOW, Chief Officer, ROLF FREDERIK MOLTZAU, Second Officer, G. DAKSERHOFF, Third Officer, CHEE AH KUN, Boatswain&#x27;s Mate, HAN FAT SANG, TSE TOR, and LIN CHANG CHIN, Quartermasters, fireman, and cabin boy who formed part of the boat&#x27;s crew from the SS Hwah Ping (all 1923); SO HAU, Fireman of SS Paul Beau of Hong Kong (1925)

Colonial Police Medal for Gallantry (CPM)&lt;br&gt;Frederick Edward Evelyn Booker, Jack Cooper Fitz-Henry, Chan Ng, William Stirton McHardy, Christopher Stanley Pile, Tam Chung, Tang Ka, Gordon Charles Taylor, Frederick Douglas Bishop Tuckett (1939), George Allan Rodney Wright-Nooth (1946), Roland Henry John Brooks (1947), Charles William Brown (1947), Chan Sang (1947), Ho Yuk (1947), Lok So (1947), William Todd (1947), Yan Fuk (1947), Chan Wing (1948), Chiu Ho-ching (1948), Li Fu (1948), Li Hon-to (1960), Lui Tong (1960), Wong Kai-wan (1962), Cheung Tin (1964), William Roger Deane (1964), John Henry Douglas Bell (1964), Brian Gray Fender (1964), Cheng Yee Hung (1966), Cheung Kwai Chau (1966), Law Kim-chuen (1966), Wu Yun-tsung (1966), Chiu Sau-sum (1968), Trevor John Colley (1968), Kwok Chung (1968), David Pitt (1968), Edward Joseph Stevenson (1968), Tang Wong-yau (1968), Tsang Wing CPM &amp; Bar (1968), Cheung Tin-fat (1972), Roberton James Patterson Burton (1972), Kong Yuk-sut (1972), Leung Kam-ming (1972), Choy Fut-po (1973), Chiu Yiu-chip (1973), Anthony Stuart Conway (1973), Leslie Burton (1973), Peter Michael Mullens (1973), Lun Kam-yat (1973), Luk Kai-lau (1973), Ng Kam-hung (1973), David Wilfred Frederick O&#x27;Brien (1973), John Reid (1973), Yau Shou-kit (1973), Chan Kam-ming (1974), Lau Piu (1974)

Queen&#x27;s Gallantry Medal (QGM)&lt;br&gt;Yip Long-ping (1977), Ho Hing-chuen (1979), Aimansing Limbu (1979), Chan Kwai-fai (1980), Tung Chi-kan (1980), Yeung Chun-hing (1980), Nicholas Alexander McQueen (1981), Lo Wai-shing (1982), Cheung Wai-leung (1982), Chiu Shing-chau (1982), Leung Siu-lin (1984), Timothy Martin Adamson (1984), Martin John Lovatt (1986), Chiu Ka-ping (1987), Li Tam-shing (1989), Lui Tak-wah (1989), Chan Chi-choi (1989), Cheng Kwok-wai (1991), Anthony Martin Leahy (1991), Nicholas John Roberts (1991), Tsang Hung-lit (1991), Yeung Kwok-wing (1993), Nigel Mills (1993), Griffiths (1993), Chan Lun-fat (1993), Cheung Hin-yeung (1993), Yeung Chi-fai (1995), Cheung Kwok Keung (1995), Lee Man-ying (1995), WPC Leung Lai-fun (1995), Barry John Smith (1995), Andrew Mark Steeple (1996), Jason Chan Siu-kei (1997), Ma Hing-keung (1997), Ma Ka-kuen (1997)

British Empire Medal for Gallantry (BEM)&lt;br&gt;Jalal Din (1946)&lt;br&gt;Mohammed Afsar (1946)&lt;br&gt;Richard Malig (1947)&lt;br&gt;Emundo Da Silva (1947)&lt;br&gt;David John Leonard (1947) Gordon Cleaver 1953, &lt;br&gt;Peter Anderson (1955)&lt;br&gt;Yu Kwong (1960)&lt;br&gt;Tang Sai-bun (1962)&lt;br&gt;Bhimraj Rai (1962)&lt;br&gt;Lee Nai Liang (1965)&lt;br&gt;David Lawrence Birch (1965)&lt;br&gt;Anthony Charlwood (1968)&lt;br&gt;Jack Cavie (1968)&lt;br&gt;Anthony Roger Prouse (1973)

Mentions in Dispatches (MID)&lt;br&gt;Charles Cranes, Albert Archibald Bennett, William Hook, William Barker Bradley, John Edward Dunderdale, James Forsyth Ross, Arthur Beresford Scott, Maurice D&#x27;Avignon, George Stuart MacDonnell, Kenneth Edward Porter, Charles John Sharp, Leslie Robert Stickles, James Murray Thom, Charles Watson, John Joseph Fitzpatrick, Edwin Harrison, Lorne Rayburn Latimer, Ernest Charles McFarland, George William McRae, Sydney Albert Sheffer, Edwin George Smith, Frank Brown, Bernard Castonguay, Robert Damant, Morgan Isaac Davies, Aubery Peacock Flegg, Nelson Carlisle Galbraith, Norman Charles Matthews, Lloyd Logan Roblee, James Austen Wallace, Ellis Taylor Edge, Sister E.A. Hills (all 1946)&lt;br&gt;NOTE: Further work required for 1946 Posthumous MID/MID (see http://www.london-gazette.co.uk/issues/37636/start=1, http://www.london-gazette.co.uk/issues/37521/supplements/1672, http://www.london-gazette.co.uk/issues/37704/supplements/4342)

King&#x27;s/Queen&#x27;s Commendation for Brave Conduct (KCBC/QCBC)&lt;br&gt;
Charlie Leung Chung-yee MBE (1947)

Donald William Cuthbert, Robert Esson (1954),
Lo Chow, James Steele (1955),
Arthur Checksfield, Ronald Harry George McKinlay (1960),
Wong Kam-wah (1962),

Lau Cheung (1963),
Choi Yuk-shu, Ng Wing-hang (1964),
John Samuel Barker, Peter Christopher Bickmore, Francis Michael Digby Hoyal, Douglas Ralph Humphrey, Mark Gregory Richie, Dunraj Rai, Lakhdham Rai (1968),
Terence Arthur Berrecloth, Chan Shing-tak, Chan Shing-yuk, Cheung Shu-sing, Trevor George Collins, Hung Sui-to, Paul Kennedy, Kong Kin, Leung Shing-chau, Li Chuen, Liu Chiu-kwan, Lo Shiu-kuen, John Dominic Moran, Pun Wai-cheung, Tam Wai-hung, Tsui Hin-kwing, Wong Shiu-hung, Guy Sanderson Shirra (1973),

Yip Kai (1976),
Lam Sai-kit, Lo Wing-tai, Lo Yin-hok, Miu Wa-keung (1977),
Cheung Ching, Chu Yung-san, Jiwanprassad Gurung, Li Wai-leung, Ng Choi-leung (1978),
Chau Kwong-tak, Ng Chung-hung, Dalbahadur Rai, Tang Kwok-fung, To Kwok-chiu (1979),
Leung Kam-chu, Tsui Pui-ling (1980),
Chan Shiu-fai (1981),
Mohamad Aslam, Wong Chun-fai (1982),
Chan Chung-hing, Ko Wing-wah, Robert Ying Ka-wong (1983),
Chiu Kwok-yin, Li Kei-kit, Ma Shui-lun, Yan Ping-kuen (1984),
Fu Siu-wing, Li Hoi-chin, Ng Kwan-wai (1986),
Wong Kwai-leung (1989),
Kam Man-wei, Wong Chi-hung (1990),
Andrew Richard Harrison, Lam Kong, Christopher James O&#x27;Donnell, John Jamieson Oberg Stoddart, Tam Ting-kai, Tang Yau-keung (1992),
Chau Ka-keung (1994)

Queen&#x27;s Commendation for Bravery (QCB)&lt;br&gt;Brian James Morris, Stephen John Rule, Wut Chi-wai (1995)&lt;br&gt;Cham Wui-wai, Chan Chi-man, Hon Wing-sang (1996)&lt;br&gt;Wu Wai-cham, Chow Hau-leung (1997)

Queen&#x27;s Commendation for Bravery in the Air (QCBA)&lt;br&gt;Raymond Chang Yao-teng (1996)&lt;br&gt;Ronald So Chi-yip (1997)

Kings/Queen&#x27;s Commendation for Valuable Service in the Air (K/QCVSA)&lt;br&gt;
The K/QCVSA was originally a British military award for gallantry equivalent to an MID (see above). It was later broadened to include meritorious acts and service by both military and civilian air crew. The award was replaced by the QCVS (non-gallantry) and the QCBA (see above) in 1994.

Gerald Walter Cussans 1947,&lt;br&gt;Danny Cheung Kong AFC (1962)&lt;br&gt;Argo Chow Chong Yan, Thomas Douglas Lewis, Ronald Percy Smith (1965)&lt;br&gt; Paul Henry Rosentall, Peter Dicky Yip (1983)&lt;br&gt;Edward Ho Dick Sang, Ross Law Siu-hing, Frank James Pilkington, Elton Tang Sing Chung, David Arthur Walmsley, Richard Paul Cooke, Michael William Pedrick (1992)&lt;br&gt;Grant Robertson, Raymong Chang Yao Teng, Jimmy Choi Chiu Ming, Michael Ellis, Mason Ng Wai Cheong (1993)&lt;br&gt;German Tsoi Tak-man (1994)

==Justice of the peace==

Justice of the Peace (; JP) is a title of honour given by the Government to community leaders, and to certain officials while they are in their terms of offices. Official Justices of the Peace () is usually refer to those who is both a government official and a Justice of the Peace. The others may be referred as Non-Official Justice of the Peace (). For a person who is related to the New Territories, the Chief Secretary for Administration may appoint him/her as a New Territories Justice of the Peace ().

Justices of the Peace have no judicial functions, and their main duties include visiting prisons, administering statutory declarations, to serve any advisory panels, and other functions appointed by the Chief Executive.

==See also==
* List of people with Hong Kong SAR honours since 1997
* Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom: formerly granted in Hong Kong and ceased after 1997. Honour members can continue to carry the titles, but not officially recognised in Hong Kong by the government after 1997.
* Hong Kong order of precedence
* Orders, decorations, and medals of Macau

==Footnotes==
==External links==
* Honours and Awards – Website of the Administration Wing, Chief Secretary for Administration&#x27;s Office
* Order of precedence in Hong Kong – Website of the Protocol Division
* Honours, hkvca.ca; accessed 9 January 2014</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q835310" start="13" end="37" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong honours system"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="60" end="82" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong" label="transfer of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="86" end="95" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="103" end="134" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="140" end="169" title="special administrative region (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="special administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="216" end="235" title="British overseas territory" label="dependent territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="253" end="275" title="British honours system" label="British honours system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636529" start="388" end="405" title="Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day" label="Establishment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q114985" start="497" end="517" title="Grand Bauhinia Medal" label="Grand Bauhinia Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="775" end="789" title="The Honourable" label="The Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q378062" start="814" end="831" title="Bauhinia blakeana" label="Bauhinia blakeana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558666" start="982" end="1000" title="Gold Bauhinia Star" label="Gold Bauhinia Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q839410" start="1184" end="1204" title="Silver Bauhinia Star" label="Silver Bauhinia Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974237" start="1336" end="1356" title="Bronze Bauhinia Star" label="Bronze Bauhinia Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805059" start="1565" end="1580" title="Medal of Honour (Hong Kong)" label="Medal of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805029" start="2018" end="2042" title="Medal for Bravery (Gold)" label="Medal for Bravery (Gold)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805030" start="2185" end="2211" title="Medal for Bravery (Silver)" label="Medal for Bravery (Silver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805027" start="2270" end="2296" title="Medal for Bravery (Bronze)" label="Medal for Bravery (Bronze)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30999" start="2526" end="2567" title="Independent Commission Against Corruption of Hong Kong" label="Independent Commission Against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q25859" start="2604" end="2620" title="Hong Kong Police" label="Hong Kong Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595073" start="2622" end="2645" title="Hong Kong Fire Services" label="Hong Kong Fire Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860726" start="2647" end="2676" title="Hong Kong Immigration Service" label="Hong Kong Immigration Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355311" start="2678" end="2706" title="Hong Kong Customs and Excise" label="Hong Kong Customs and Excise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304226" start="2708" end="2739" title="Hong Kong Correctional Services" label="Hong Kong Correctional Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q838895" start="2749" end="2774" title="Government Flying Service" label="Government Flying Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636509" start="4024" end="4050" title="Hong Kong Auxiliary Police" label="Hong Kong Auxiliary Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q752790" start="4650" end="4669" title="Emblem of Hong Kong" label="Emblem of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q838921" start="5323" end="5380" title="Public holidays in Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5520" end="5562" title="Orders, decorations and medals of the United Kingdom#Modern honours" label="See Modern Honours from the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5565" end="5608" title="Orders, decorations and medals of the United Kingdom#Current orders of chivalry" label="See Chivalry orders from the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004840" start="5611" end="5647" title="Hong Kong Disciplined Services Medal" label="Hong Kong Disciplined Services Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="6053" end="6072" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross (VC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255134" start="6082" end="6100" title="John Robert Osborn" label="John Robert Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143510" start="6109" end="6126" title="George Cross" label="George Cross (GC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786367" start="6136" end="6155" title="Mateen Ahmed Ansari" label="Mateen Ahmed Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218574" start="6201" end="6222" title="John Alexander Fraser" label="John Alexander Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="6354" end="6387" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order (DSO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6621" end="6668" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire (CBE) for Gallantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6748" end="6795" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire (OBE) for Gallantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6989" end="7036" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire (MBE) for Gallantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q764256" start="7432" end="7459" title="Indian Order of Merit" label="Indian Order of Merit (IOM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229529" start="7568" end="7601" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94340" start="7765" end="7795" title="Royal Red Cross" label="Royal Red Cross – Member (RRC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="7901" end="7920" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross (MC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427600" start="9107" end="9128" title="Air Force Cross (United Kingdom)" label="Air Force Cross (AFC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94340" start="9325" end="9359" title="Royal Red Cross" label="Royal Red Cross – Associate (ARRC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29047533" start="9548" end="9563" title="Anna May Waters" label="Anna May Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q339016" start="9572" end="9605" title="Distinguished Conduct Medal" label="Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507907" start="9948" end="9965" title="George Medal" label="George Medal (GM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792177" start="10465" end="10509" title="King&amp;#x27;s Police Medal for Gallantry" label="King&amp;#x27;s Police Medal for Gallantry (KPM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792177" start="10806" end="10851" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Police Medal for Gallantry" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Police Medal for Gallantry (QPM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404179" start="10886" end="10927" title="Indian Distinguished Service Medal" label="Indian Distinguished Service Medal (IDSM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483675" start="10956" end="10989" title="Distinguished Service Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Service Medal (DSM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="11064" end="11083" title="Military Medal" label="Military Medal (MM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592666" start="12237" end="12258" title="Air Force Medal" label="Air Force Medal (AFM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935462" start="12303" end="12328" title="Sea Gallantry Medal" label="Sea Gallantry Medal (SGM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113935" start="13226" end="13267" title="Colonial Police Medal for Gallantry" label="Colonial Police Medal for Gallantry (CPM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q72039" start="14558" end="14592" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gallantry Medal" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gallantry Medal (QGM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q918601" start="15435" end="15475" title="British Empire Medal" label="British Empire Medal for Gallantry (BEM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269958" start="16908" end="16975" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Brave Conduct" label="King&amp;#x27;s/Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Brave Conduct (KCBC/QCBC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269959" start="18414" end="18457" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Bravery" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Bravery (QCB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269959" start="18628" end="18683" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Bravery in the Air" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Bravery in the Air (QCBA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630922" start="18764" end="18821" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Valuable Service in the Air" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commendation for Valuable Service in the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q596660" start="20064" end="20079" title="New Territories" label="New Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135366" start="20085" end="20119" title="Chief Secretary for Administration" label="Chief Secretary for Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="20276" end="20282" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124458" start="20423" end="20475" title="List of people with Hong Kong SAR honours since 1997" label="List of people with Hong Kong SAR honours since 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="20478" end="20531" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom" label="Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="20553" end="20562" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895408" start="20710" end="20739" title="Hong Kong order of precedence" label="Hong Kong order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923962" start="20742" end="20782" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Macau" label="Orders, decorations, and medals of Macau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498980" wikidata="Q940354" url="?curid=498980" title="Egg of Columbus">
<text>An egg of Columbus or Columbus&#x27;s egg ( ) refers to a seemingly impossible task that becomes easy once understood. The expression refers to an apocryphal story, dating from at least the 16th century, in which it is said that Christopher Columbus, having been told that finding a new trade route was inevitable and no great accomplishment, challenges his critics to make an egg stand on its tip. After his challengers give up, Columbus does it himself by tapping the egg on the table to flatten its tip.

The story is often alluded to when discussing creativity. The term has also been used as the trade name of a tangram puzzle and several mechanical puzzles.

==Source of the story==

The Columbus egg story may have originated with Italian historian and traveler Girolamo Benzoni. In his book &quot;History of the New World&quot;, published in 1565, he wrote:

The factual accuracy of this story is called into question by its similarity to another tale published fifteen years earlier (while Benzoni was still travelling in the Americas) by painter and architect Giorgio Vasari. According to Vasari, the young Italian architect Filippo Brunelleschi had designed an unusually large and heavy dome for Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence, Italy. City officials had asked to see his model, but he refused, proposing instead:

When the church was finally built it had the shape of half an egg slightly flattened at the top.

==See also==

*Egg balancing, a Chinese tradition
*Gömböc, an egg-like (convex, homogeneous, solid) 3-D body that has only one stable equilibrium
*Gordian Knot, a legendary impossible knot
*Hindsight bias, the inclination to see events that have already occurred as being more predictable than they were before they took place
*Superegg, an egg-like shape designed by Piet Hein that stands on its ends
*Tesla&#x27;s Egg of Columbus, Westinghouse Electric display at the 1893 Chicago World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition 
*Väinämöinen in Kalevala was asked to tie an egg into a knot, in which he succeeded

==Notes==
==References==
*Baldwin, James. &quot;Columbus and the egg&quot;, 1903.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q940354" start="3" end="18" title="Egg of Columbus" label="egg of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q940354" start="22" end="41" title="Egg of Columbus" label="Columbus&amp;#x27;s egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="147" end="156" title="apocrypha" label="apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="229" end="249" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="377" end="380" title="Egg (food)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="554" end="564" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347849" start="615" end="631" title="Egg of Columbus (tangram puzzle)" label="a tangram puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347848" start="636" end="662" title="Egg of Columbus (mechanical puzzle)" label="several mechanical puzzles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236037" start="769" end="785" title="Girolamo Benzoni" label="Girolamo Benzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="1070" end="1084" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="1135" end="1155" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="1207" end="1228" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Santa Maria del Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1232" end="1240" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347850" start="1441" end="1454" title="Egg balancing" label="Egg balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031518" start="1477" end="1483" title="Gömböc" label="Gömböc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193373" start="1573" end="1585" title="Gordian Knot" label="Gordian Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960297" start="1616" end="1630" title="Hindsight bias" label="Hindsight bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329738" start="1754" end="1762" title="Superegg" label="Superegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q359592" start="1794" end="1803" title="Piet Hein (Denmark)" label="Piet Hein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499460" start="1829" end="1857" title="Tesla&amp;#x27;s Egg of Columbus" label="Tesla&amp;#x27;s Egg of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616178" start="1945" end="1956" title="Väinämöinen" label="Väinämöinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130924" start="1960" end="1968" title="Kalevala" label="Kalevala"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498983" wikidata="Q2659023" url="?curid=498983" title="First Polish Army (1944–1945)">
<text>The Polish First Army (, 1 AWP for short, also known as Berling&#x27;s Army) was an army unit of the Polish Armed Forces in the East. It was formed in the Soviet Union in 1944, from the previously existing Polish I Corps in the Soviet Union, as part of the People&#x27;s Army of Poland (LWP). The First Army fought westward, subordinated to the Soviet 1st Belorussian Front, during the offensive against Nazi Germany that led to the capture of Warsaw in January 1945, and the capture of Berlin in May 1945.

==Formation==
The First Army was formed in the Soviet Union in 1944, from the previously existing Polish I Corps as part of the People&#x27;s Army of Poland (LWP). On 10 August 1943, the Soviets gave permission for enlarging the Polish 1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division into a Corps (Polish I Corps). The new formation was to be composed of two infantry divisions, one artillery and one armor brigade, one support and one air regiment, four independent battalions, and support units. On 29 July 1944 the Polish units were reorganized into the 1st Polish Army. From October 12 to 14, 1943, the First Polish Infantry Division made an assault on Lenino near
Smolensk and sustained twenty-five percent losses. Later, the 1ST Kosciuszko Infantry Division fought in Berlin around the Reich Chancellery and the Reichstag. At this stage of the war, the Polish role in the Soviet drive westward was fairly substantial,
contributing 200,000 troops; this was approximately ten percent of the force taking part in Zhukov&#x27;s and Konev&#x27;s drive on Berlin.

==Personnel==

Initially, the Polish personnel of the First Polish Army were recruited from Polish soldiers taken prisoner during the 1939 Soviet invasion of Poland (after Germany conquered western Poland), and from Poles deported from Soviet-occupied Poland in 1939–1941. They were nearly all of the First Army&#x27;s front-line combat troops. However, many Soviet personnel served in the First Army, including 39% of officers and technical specialists, while for senior officers the proportion reached 75%. As the Red Army moved into Polish areas west of the Curzon Line, draftees from those areas also became available for the First Polish Army (and Second Polish Army) in accordance with the August 15, 1944, decree of the Polish Committee of National Liberation (the Lublin government).

Until October 1944, the First Army was commanded by Lt. Gen. Zygmunt Berling. His second-in-command was Lt. Gen. Karol Świerczewski. Col. Włodzimierz Sokorski was the chief political officer. The corps took part in combat from September 1943.

==Operational history==

Operating under the auspices of the Red Army, it first entered combat in the summer of 1944 as part of the 1st Belorussian Front on the right wing of the Lvov-Sandomierz Operation, fighting in the battles during the Soviet crossing of the river Vistula around Dęblin and Puławy. In September 1944, units of the First Army were involved in heavy fighting during the latter stages of the Warsaw Uprising after crossing the river Vistula following the capture of Warsaw&#x27;s eastern Praga district, but suffered heavy losses.

After eventually taking control of Warsaw in January 1945, the First Army took part in the Vistula–Oder Offensive, and afterwards it moved towards Bydgoszcz. The Polish First Army then fought in Pomerania, breaking through the Pomeranian Wall (&quot;Pommernstellung&quot;) fortified line and capturing Fortress Kolberg, a heavily fortified city, in March. Its units advanced northeast as far as Gdańsk and During the battles to penetrate the Pomeranian fortifications, the 1st &quot;Warsaw&quot; Cavalry Brigade made the last mounted charge of Polish cavalry at the village of Schoenfeld.

In the spring of 1945 the army, now numbering 78,556 soldiers, was redeployed to the front on the Oder river in preparation for the final Soviet offensive of the war in Europe. The Polish Second Army also entered the line of battle at this time, and together the two armies contributed about 10% of the total forces involved in the operation. During the offensive it crossed the river on April 16 and joined the Battle of Berlin. In this, among other actions, Polish units of the 1st Army crossed the Hohenzollern Canal and advanced on Kremmen, Flatow, Paaren and Nauen. They ended their campaign by participating in the Battle of Berlin. In the Berlin Offensive, the First Polish Army&#x27;s strength was over 74,000, thus making up 7.5% of the strength of the Soviet 1st Belorussian Front, which counted over 980,000 men when the Polish First Army is included in the total. During the Berlin Offensive, the Polish First Army sustained casualties of over 10,400 men. The troops of the 1st Infantry Division supported by the 2nd Howitzer Artillery Brigade and the 1st Independent Mortar Brigade, fought in Berlin around the Technical University and the southwestern side of the Tiergarten close to the Berlin Zoo.

The army was disbanded after the war on August 22, 1945. Its constituent units went on to serve in the armed forces of the newly created Polish People&#x27;s Republic.

==Organization==
The 1st Polish Army was very similar in organisation to other standard general purpose armies making up the bulk of Red Army&#x27;s order of battle. It had a good mix of infantry units and artillery together with other support arms. Its armor capability was considerably weaker, and consisted of only one organic tank brigade. In manpower it was broadly equivalent to an American infantry corps, having a strength of 74,530 men on May 1, 1945. At the end of the war in 1945, it consisted of the following large units (honorific names given in brackets)

==See also==
*Second Army (Poland)
*Monument to the Soldiers of the First Polish Army
*Polish Armed Forces in the East
*Polish Armed Forces in the West
*Emilia Plater Independent Women&#x27;s Battalion
*&quot;Four Tank-Men and a Dog&quot; - TV series

== Notes ==
== Sources ==

* Czesław Grzelak and others, &quot;Armia Berlinga i Żymierskiego&quot;, Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Neriton, 2002.
* G. F. Krivosheev, &quot;Soviet casualties and combat losses in the Twentieth Century&quot;, London: Greenhill Books, 1997.
* Steven J. Zaloga, &quot;The Polish Army 1939–45&quot;, Oxford: Osprey, 1998.
==External links==
*Polish Army in the East 1943–1945</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="4" end="21" title="First Polish Army (1944–1945)" label="Polish First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="56" end="75" title="First Polish Army (1944–1945)" label="Berling&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q474867" start="101" end="132" title="Polish Armed Forces in the East" label="Polish Armed Forces in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="155" end="167" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143263" start="257" end="285" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088142" start="352" end="373" title="1st Belorussian Front" label="1st Belorussian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="404" end="416" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q159065" start="433" end="450" title="Vistula–Oder Offensive" label="capture of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="472" end="493" title="Battle of Berlin" label="the capture of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143263" start="636" end="664" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329954" start="737" end="784" title="Polish 1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division" label="Polish 1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="792" end="797" title="Corps#Soviet Union" label="Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="799" end="813" title="Polish I Corps in the Soviet Union" label="Polish I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="1705" end="1730" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335255" start="2127" end="2138" title="Curzon Line" label="Curzon Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029870" start="2219" end="2237" title="Second Polish Army" label="Second Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40147" start="2293" end="2332" title="Polish Committee of National Liberation" label="Polish Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40147" start="2338" end="2355" title="Lublin government" label="Lublin government"/>
<link wikidata="Q245320" start="2420" end="2435" title="Zygmunt Berling" label="Zygmunt Berling"/>
<link wikidata="Q142768" start="2472" end="2490" title="Karol Świerczewski" label="Karol Świerczewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943955" start="2497" end="2517" title="Włodzimierz Sokorski" label="Włodzimierz Sokorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="2664" end="2672" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088142" start="2735" end="2756" title="1st Belorussian Front" label="1st Belorussian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q313748" start="2782" end="2807" title="Lvov-Sandomierz Operation" label="Lvov-Sandomierz Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="2873" end="2880" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q983732" start="2888" end="2894" title="Dęblin" label="Dęblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320007" start="2899" end="2905" title="Puławy" label="Puławy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="3014" end="3029" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3088" end="3094" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3189" end="3195" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q159065" start="3245" end="3267" title="Vistula–Oder Offensive" label="Vistula–Oder Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="3301" end="3310" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q91258" start="3381" end="3396" title="Pomeranian Wall" label="Pomeranian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503720" start="3456" end="3472" title="Battle of Kolberg (1945)" label="Fortress Kolberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="3549" end="3555" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872333" start="3675" end="3712" title="Battle of Schoenfeld" label="last mounted charge of Polish cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="3842" end="3852" title="Oder river" label="Oder river"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029870" start="3925" end="3943" title="Polish Second Army" label="Polish Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="4156" end="4172" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q695548" start="4245" end="4263" title="Oder–Havel Canal" label="Hohenzollern Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q587094" start="4280" end="4287" title="Kremmen" label="Kremmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q249166" start="4289" end="4295" title="Złotów" label="Flatow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4297" end="4303" title="Paaren" label="Paaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q581994" start="4308" end="4313" title="Nauen" label="Nauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="4365" end="4381" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="4390" end="4406" title="Berlin Offensive" label="Berlin Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329954" start="4730" end="4751" title="Polish 1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q713400" start="4840" end="4856" title="Battle in Berlin" label="fought in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="4868" end="4888" title="Technical University of Berlin" label="Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q694020" start="4922" end="4932" title="Tiergarten (park)" label="Tiergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q154828" start="4946" end="4956" title="Zoologischer Garten Berlin" label="Berlin Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="5096" end="5125" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597661" start="5232" end="5238" title="Army (Soviet Army)" label="armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="5315" end="5323" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="5334" end="5343" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="5450" end="5457" title="Organic (military)" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="5534" end="5539" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326966" start="5663" end="5672" title="honorific" label="honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029870" start="5713" end="5733" title="Second Army (Poland)" label="Second Army (Poland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823607" start="5735" end="5784" title="Monument to the Soldiers of the First Polish Army" label="Monument to the Soldiers of the First Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q474867" start="5786" end="5817" title="Polish Armed Forces in the East" label="Polish Armed Forces in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q119879" start="5819" end="5850" title="Polish Armed Forces in the West" label="Polish Armed Forces in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028003" start="5852" end="5900" title="Emilia Plater Independent Women&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Emilia Plater Independent Women&amp;#x27;s Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q990" start="5908" end="5931" title="Four Tank-Men and a Dog" label="Four Tank-Men and a Dog"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="498985" wikidata="Q27158" url="?curid=498985" title="Barkas (van manufacturer)">
<text>Barkas was the East German manufacturer of small delivery vans and minibuses named the B 1000. In addition to delivery vans, Barkas also made engines for Trabant cars.

The van was built in a new factory in Chemnitz (then known as Karl-Marx-Stadt) on a site which was formerly home to the Framo car plant, the old Framo factory having been crated up and shipped to the Soviet Union as part of a larger war reparations package in the late 1940s. The business had subsequently been nationalized by the GDR government.

B 1000 production started in 1961 and continued until 1991. Originally the B 1000 was powered by the 45 PS three cylinder, two stroke DKW derived engine found also in contemporary Wartburgs. Shortly before production ceased, the model designation was changed to B 1000/1, and the old engine was replaced by a 1.3 four-stroke engine manufactured under licence from Volkswagen. The Belgian importer began installing a 1.8-litre (Endura-D) Ford diesel engine in the 1980s as the two-stroke was no longer competitive.

The B 1000 was a remarkable van at the time; the unusually high loading capacity, two-stroke engine, front wheel drive and semi trailing arms suspension differed from the more traditionally constructed vans in the West. Being the only commercially available van in East Germany, the factory offered many body styles; a flatbed, a panel van, a people carrier, a box van and an ambulance were all available.

Comparisons with the Volkswagen van of the early 1960s were inevitable. Its front-mounted engine made the Barkas easier to load and more variable in its configuration, with space for up to eight passenger seats. The vehicles were mostly produced for public service applications, with private customer delivery times in the 1960s stretching to heroic levels commonly associated with Trabants, of between ten and fourteen years.

Perhaps the most infamous alleged use of the B 1000 in the time of East Germany was by the feared Stasi state security forces as a covert prisoner transport vehicle, whereby up to five prisoners could be held in tiny, windowless cells in the rear of the vehicle. The vans were often used allegedly to snatch citizens directly from the street, and were usually disguised as food delivery trucks. Examples of vans configured in this way can be found on display at the former Stasi headquarters in Berlin, as well as the Hohenschönhausen prison used to hold political prisoners.

Altogether 175,740 B1000s and 1,961 B1000-1s were built.

==See also==

* Tempo Matador
* DKW Schnellaster
* VW T1

==Gallery==
==References==
== External links ==

*UK IFA owners&#x27; club Barkas page
* www.barkas.de
* Website zum 4-Takt-Barkas B1000-1
* Fire Museum Frankenberg
* https://web.archive.org/web/20041209040812/http://home.clara.net/peterfrost/barkas.html Alternative Autos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27158" start="0" end="6" title="Barkas (van manufacturer)" label="Barkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="15" end="26" title="East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="67" end="74" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q790475" start="87" end="93" title="Barkas B 1000" label="B 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795" start="207" end="215" title="Chemnitz" label="Chemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q314813" start="289" end="294" title="Framo (car)" label="Framo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="369" end="381" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="500" end="503" title="East Germany" label="GDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q790475" start="517" end="523" title="Barkas B 1000" label="B 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q639268" start="651" end="654" title="DKW" label="DKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="868" end="875" title="licence" label="licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="881" end="891" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467730" start="944" end="952" title="Ford Endura-D engine" label="Endura-D"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1460" end="1474" title="Volkswagen Type 2#T1" label="Volkswagen van"/>
<link wikidata="Q153681" start="1821" end="1828" title="Trabant" label="Trabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="1965" end="1970" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q570472" start="2340" end="2358" title="Stasi Museum" label="Stasi headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q390508" start="2385" end="2408" title="Berlin-Hohenschönhausen Memorial" label="Hohenschönhausen prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q315341" start="2518" end="2523" title="Tempo (automobile)" label="Tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097034" start="2534" end="2550" title="DKW Schnellaster" label="DKW Schnellaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="2553" end="2558" title="VW T1" label="VW T1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499002" wikidata="Q539027" url="?curid=499002" title="Zenzizenzizenzic">
<text>Zenzizenzizenzic is an obsolete form of mathematical notation representing the eighth power of a number (that is, the zenzizenzizenzic of &quot;x&quot; is &quot;x&quot;8), dating from a time when powers were written out in words rather than as superscript numbers. This term was suggested by Robert Recorde, a 16th-century Welsh physician, mathematician and writer of popular mathematics textbooks, in his 1557 work &quot;The Whetstone of Witte&quot; (although his spelling was &quot;zenzizenzizenzike&quot;); he wrote that it &quot;doeth represent the square of squares squaredly&quot;.

== History ==
At the time Recorde proposed this notation, there was no easy way of denoting the powers of numbers other than squares and cubes. The root word for Recorde&#x27;s notation is zenzic, which is a German spelling of the medieval Italian word , meaning &#x27;squared&#x27;. Since the square of a square of a number is its fourth power, Recorde used the word &quot;zenzizenzic&quot; (spelled by him as &quot;zenzizenzike&quot;) to express it. Some of the terms had prior use in Latin , and . Similarly, as the sixth power of a number is equal to the square of its cube, Recorde used the word &quot;zenzicubike&quot; to express it; a more modern spelling, &quot;zenzicube&quot;, is found in Samuel Jeake&#x27;s &quot;Arithmetick Surveighed and Reviewed&quot;. Finally, the word &quot;zenzizenzizenzic&quot; denotes the square of the square of a number&#x27;s square, which is its eighth power: in modern notation,
:formula_1

Samuel Jeake gives &quot;zenzizenzizenzizenzike&quot; (the square of the square of the square of the square, or 16th power) in a table in &quot;A Compleat Body of Arithmetick&quot; (1701):

The word, as well as the system, is obsolete except as a curiosity; the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (&quot;OED&quot;) has only one citation for it.
As well as being a mathematical oddity, it survives as a linguistic oddity: &quot;zenzizenzizenzic&quot; has more Zs than any other word in the OED.

== Notation for other powers ==
Recorde proposed three mathematical terms by which any power (that is, index or exponent) greater than 1 could be expressed: &quot;zenzic&quot;, i.e. squared; &quot;cubic&quot;; and &quot;sursolid&quot;, i.e. raised to a prime number greater than three, the smallest of which is five. Sursolids were as follows: 5 was the first; 7, the second; 11, the third; 13, the fourth; etc.

Therefore, a number raised to the power of six would be &quot;zenzicubic&quot;, a number raised to the power of seven would be the second sursolid, hence &quot;bissursolid&quot; (not a multiple of two and three), a number raised to the twelfth power would be the &quot;zenzizenzicubic&quot; and a number raised to the power of ten would be &quot;the square of the (first) sursolid&quot;. The fourteenth power was the square of the second sursolid, and the twenty-second was the square of the third sursolid.

Jeake&#x27;s text appears to designate a written exponent of 0 as being equal to an &quot;absolute number, as if it had no Mark&quot;, thus using the notation x0 to refer to an independent term of a polynomial, while a written exponent of 1, in his text, denotes &quot;the Root of any number&quot; (using &quot;root&quot; with the meaning of the &quot;base&quot; number, i.e. its first power x1, as demonstrated in the examples provided in the book).

== References ==
== See also ==

* Prime factor exponent notation

==External links==

*Entry at World Wide Words</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q539027" start="0" end="16" title="Zenzizenzizenzic" label="Zenzizenzizenzic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140046" start="40" end="61" title="mathematical notation" label="mathematical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84752530" start="79" end="91" title="eighth power" label="eighth power"/>
<link wikidata="Q318192" start="292" end="306" title="Robert Recorde" label="Robert Recorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="323" end="328" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="376" end="387" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087188" start="422" end="444" title="The Whetstone of Witte" label="The Whetstone of Witte"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="685" end="691" title="exponentiation" label="powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="797" end="803" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="820" end="836" title="medieval Italian" label="medieval Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q840676" start="921" end="933" title="fourth power" label="fourth power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411845" start="1288" end="1300" title="Samuel Jeake" label="Samuel Jeake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1314" end="1349" title="Arithmetick Surveighed and Reviewed" label="Arithmetick Surveighed and Reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411845" start="1523" end="1535" title="Samuel Jeake" label="Samuel Jeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1791" end="1816" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751" start="1985" end="1986" title="Z" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="2133" end="2141" title="exponent" label="exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10549775" start="2241" end="2249" title="sursolid" label="sursolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243368" start="3430" end="3460" title="Prime factor exponent notation" label="Prime factor exponent notation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499005" wikidata="Q406043" url="?curid=499005" title="Coron">
<text>Coron can refer to:

==Places==
* Coron, Palawan, a municipality in the Philippines
** Coron Island, under the jurisdiction of the municipality, Philippines
* Coron, Maine-et-Loire, a commune in the Maine-et-Loire &quot;département&quot; in France
* Coron, the Venetian name of the coastal town of Koroni on the Ionian Sea, in present-day Greece.
** Siege of Coron

==People==
* Jean-Michel Coron (born 1956), a French mathematician
* Coron D. Evans (born 1844), an American soldier

==Other==
* (urbanism) Coron, a historical type of working-class housing found in parts of Northern France and Belgium
* &quot;Coron Land&quot;, a 1995 action video game
* Llywelyn&#x27;s coronet (Coron Arthur)
* &quot;Les corons&quot;, French miner&#x27;s song</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q406043" start="0" end="5" title="Coron" label="Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q111414" start="34" end="48" title="Coron, Palawan" label="Coron, Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134477" start="87" end="99" title="Coron Island" label="Coron Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390675" start="159" end="180" title="Coron, Maine-et-Loire" label="Coron, Maine-et-Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q954866" start="298" end="304" title="Koroni" label="Koroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q126902936" start="350" end="364" title="Siege of Coron (disambiguation)" label="Siege of Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685073" start="379" end="396" title="Jean-Michel Coron" label="Jean-Michel Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198461" start="435" end="449" title="Coron D. Evans" label="Coron D. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184150" start="507" end="512" title="Coron (house)" label="Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473772" start="611" end="621" title="Coron Land" label="Coron Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662975" start="656" end="679" title="Llywelyn&amp;#x27;s coronet" label="Llywelyn&amp;#x27;s coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q746087" start="703" end="713" title="Les corons" label="Les corons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499007" wikidata="Q2004984" url="?curid=499007" title="William Cheselden">
<text>William Cheselden (; 19 October 168810 April 1752) was an English surgeon and teacher of anatomy and surgery, who was influential in establishing surgery as a scientific medical profession. Via the medical missionary Benjamin Hobson, his work also helped revolutionize medical practices in China and Japan in the 19th century.

==Life==

Cheselden was born in Somerby, Leicestershire on 19 October 1688. He studied anatomy in London under William Cowper (1666–1709), and began lecturing anatomy in 1710. That same year, he was admitted to the London Company of Barber-Surgeons, passing the final examination on 29 January 1711.

He was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1712 and the following year saw the publishing of his &quot;Anatomy of the Human Body&quot;, which achieved great popularity becoming an essential study source for students, lasting through thirteen editions, mainly because it was written in English instead of Latin as was customary.

In 1718 he was appointed an assistant surgeon at St Thomas&#x27; Hospital in London, becoming full surgeon in 1719 or 1720 where his specialisation of the removal of bladder stones resulted in the increase in survival rates. Afterwards, he was appointed surgeon for the stone at Westminster Infirmary and surgeon to Queen Caroline. He also improved eye surgery, developing new techniques, particularly in the removal of cataracts. Cheselden was selected as a surgeon at St George&#x27;s Hospital upon its foundation in 1733. 

In 1733 he published &quot;Osteographia or the Anatomy of Bones&quot;, the first full and accurate description of the anatomy of the human skeletal system.

Cheselden retired from St Thomas&#x27; in 1738 and moved to the Chelsea Hospital. His abode is listed as &quot;Chelsea College&quot; on the 1739 royal charter for the Foundling Hospital, a charity for which he was a founding governor.

In 1744 he was elected to the position of Warden of the Company of Barber-Surgeons, and had a role in the separation of the surgeons from the barbers and to the creation of the independent Company of Surgeons in 1745, an organisation that would become later the famous Royal College of Surgeons of England.

He died in Bath on 10 April 1752 aged 63.

==First surgical recovery from blindness==
Cheselden is credited with performing the first known case of full recovery from blindness in 1728, of a blind 13-year-old boy. Cheselden presented the celebrated case of a boy of thirteen who gained his sight after removal of the lenses rendered opaque by cataract from birth.
Despite his youth, the boy encountered profound difficulties with the simplest visual perceptions. 
Described by Cheselden:

When he first saw, he was so far from making any judgment of distances, that he thought all object whatever touched his eyes (as he expressed it) as what he felt did his skin, and thought no object so agreeable as those which were smooth and regular, though he could form no judgment of their shape, or guess what it was in any object that was pleasing to him: he knew not the shape of anything, nor any one thing from another, however different in shape or magnitude; but upon being told what things were, whose form he knew before from feeling, he would carefully observe, that he might know them again;
Philosopher George Berkeley claimed that his visual theories were “vindicated” by Cheselden&#x27;s 1728 report on this congenital cataract patient. In 2021, the patient&#x27;s name was published for the first time: Daniel Dolins. Berkeley knew the Dolins family, had numerous social links to Cheselden, including the poet Alexander Pope, and Princess Caroline, to whom Cheselden&#x27;s patient was presented. The report misspelled Cheselden&#x27;s name, used language typical of Berkeley, and may even have been ghost-written by Berkeley. Unfortunately, Dolins was never able to see well enough to read, and there is no evidence that the surgery improved Dolins&#x27; vision at any point prior to his death at age 30.

==Works==
Cheselden is famous for the invention of the lateral lithotomy approach to removing bladder stones, which he first performed in 1727. The procedure had a short duration (minutes instead of hours) and a low mortality rate (approximately 50%). Cheselden had already developed in 1723 the suprapubic approach, which he published in &quot;A Treatise on the High Operation for the Stone&quot;. In France, his works were developed by Claude-Nicolas Le Cat.

He also effected a great advance in ophthalmic surgery by his operation, iridectomy, described in 1728, to treat certain forms of blindness by producing an artificial pupil. Cheselden also described the role of saliva in digestion. He attended Sir Isaac Newton in his last illness and was an intimate friend of Alexander Pope and of Sir Hans Sloane.

==References==
==Sources==

*R. H. Nichols and F A. Wray, &quot;The History of the Foundling Hospital&quot; (London: Oxford University Press, 1935), p. 353.
*
*
*
*
*
*Cope, Zachary; &quot;William Cheselden&quot;, &quot;1688–1752.&quot; Edinburgh: E. &amp; S. Livingstone, 1953.

==External links==

* William Cheselden (1666–1709). Surgical Tutor.
* Cheselden, Wm: Osteographia or the Anatomy of the Bones. Scanned pages of the original work. Historical Anatomies in the Web. US National Library of Medicine.
* Complete scanned copy of the Ostepgraphia in the public domain at Biu Sante.
* The Anatomy of the Human Body (1750) at the Internet Archive.
* Accuracy and Elegance in Cheselden&#x27;s Osteographia (1733) article by Monique Kornell, including gallery and comprehensive links to public domain online copies.
* Selected images from &quot;Anatomy of the Humane Body&quot; From The College of Physicians of Philadelphia Digital Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2004984" start="0" end="17" title="William Cheselden" label="William Cheselden"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="89" end="96" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806569" start="198" end="216" title="Medical missions in China" label="medical missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888825" start="217" end="232" title="Benjamin Hobson" label="Benjamin Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="290" end="295" title="Qing Empire" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="300" end="305" title="Tokugawa Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559736" start="360" end="383" title="Somerby, Leicestershire" label="Somerby, Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="415" end="422" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047779" start="439" end="453" title="William Cowper (anatomist)" label="William Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584160" start="550" end="576" title="Company of Barber-Surgeons" label="Company of Barber-Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="663" end="676" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="941" end="946" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="1015" end="1039" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825881" start="1132" end="1146" title="bladder stones" label="bladder stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989168" start="1245" end="1266" title="Westminster Hospital" label="Westminster Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="1282" end="1296" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Queen Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="1386" end="1394" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q772421" start="1436" end="1461" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Hospital Medical School" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="1632" end="1647" title="skeletal system" label="skeletal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628509" start="1714" end="1730" title="Chelsea Hospital" label="Chelsea Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="1795" end="1808" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439887" start="1817" end="1835" title="Foundling Hospital" label="Foundling Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584160" start="2075" end="2094" title="Company of Surgeons" label="Company of Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584160" start="2155" end="2191" title="Royal College of Surgeons of England" label="Royal College of Surgeons of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="2205" end="2209" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303011" start="2347" end="2370" title="recovery from blindness" label="recovery from blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q21714486" start="4071" end="4080" title="lithotomy" label="lithotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="4102" end="4109" title="Urinary bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="4224" end="4233" title="death" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q16027703" start="4446" end="4467" title="Claude-Nicolas Le Cat" label="Claude-Nicolas Le Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="4506" end="4524" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672638" start="4543" end="4553" title="iridectomy" label="iridectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="4681" end="4687" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="4691" end="4700" title="digestion" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="4718" end="4730" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="4781" end="4795" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q310326" start="4807" end="4818" title="Hans Sloane" label="Hans Sloane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499012" wikidata="Q585537" url="?curid=499012" title="Hot Wheels">
<text>Hot Wheels is an American media franchise and brand of scale model cars invented by Elliot Handler and introduced by his company Mattel on May 18, 1968. It was the primary competitor of Matchbox until Mattel bought Matchbox owner Tyco Toys in 1997.

Many automobile manufacturers have since licensed Hot Wheels to make scale models of their cars, allowing the use of original design blueprints and detailing. Although Hot Wheels were originally intended to be children&#x27;s toys, they have become popular with adult collectors, for whom limited edition models are now made available.

==History==
===Development===
The original Hot Wheels were made by Elliot Handler. Handler discovered his son Kenneth playing with Matchbox cars and decided to create a line to compete with Matchbox. Hot Wheels were originally conceived by Handler to be more like &quot;hot rod&quot; cars (i.e., customized/modified or even caricaturized or fantasy cars, often with big rear tires, superchargers, flame paint-jobs, outlandish proportions, hood blowers, etc.), as compared to Matchbox cars which were generally small-scale models of production cars. He began producing the cars with assistance from fellow engineer Jack Ryan. The flame logo was designed by Rick Irons, an art director working at Mattel at the time.

====The Sweet 16====
The first line of Hot Wheels cars, known as &quot;The Original Sweet 16&quot; was manufactured in 1967. These were the first of the Red Line Series, named for the tires which had a red pin stripe on their sides.

There were sixteen castings released, eleven of them designed by Harry Bentley Bradley with assistance from Handler and Ryan. The first one produced was a dark blue &quot;Custom Camaro&quot;. Bradley was from the car industry and had designed the body for the (full-sized) Dodge Deora concept car and the &quot;Custom Fleet side&quot;, (based on his own customized 1966 El Camino).

=== Racing track set ===
In addition to the cars themselves, Mattel produced a racing track set (sold separately). Though it would be updated throughout the years, the original track set consists of a series of bright orange road sections (pieced together to form an oblong, circular race track), with one (or sometimes two) &quot;superchargers&quot; (faux service stations through which cars passed on the tracks, featuring battery-powered spinning wheels, which would propel the cars along the tracks). Hot Wheels&#x27; use of wide, hard-plastic tires created much less friction and tracked more smoothly than the narrow metal or plastic wheels used on contemporary Matchbox cars. Hot Wheels cars were designed to roll easily and at high speeds, which was a great innovation at the time.

===1968–1977: The &quot;Redline&quot; era===

===1968===
The Hot Wheels brand was a staggering success. The series completely disrupted the industry for small die-cast car models from 1968 onward, forcing the competition at Matchbox and elsewhere to completely rethink their concepts, and to scramble to try to recover lost ground. Harry Bentley Bradley did not think that would be the case and had quit Mattel to go back to the car industry. When the company asked him to come back, he recommended a good friend, Ira Gilford. Gilford, who had just left Chrysler, quickly accepted the job of designing the next Hot Wheels models. Some of Hot Wheels&#x27; greatest cars, such as the Twin Mill and Splittin&#x27; Image, came from Ira Gilford&#x27;s drawing board. The Twin Mill was introduced in 1969 and was used to create the company&#x27;s first full-scale replica car in 2001.

The success of the 1968 line was solidified and consolidated with the 1969 releases, with which Hot Wheels effectively established itself as the hottest brand of small toy car models in the USA. &quot;Splittin&#x27; Image&quot;, &quot;Torero&quot;, &quot;Turbofire&quot;, and &quot;Twin Mill&quot; were part of the &quot;Show &amp; Go&quot; series and are the very first original in-house designs by Hot Wheels.

The initial prototypes of the Beach&quot; &quot;Bomb were faithful to the shape of a real VW Type 2 &quot;bus&quot;, and had two surfboards sticking out the back window, in a nod to the VW&#x27;s perceived association with the surfing community and the slang term for a person who spends much time surfing—a &quot;beach bum&quot;. During the fledgling Hot Wheels era, Mattel wanted to make sure that each of the cars could be used with any of the playsets and stunt track sets. Unfortunately, testing showed that this early version (now known among collectors as the Rear-Loader Beach Bomb, or &quot;RLBB&quot;) was too narrow to roll effectively on Hot Wheels track or be powered by the Super Charger, and was too top-heavy to negotiate high-speed corners.

Hot Wheels designers Howard Rees and Larry Wood modified the casting, extending the side fenders to accommodate the track width, as well as providing a new place on the vehicle to store each of the plastic surfboards. The roof was also cut away and replaced by a full-length sunroof, to lower the center of gravity. Nicknamed the Side-loader by collectors, this was the production version of the Beach Bomb.

The &quot;Rear-Loader Beach Bomb&quot; is widely considered the &quot;Holy Grail&quot;, or ultimate pinnacle, of a serious Hot Wheels collection. An unknown number were made as test subjects and given to employees. A regular production &quot;Beach Bomb&quot; may be worth up to $600, depending on condition. Market prices on &quot;RLBBs&quot; however, have easily reached the five-figure plateau, ranging from $70,000 to $120,000. The Petersen Automotive Museum in Los Angeles had a pink &quot;RLBB&quot; in its Hot Wheels exhibit, displayed alone on a rotating platform under glass. The Hot Wheels Collectors Club released a new, updated version of the &quot;Rear Loading Beach Bomb&quot; in 2002 as a limited edition.

===1970s===
1970 was a very successful year for Hot Wheels, so Mattel came up with a new advertising slogan for the cars: &quot;Go With the Winner&quot;. 43 new cars appeared that year, including the Sizzlers and Heavyweights lines. Howard Rees, who worked with Ira Gilford, was tired of designing cars. He wanted to work on the Major Matt Mason action figure toy line-up. Rees had a good friend by the name of Larry Wood, whom he worked with at Ford designing cars. When Wood found out about Hot Wheels at a party Rees was holding, Rees offered him the job of designing Hot Wheels models. Wood accepted, and, by the end of the week, Wood was working at Mattel, where his first design was the Tri-Baby. Larry Wood retired in 2019 after over 40 years of designing cars.

Another designer, Paul Tam, joined Wood and Gilford. Tam&#x27;s first design was the Whip Creamer. Tam continued to work for Mattel until 1973. Among the many fantastic designs Tam thought up for Hot Wheels, some of the collector&#x27;s favorites include Evil Weevil (a Volkswagen Beetle with two engines), Open Fire (an AMC Gremlin with six wheels), Six Shooter (another six-wheeled car), and the rare Double Header (co-designed with Larry Wood).

The year 1970 introduced &quot;the Snake and the Mongoose&quot;, a manufactured &#x27;rivalry&#x27; between two professional drag racers calling themselves &quot;the Snake&quot; and &quot;the Mongoose&quot; for the purposes of publicity. This was notably drag racing&#x27;s first major non-automotive corporate sponsor, and the beginning of the NHRA&#x27;s booming popularity with large-budget teams and championships. 1970 also introduced the first &#x27;Silver Series&#x27;, which contained three silver-painted models: the Boss Hoss, the Heavy&quot; &quot;Chevy, and the King &#x27;Kuda, which were only obtainable through a mail-in offer that included a membership to the Hot Wheels Club. These three cars featured &quot;supercharged&quot; engines (featuring large Roots blowers) without hoods, and open exhaust headers, after the style of drag racing cars of the era. Popular among children, these &#x27;Silver Cars&#x27; were considered faster than the rest of the Hot Wheels lineup, because they were supposedly heavier than the other gravity models, but the accuracy of this claim has never been tested under scientific conditions.

However, 1972 and 1973 were slow years. Only seven new models were made in 1972. Of the 24 models appearing for 1973, only three were new models. Also the cars changed from Mattel&#x27;s in-house &quot;Spectraflame&quot; colors to mostly drab, solid enamel colors, which mainstream Hot Wheels cars still use today. Due to low sales, and the fact that the majority of the castings were not re-used in later years, the 1972-3 models are known to be very collectible.

In 1974, Hot Wheels introduced its &#x27;&quot;Flying&quot; &quot;Colors&quot;&#x27; line, and added flashy decals and &quot;tampo-printed&quot; paint designs which helped revitalize sales. As with the lower-friction wheels in 1968, this innovation was revolutionary in the industry, and—although far less effective in terms of sales impact than in 1968—was copied by the competition, who did not want to be outmaneuvered again by Mattel product strategists.

In 1977, the &#x27;Redline Wheel&#x27; was phased out, with the red lines no longer being printed on the wheels. This cut costs, but also reflected that the prototypical &quot;red line tires&quot; popular on high-speed-rated automotive tires during the era of muscle cars and Polyglas tires were no longer popular. During this period, there was a trend away from wild hot rods and fantastic cars, and a move to more realistic cars and trucks, like the competitor Matchbox.

===1977–1988: The &#x27;Blackwalls&#x27; era===
In 1981, Hot Ones wheels were introduced, which had gold-painted hubs, and claimed to have thinner axles for greater speed, along with additional suspension compliance that older production Hot Wheels lacked. Ultra Hot Wheels were introduced in 1984, and looked something like the cast alloy wheels found on a 1980s-era high-trim Renault Fuego or a Mazda 626, with three parallel dark lines cutting diagonally across the flat chrome face of the wheel, all three broken in the center to form six individual shorter lines. These new &quot;&quot;Ultra Hots&quot; claimed further speed improvements. Hot Wheels started offering models based on 1980s-era sports and economy cars, like the Pontiac Fiero or Dodge Omni 024, in addition to their typical &#x27;hot rod&#x27; and muscle car style offerings. In 1983, a new style of wheel called Real Riders was introduced, which featured real rubber tires. Despite the fact that they were very popular, the Real Riders line was short-lived, because of high production costs. In the late 1980s, the so-called Blue&quot; &quot;Card blister pack color scheme was introduced, which would become the basis of Hot Wheels colors still used today (original blister packs were red and yellow).
Two other innovations were introduced briefly in Hot Wheels cars in the 1980s – &quot;Thermal Color Change&quot; paint, and rotating &#x27;crash panel&#x27; vehicles (&quot;Crack-Ups&quot;&quot;). The former was able to change color on exposure to hot or cold water, and there was an initial release of 20 different cars, available as sets of three vehicles. The latter were vehicles with a panel that, on contact, would rotate to reveal a reverse side that appeared to be heavily dented. Variations in crash panels included front, rear and side panels, the last of whose mechanism has proven to be the most durable.

In the 1980s, Hot Wheels had gotten into a controversy with General Motors&#x27; Chevrolet Motors Division. In 1982, the Chevrolet Corvette had ended the curvaceous &quot;Mako Shark&quot; body style that had been in production for almost 15 years, and GM announced that the Corvette would be redesigned. In 1983, Chevrolet started to produce the all-new C4 Corvette but had assembly line problems which pushed production back 6 months causing GM&#x27;s Marketing Department to label all 1983s as 1984s once they got production perfected so it would seem to the public that the all-new C4 Corvette came out early rather than late. But Hot Wheels saw what the new model of Corvette was going to look like before GM&#x27;s official unveiling, and they designed a die-cast version of the 1984 Corvette. GM was angered and almost pulled its licensing with Mattel, but this controversy helped Corvette enthusiasts see what the new Corvette was going to look like. The 1984 Corvette production ran for 1.5 model years covering half of the remaining 1983 model year and ending on time for the 1985 model year.

In conjunction with Epyx Software, Mattel released a computer game edition of Hot Wheels for various 8-bit platforms in 1985, as part of the Computer Activity Toys series.

===1989–1994: The collector number era===
In 1989, Mattel released collector numbers. Each car had its own number. The cards were all blue, for all blister packs released from 1989 to 1994. Numbers included went as high as 274; however, these were skip numbered, and numbers such as 48, 61, and 173 were not used.

=== 1995–1999: The Treasure Hunt era ===
The year 1995 brought a major change to the Hot Wheels line, where the cars were split up into series. One was the 1995 Model Series, which included all of that year&#x27;s new castings. In 1996, the Model Series was renamed to First Editions. 1995 also saw the introduction of the &quot;Treasure Hunt Series&quot; (see below). The rest of the series included four cars with paint schemes that followed a theme. For example, the &quot;Pearl Driver&quot; cars all had pearlescent paint. Sales for the series models soared with another program also introduced that year called the &quot;Bonus&quot; &quot;Car&quot; program, causing stores across the nation to have shortages. Purchasing the four car sets and sending in the packaging backs plus a handling fee gave you the opportunity to collect the bonus cars, 1 each released for each quarter of the year starting in 1996 through at least 2000. Several new wheel designs were also introduced in the 1990s.

Mattel bought Tyco Toys in 1997. Along with the purchase came the company&#x27;s old competitor Matchbox. Arguably the two dominant companies in matchbox-sized cars were now under one roof.

In 1998, Mattel celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Hot Wheels brand by replicating various cars and individual packaging from its 30-year history and packaging these replicated vehicles in special 30th Anniversary boxes. In 1999, Hot Wheels Interactive was launched.

=== 2000s ===
A new generation of Hot Wheels Designers came in. Eric Tscherne and Fraser Campbell along with former designer Paul Tam&#x27;s son, Alec Tam, joined the design team. Tscherne&#x27;s &quot;Seared Tuner&quot; (formerly &quot;Sho-Stopper&quot;) graced the mainline packaging from 2000 to 2003. The &quot;Deora II&quot;, one of only two Hot Wheels concept cars ever made into full-size, functional cars, was also released this year.

In 2001, Mattel created a Hot Wheels collectors website.

Also in 2001, Mattel issued 240 mainline releases consisting of 12 &quot;Treasure Hunts&quot;, 36 &quot;First Editions&quot;, 12 &quot;Segment Series&quot; with four cars each, and 144 open stock cars. Popular models that debuted include the HyperMite and FrightBike.

For 2002, the mainline consisted of 12 &quot;Treasure Hunts&quot;, 42 &quot;First Editions&quot;, 15 &quot;Segment Series&quot; of 4 cars each, and 126 open stock cars. Popular new models included the `68 Cougar and the Nissan Skyline GT-R. Some cars from the first editions series are the &quot;Backdraft&quot;, &quot;Overbored 454&quot;, and &quot;Super Tsunami&quot;.

=== 2003 ===
Hot Wheels celebrated its 35th anniversary with a full-length animated film called &quot;Hot Wheels Highway 35 World Race&quot;. This movie tied into the &quot;Highway 35&quot; line of cars that featured 35 classic Hot Wheels cars with special graphics and co-molded wheels.

=== 2004 ===
In 2004, Hot Wheels unveiled its &quot;Hot 100&quot; line of 100 new models. These included mostly short-lived lines of cartoonish vehicles such as &quot;Tooned&quot; (vehicles based on the larger &quot;Hot&quot; &quot;Tunerz&quot; line of Hot Wheels created by Eric Tscherne), &quot;Blings&quot; (boxy bodies and big wheels), &quot;Hardnoze&quot; (enlarged fronts), &quot;Crooze&quot; (stretched out bodies), and &quot;Fatbax&quot; (super-wide rear wheels and short bodies). &quot;Fatbax&quot; models included vehicles such as the Toyota Supra and Corvette C6. These vehicles did not sell as well as Mattel expected, and many could still be found in stores throughout 2005. Mattel also released 2004 &quot;First Editions&quot; cars with unpainted Zamac bodies. They were sold through Toys &#x27;R&#x27; Us and were made in limited numbers.

=== 2005 and 2006 ===
In 2005, Hot Wheels continued with new &quot;extreme&quot; castings for the 2nd year, debuting the &quot;Torpedoes&quot; line (skinny bodies and outboard wheels) and &quot;Drop Tops&quot; (flattened rooflines and wheel arches that extend above the car&#x27;s roofline), in addition to 20 &quot;&quot;Realistix&quot; models. The rest of the line included the standard 12 &quot;Treasure Hunts&quot;, 10 &quot;Track Aces&quot;, 50 &quot;Segment Series&quot; &quot;Cars&quot;, and 50 &quot;Open Stock Models&quot;. Four Volkswagen &quot;Mystery&quot; &quot;Cars&quot;&quot; were offered as a special mail-in promo. Each &quot;Mystery&quot; &quot;Car&quot; came with a special voucher. Upon collection of all 4 vouchers, one was able to send away for a special 13th &quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunt&quot;, a &quot;VW Drag Bus.&quot;

Hot Wheels also unveiled its new &quot;Faster than Ever&quot; line of cars, which had special nickel-plated axles, along with bronze-colored &quot;Open-Hole 5 Spoke&quot; wheels. These adjustments supposedly reduced friction dramatically. The first run of these cars were available for a limited time only, from the beginning of October towards the end of November 2005.

Also, a continuation of the movie &quot;Highway 35&quot; called &quot;Hot Wheels AcceleRacers&quot; was created, taking place two years after the events of &quot;Highway 35&quot;. It is featured in four movies and many short segments where the drivers (old ones, gangs, like Teku, Metal Maniacs, the evil Racing Drones, and the stealthy Silencerz). All of the shorts and previews of the movies were placed on a temporary website that was deleted shortly after the last movie.

2006 was the final year of the First Editions series consisting of 38 cars for that year including a Toyota AE86, 2006 Honda Civic Si, Plymouth Superbird and 2007 Cadillac Escalade along with fantasy models like the &quot;Nerve Hammer&quot;, &quot;Pharodox&quot;, &quot;Semi-Psycho&quot; as well as the fan-favourite &quot;Bone Shaker&quot;, Larry Wood&#x27;s most popular design to date.

=== 2007 and 2008 ===
In 2007, Mattel released 36 &quot;New Models&quot; (formerly &quot;First Editions&quot;), 12 &quot;Treasure Hunts&quot; (with a hard-to-find regular version and even rarer &quot;Super Treasure Hunt&quot; version of each with rubber &quot;Real Rider&quot; tires and Spectraflame paint), 12 &#x27;Teams&#x27; of 4 cars each (formerly &quot;Segment Series&quot;), 24 &quot;Code&quot; &quot;Cars&quot; (codes imprinted inside the packaging that can be used to unlock web content), 12 &quot;Track Stars&quot; (formerly &quot;Track Aces&quot;), 24 &quot;Mystery Cars&quot; (packaged on a card with an opaque blister, so the buyer cannot see which car is inside without opening it), and 24 &quot;All-Stars&quot; (formerly &quot;Open Stock&quot;). In late 2006, a new package design for 2007 was released. Some 2006 cars and all 2007 cars are packaged on a blister card with the new design. Hot Wheels released a series called &quot;Modifighters&quot;, which are similar to Transformers except for the fact that they were originally cars and were modified into robots. The &quot;Modifighters&quot; names are: Streetwyse, Skullface, Live Wire, Bedlam, Nightlife, Mr. Big, and Quick-Tyme.

In 2008, all the series and vehicles were relatively similar to 2007&#x27;s cars. Approximately 180 to 200 new vehicles were released.

=== 2009 and 2010 ===
In 2009, Mattel released 42 &quot;New Models&quot;, 12 &quot;Treasure Hunts&quot;, 12 &quot;Track Stars&quot;, 24 &quot;Mystery Cars&quot;, 10 &quot;Segment Series&quot; of 10 cars, and introduced the Indy Car Series drivers.

Mattel released its first-ever animated episodic television series called &quot;Hot Wheels Battle Force 5&quot;, which was a co-production between Canadian animation studios, Nelvana and Nerd Corps Entertainment. (now WildBrain.) The series debuted in the United States on Cartoon Network on August 29, 2009..

=== 2011 ===
2011 saw the release of 244 cars beginning with the 2011 New Car Series which includes the Lamborghini Gallardo LP570-4 Superleggera, Custom 2011 Camaro, and the DeLorean time machine from the Back to the Future series. This was followed by the 15-car &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; series with 1957 Chevy and 1958 Chevy Impala, 15 &quot;Track Stars&quot; including the 2010 &quot;Formula Street&quot; series, the &quot;10x10&quot; series, the &quot;Thrill Racers&quot; series, and 22 &quot;HW Video Game Heroes&quot; which were packaged with codes for an internet computer game. The new series &quot;Team Hot Wheels&quot; appear in late 2011.

=== 2012 ===
2012 saw the release of 247 cars, beginning with the 2012 &quot;New Car Series&quot; which includes the Lamborghini Aventador, Ford Mustang Boss 302 Laguna Seca, KITT from Knight Rider, and the ever-popular Scooby-Doo &quot;Mystery Machine&quot;. 2012 also saw the release of two vehicles from the &quot;Angry Birds&quot; video game franchise, consisting of the Red Bird and the green Minion Pig.

=== 2013 ===
2013 saw the release of 250 cars including &quot;Stunt&quot;, &quot;Racing&quot;, &quot;Imagination&quot;, &quot;City&quot;, and &quot;Showroom&quot;, all of which contain sub-series. 2013 also saw a change in the look of the packaging cards which includes a quartet of helmeted motorcycle riders standing behind the flame logo and the &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; series cards no longer marked with a treasure chest. Some of those cars include &quot;Rodzilla&quot;, &quot;Fangula&quot;, &quot;Twin Mill III&quot; (3), &quot;Bone&quot; &quot;Shaker&quot; and &quot;Baja&quot; &quot;Bone&quot; &quot;Shaker&quot;.

General Motors also released a special Chevrolet Camaro Hot Wheels Edition, which was a blue convertible that offered various Hot-Wheels-themed decorations throughout the car.

=== 2014 ===
2014 saw 250 mainstream cars released with similar segments to 2013. Various playsets and other non-car merchandise were also released this year. 2014 also marked the end of the license agreement between Mattel and Ferrari, meaning the 2014 release of &quot;Ferrari 5 Pack&quot; would be the last for Mattel, and the 2015 black &quot;Ferrari 599XX&quot; was the last Ferrari model appearing in mainstream, both regular model and its Treasure Hunt variant.

=== 2016 ===
2016 lineup was similar to 2015 and 2014 in terms of segments, and the design of the card was overhauled. Some car names were TBD (To Be Determined) or 2016 (Coming Soon). They&#x27;re now divided into mini collections with their corresponding segments and their icons printed on the card. Some of them include &quot;HW Showroom&quot;, &quot;BMW&quot; (100th anniversary of BMW), &quot;HW Screen Time&quot; (Cars and characters seen on television, video games, and movies), and &quot;HW&quot; &quot;Snow&quot; &quot;Stormers&quot;. New models include the &quot;Cruise&quot; &quot;Bruiser&quot;, &quot;Side&quot; &quot;Ripper&quot;, &quot;Grass&quot; &quot;Chomper&quot;, and the &quot;″16 Acura NSX&quot;, while other models first see their release in the mainline series, such as the &quot;″52&quot; &quot;Hudson Hornet&quot;

=== 2017–present ===
2017 saw a major change in casting numbering. Since that moment, recolors are named with a different number than the original, thus causing the number limit of cars to expand to 365. The idea of numbering a casting with a number corresponding to their own series was also aborted. There were also some new mainline series introduced, such as &quot;Experimotors&quot; (cars with moving parts, or a secondary purpose), &quot;Holiday Racers&quot; (cars that have a holiday based theme), &quot;Factory Fresh&quot; (a series including newer, sometimes older castings with fabric painting) and &quot;Camaro Fifty&quot; (a series dedicated to the Chevrolet Camaro, and its 50th anniversary).

In 2018, Hot Wheels celebrated its 50th anniversary. The style of the blister cards were changed again, depicting a city in the background of the car, thus emulating a &quot;Hot Wheels City&quot; theme. For that year, each blister card had a 50th Anniversary logo. Hot Wheels also launched several collector-focused lines for that year, including &quot;Favorites&quot;, which was a series that consisted of 11 highly detailed vehicles (which were based on real cars), all with metal bodies and rubber tires. For this year, Hot Wheels also launched a display case, which could hold up to 48 cars, and could either stand up on its own (via attachable &quot;feet&quot;) or be mounted on a wall. Each display case came with an exclusive car.

On October 4, 2018, Hot Wheels filed a new trademark for the motto &quot;it&#x27;s not the same without the flame&quot;. In 2019, a seal was added in the bottom left corner of the blister card with the motto.

On February 18, 2021, the Hot Wheels Mars Perseverance Rover was released; a die-cast scale model latest vehicle in its Space mini-collections inspired by the NASA-launched Perseverance rover.

Hot Wheels designer Ryu Asada died on March 23, 2021, at age 42, after years of suffering from cancer. That same year, Hot Wheels began a partnership with Milestone S.r.l. to release their first game, &quot;Hot Wheels Unleashed&quot;, in which came out on September 30, 2021.

On March 7, 2023, NBC ordered a reality competition series known as &quot;Hot Wheels: Ultimate Challenge&quot; with Rutledge Wood as host which premiered on May 30.

On September 28, 2023, Netflix announced &quot;Hot Wheels Let&#x27;s Race&quot;, a new animated series adaptation which premiered on March 4, 2024.

On October 9, 2024, Formula One announced a new multi-year partnership with Hot Wheels. The partnership starts in 2024 with the release of a one-of-a-kind F1 car, before the full Hot Wheels range – featuring teams&#x27; cars and products – is released in 2025.

==Hot Wheels Legends Tour==
Starting in 2018, Hot Wheels launched a new program called the &quot;Hot Wheels Legends Tour&quot;. This program was originally launched to commemorate Hot Wheels&#x27;s 50th anniversary. Each year, there are 18 Legends Tour events that are held at various Walmart locations across the United States. Over 111,000 people attend and about 5,000 cars are entered at those events. At each event, one car is picked to be recreated as a potential new Hot Wheels casting. After all the events for that year conclude, one finalist is then picked to be the winner, and their car then gets recreated as a new Hot Wheels casting next year. Hot Wheels are looking for vehicles that embody the fun and creative spirit of Hot Wheels, which is their main selling point.

===Hot Wheels Legends Tour winners===
* 2018: &quot;Custom built &quot;2JetZ&quot;, built by Luis Rodriguez&quot;
* 2019: &quot;1957 Nash Metropolitan &quot;The Nash&quot;, built by Greg Salzillo and Dave Ford&quot;
* 2020: &quot;1970 Pontiac Trans Am, built by Riley Stair.&quot;
* 2021: &quot;1969 Volvo P1800 &quot;Ain&#x27;t No Saint&quot;, built by Lee Johnstone.&quot;
* 2022: &quot;1992 Autozam Scrum &quot;Texas Toot&quot;, built by Craig Meaux&quot;
* 2023: &quot;1990 Mazda MX-5 Roadster &quot;Chimera&quot;, built by Chris Watson&quot;
* 2024: &quot;Custom 1968 Ford Falcon &quot;La Liebre&quot;, built by Giuseppe Casagrande and Maurizio Moschini&quot;

==&quot;Sweet 16&quot; line==
The &quot;Sweet 16&quot; was the first production line of Hot Wheels for the year 1968. The lineup consisted of the following:

* Beatnik Bandit
* Custom El Dorado
* Custom Camaro
* Custom Corvette
* Custom Fleetside
* Deora
* Custom Mustang
* Custom T-Bird
* Hot Heap
* Ford J-Car
* Custom Cougar
* Custom Firebird
* Custom Barracuda
* Python 
* Silhouette
* Custom Volkswagen

;Notes
==Collectables==
Through the years, Hot Wheels cars have been collected mostly by children. However, since the late 1990s, there has been an increase in the number of adult collectors. Mattel estimates that 41 million children grew up playing with the toys, the average collector has over 1,550 cars, and children between the ages of 5 and 15 have an average of 41 cars. Most believe the collecting craze started with the &quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunts&quot; in 1995. Mike Strauss has been called the father of Hot Wheels collecting; he has organized two collectors&#x27; events each year in some form since 1986. The first event was the Annual Hot Wheels Collectors Convention, normally held each year in the fall. The convention occurred in various locations around the country until 2001, when the first Annual Hot Wheels Collectors Nationals was put together. Since then, the Conventions are held each year in southern California. The Hot Wheels Collectors Nationals rotate among cities outside of California during the spring. Strauss has also published the quarterly Hot Wheels Newsletter since 1986 and was one of the first to unite collectors all over the world. He also writes&quot;Tomart&#x27;s Price Guide To Hot Wheels&quot;, a book listing history, car descriptions and values, which is used by almost every collector to learn more about the hobby and their collection. Strauss sold his collection in 2011 and retired from the Hot Wheels Newsletter.

There are hundreds, perhaps even thousands, of web pages dedicated to Hot Wheels collecting. Collectors are seeking everything related to Hot Wheels, from only new castings to only Red Lines and everything in between. For the most part, it is a relatively inexpensive hobby, when compared with coin collecting, stamp collecting or Barbie collecting, with mainline cars costing about $0.97-$1.08 (USD) at retail. The price has not changed much in almost 40 years, although in real terms the models have dropped significantly in price (a Hot Wheels car cost $0.98 in 1968 and costs $0.98 today, in spite of inflation). After the cars are no longer available at retail the cost can vary significantly. A common car may sell for less than retail, while some of the more difficult cars can sell for many hundred or even thousands of dollars. The highest price paid for a Hot Wheels car was close to $70,000 in 2000 for a pre-production version of a &quot;Volkswagen Rear Loader Beach Bomb&quot; (the asking price was $72,000). The Beach Bomb is a VW microbus with a pair of surfboards poking out the rear window. This design failed initial testing, proving to be top-heavy and not functional with the Power Booster track accessory. A widened version with the surfboards mounted in side slots was designed and released for the 1969 model year, making the &quot;rear loader&quot; version a rarity and very sought-after piece. As of 2018, there are about 50 &quot;rear loaders&quot; known to exist.

===Dates on cars===
The date on the base of a Hot Wheels car (Example: ©2008 Mattel) is the copyright date for the casting of the car, not a production date or release year. The date is usually the year before the car was first released, but not always. For example, a car in the 2001 First Editions series called Evil Twin, was released in 2001 but the year dated on the bottom of the car is 2000. Sometimes, the copyright will be the same year as the casting&#x27;s first release. This usually happens with cars released toward the end of a model year. There are a few cases where the copyright is several years before a car&#x27;s first release. The copyright date will usually not change through the lifetime of a casting. For example, the Twin Mill, first released in 1969, still had a 1969 copyright date on the 2019 mainline releases of the car. If the tooling for a car has a major change at some point in its life, the copyright date might be changed or amended to reflect the change. For example, Quick Bite, first released in 1984 as the Good Humor Truck, had a tooling update before 2018, so its date reads 1983, &#x27;17 on the base of the 2018 release.

There are a few exceptions where the copyright date applies only to the base of a car instead of to the entire car. Those exceptions are mostly funny car castings where the same base was used with various different bodies over the years.

Since 2008, Hot Wheels cars have had a code stamped or printed on the base. This is a &quot;base code&quot;. This base code can be used to identify exactly when an individual car was produced in the Hot Wheels factory. The code begins with a letter, followed by a two-digit number. The letter for the year 2008 was &quot;A&quot;. The letter is then followed by two numbers, which represent the week of that particular year the car was manufactured. For example, a car with the date stamp of &quot;A52&quot; was produced on the fifty-second week of 2008.

Some cars have 4-digit date codes on the base. These date codes are more specific than the 3-digit codes as they indicate the day a car was made instead of just the week. For the 4-digit codes, the first 3 digits indicate the day of the year and the last digit is the year. A date code of 1987 would indicate the car was made on the 198th day of 2017 (July 17). A code of 0250 would be the 25th day of 2010 (or 2020; depending on the car).

Date codes only indicate when a specific car was made. They do not necessarily reflect the model release year of a particular car. Mainline production changes to the next model year right around the middle of the calendar year at the end of June/beginning of July. Premiums and other special series lines often run later in the calendar year before changing production to the next year.

==Hot Wheels Classics==
The &quot;Hot&quot; &quot;Wheels&quot; &quot;Classics&quot; line was an immediate hit with enthusiasts everywhere. The new line focused on muscle cars, hot rods, and other offbeat vehicles (such as a go-kart, a motor home and even an airplane), many from the company&#x27;s first ten years (1968–78) of production. The series is also used to debut several different castings, such as the &quot;1965 Chevy Malibu&quot; or the &quot;1972 Ford Ranchero.&quot;

Series 1 from 2005 consisted of 25 models, each with all-metal body and chassis, decked out with Spectraflame paint, in packages similar to those used from 1968 to 1972. Each car had a retail price of about three to four dollars (USD) and each of the 25 cars were released with 7 or 8 different colors. Models included the &quot;1957 Chevy Bel Air&quot; (pictured at the right), the &quot;1963 Ford T-Bird&quot;, and the &quot;1965 Pontiac GTO&quot;.

There were also track sets in similar retro packaging, and 1:18 scale &quot;Hot Wheels Classics&quot;. The Classics version of the &quot;Purple&quot; &quot;Passion&quot; was released with &quot;Real Riders&quot; tires at San Diego Comic-Con. Mattel also produced a &quot;Classics&quot; &quot;Olds 442&quot; in Spectraflame blue for the 2005 Toy Fair.

In late 2005, Series 2 now consisted of 30 models including the &quot;1967 Camaro Convertible&quot;, the &quot;1969 Dodge Charger&quot;, and a &quot;1965 Mustang GT&quot;. There was also supposed to be a separate &quot;Mustang Funny Car&quot; (as listed on the blisterpack rear checklist) but this was apparently changed to a &quot;Plymouth Barracuda Funny Car&quot; during production.

In 2006, a Series 3 line of Classics was introduced, again containing 30 models with multiple colors of each vehicle. Models included the &quot;&#x27;69 Pontiac Firebird&quot;, a &quot;Meyers Manx&quot; dune buggy, and the Richard Petty &quot;&#x27;70 Plymouth &quot;Superbird&quot;&quot;.

In 2007, Series 4 debuted with just fifteen models. However, in recognition of the 40th anniversary there were two packaging versions available - models came with a collectible metal badge (featuring a portrait of the involved vehicle) or were sold alone as in the previous three series. Models included a &quot;VW Karmann Ghia&quot;, a &quot;&#x27;68 Mercury Cougar&quot;, and the &quot;&quot;Red Baron&quot; hot rod&quot;. For its 40th anniversary in 2008, Hot Wheels celebrated the making of its four billionth car with the production of a diamond-studded model worth US$140,000. It had 2,700 diamond chips, a total of almost 23 karats, and was cast in white gold, with rubies serving as taillights.

In 2009, Series 5 has 30 models. For the first time, there are chase cars in the classics series. These cars feature &quot;Real&quot; &quot;Riders&quot; rubber tires. A few models included are &quot;Copper Stopper&quot;, &quot;1970 Pontiac GTO&quot;, and &quot;Hammer&quot; &quot;Sled&quot;.

==Special model lines==
Hot Wheels has also released slightly larger, more detailed models, such as the original &quot;Gran&quot; &quot;Toros&quot; (1/43 scale) from 1970, and the &quot;Dropstars&quot; line (a model line of &quot;blinged&quot; cars). Also in this larger scale are the &quot;HIN&quot; (Hot Import Nights), &quot;G-Machines&quot; and &quot;Customs&quot; lines. These lines were introduced in 2004–2005.

Hot Wheels has produced many replica scale models in the industry standard 1/43, 1/24 and 1/18 scales. In 2004, it released a 1/12 scale replica of the C6 Corvette.

Hot Wheels also in the early 1990s introduced a series known as the California Customs. A line of cars that had a California theme.

Other lines from Hot Wheels include: &quot;R-R-Rumblers &amp; Chopcycles&quot; (motorcycles introduced in 1971), &quot;Hotbirds&quot; (metal airplanes), &quot;Sizzlers&quot;, &quot;XV Racers&quot;, &quot;Hot Tunerz&quot; and &quot;Stockerz&quot;.

Over the years, Mattel has also teamed up with other retail organizations to produce special models available through those retailers. The list of retailers includes Avon, Chuck E. Cheese, Dinty Moore, FAO Schwarz, Full Grid, General Mills, Getty, HEB, Hills, Hormel, Hughes Family Markets, JC Penney, JC Whitney, Kay-Bee Toys, K-Mart, Kellogg&#x27;s, Kool-Aid, Kroger, Lexmark, Liberty Promotions (contracted the series of special models for Jiffy Lube and Penske), Little Debbie Snacks, Malt-O-Meal, McDonald&#x27;s, Mervyn&#x27;s, Otter Pops, Rose&#x27;s Discount Stores, Shell, Target, Tony&#x27;s Pizza, Toys &quot;R&quot; Us, Union 76, Valvoline, Van de Kamp&#x27;s, Walmart, and White&#x27;s Guide to Collecting, as well as several Major League Baseball franchises to name a few.

In 2016, Hot Wheels released a special collection for the 50th anniversary of the Beatles&#x27; 1966 song &quot;Yellow Submarine.&quot; The collections includes five cars, a VW microbus and a yellow submarine.

===Made by other companies===
In some cases, Hot Wheels dies have been sold or acquired by other companies once Mattel has finished using them. One example were early dies that made their way to Argentina and were reproduced as Mukys, though not with spectra-flame paints or the same quality as seen in Mattel&#x27;s products.

===Hot Wheels Elite and Hot Wheels Mattel===
Hot Wheels have a series named &quot;Hot Wheels Elite&quot; and &quot;Hot Wheels Mattel&quot;. The &quot;Elite&quot; Hot Wheels are 1:18, 1:43 and 1:50 highly detailed diecast; the majority of them being based on Ferraris. They are more expensive than the &quot;Mattel&quot; models which aren&#x27;t as highly detailed. The &quot;Elite&quot; versions are licensed by Ferrari. The Hot Wheels &quot;Elite&quot; series have a &quot;mini&quot; series which can be seen on the website. Two of the popular limited 1:18 Hot Wheels &quot;Elite&quot; series&#x27; are the Ferrari in Music and Cult Classics. The music series features singers&#x27; and rappers&#x27; Ferraris, including Jamiroquai&#x27;s Jay Kay&#x27;s Black Enzo Ferrari.

===Car Culture===
In 2016, Hot Wheels started a new line of Collector&#x27;s models, in a line called &quot;Car Culture&quot;. Car Culture is Hot Wheels&#x27; line of Premium 1:64 models with metal bodies and bases, two-piece wheels with rubber tires, and more detailed decorations. Intended for adult collectors primarily, these models retail for roughly 6-7 times the cost of a mainstream 1:64 Hot Wheels model. These cars retail for over three times the retail price of a &quot;basic&quot; car, and are produced in significantly fewer numbers.

This line debuted with the release of &quot;&quot;Japan Historics&quot;, a set of five Japanese sports cars. Every year at least four more sets are introduced. All &quot;Car Culture&quot; sets have five cars, and often have new castings created for the sets. The number five spot in the set is usually reserved for the newest casting in the set. &quot;Car Culture&quot; cars are typically based on real automobiles; however in 2018, Hot Wheels introduced a set called &quot;Team&quot; &quot;Transport&quot;, which included some fantasy truck castings. The fact that some of the trucks are unlicensed allows the castings to be universally used in any &quot;Team Transport&quot; set regardless of theme (for example, a Chevrolet-branded truck would not make sense in a Ford-themed set). Although &quot;Team&quot; &quot;Transport&quot;&quot; is labeled under the &quot;Car Culture&quot; line, they are a separate category of &quot;Car Culture&quot; vehicles than the usual 5-car sets, possessing different barcodes and prices.

In 2018, for Hot Wheels&#x27; 50th Anniversary, Car Culture card sizes were increased, along with the amount of decorations on the cars. A Hot Wheels &quot;50th anniversary&quot; logo was also placed beside the set&#x27;s name on the packaging.

==&quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; series==
&quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunt&quot; (sometimes T-Hunt) is a line of Hot Wheels cars, introduced by Mattel in 1995. It consisted of 12 cars every year (15 beginning in 2011) with one or two released per month. The original production run was 10,000 of each car worldwide; that number has since risen due to the increasing demand for and popularity of Hot Wheels as a collector&#x27;s item.

Treasure Hunt vehicles are identifiable by a label on the package. The blister card said &quot;&quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunt&quot; or &quot;T-Hunt&quot;&quot; on a green bar, sometimes with an illustration of a treasure chest. Since 2013, &quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunts&quot; do not have the green stripe anymore; instead, the cars are recognizable with a &quot;flame in a circle logo&quot; on the vehicle and behind it on the card. The cars were decorated with flashy designs and special &quot;rubber&quot; wheels before 2007.
In 2007, Mattel introduced a two-tiered &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; system. A regular &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; will feature normal enamel paint and normal wheels like other Hot Wheels cars. The production of these is rumored to be greater than previous T-Hunts. &quot;&quot;Super&quot; Treasure Hunts&quot; are much harder to find. Like &quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunts&quot; of the past, a &quot;Super Treasure Hunt&quot; features premium wheels and Spectraflame paint, as well as (starting in 2015), a golden-colored circle-flame logo printed on the card behind the car. Many Hot Wheels collectors have noticed in recent times that the US Basic mixes are more likely to have a &quot;Super Treasure Hunt&quot; in them compared to International Mixes.
Before 2013, all 12 &quot;Treasure Hunt&quot; cars of a year were released in both regular and super versions. In 2012, &quot;Super Treasure Hunts&quot; came with special paint and wheels, but with series designation on the card. However, the regular &quot;T-hunts&quot; retained a special &quot;T-Hunt&quot; series card. Mattel stopped using special cards for all &quot;Treasure&quot; &quot;Hunts&quot; in 2013. Some U.S. releases in 2014 had the phrase &quot;This symbol on the vehicle lets you know it is hard to find and highly collectible&quot;. However, in 2016, this was changed to &quot;Congratulations! This symbol means you just found a collectable treasure-hunt car!&quot;. This would be under a silver flame logo on the card for &quot;T-Hunts&quot;. In 2015, Supers featured a gold logo on the card. Generally, Hot Wheels has targeted both kids and adults with the &quot;T-Hunt&quot; series, focusing more on the adult collecting market with Supers.

==Live-action film adaptation==
On January 30, 2003, Columbia Pictures announced they had gained exclusive rights to developing a feature film based on the toy line &quot;Hot Wheels&quot; with McG attached to direct. Although unwritten, the premise involved a young man &quot;trying to reconcile with his father. It&#x27;s a kid who steals his dad&#x27;s racecar and ends up going through a sort of &quot;Back to the Future&quot; portal into this world, and he has to reconcile his relationship with his father.&quot; In 2006, McG said that he dropped out as director and chose to produce instead. The film was to be produced by Columbia Pictures, Flying Glass of Milk Films and Silver Pictures, under license to Mattel.

In 2009, with no recent developments, the film was put into turnaround, and the rights were handed over to Warner Bros. Pictures. Joel Silver took over producing with Matt Nix writing the script.

On June 17, 2011, it was announced that Legendary Pictures was developing a film based on Hot Wheels due to the success of &quot;Fast Five&quot; by developing an edgier film. On July 10, 2013, Simon Crane and Juan Carlos Fresnadillo were named as the frontrunners to direct the film, with Art Marcum and Matt Holloway writing the film, intended to be more &quot;&quot; than &quot;Fast and Furious&quot;. On September 28, 2016, Justin Lin signed on to direct the film, which will be produced through his production company Perfect Storm Entertainment. On August 1, 2017, Lin revealed that the film was still in development. It was speculated that the film would be released as an animated direct sequel to 2003&#x27;s &quot;Hot Wheels: World Race&quot; and receive additional animation development from Playground Games who had previously collaborated with Mattel to release an expansion for the video game &quot;Forza Horizon 3&quot;. However the option expired and returned to Mattel.

In late January 2019, Mattel Films and Warner Bros. Pictures agreed to partner on a Hot Wheels film.
It was announced on September 25, 2020, by &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; that Warner Bros. has hired Neil Widener and Gavin James to write the film.

On April 25, 2022, it was announced that Bad Robot will produce the film. On January 23, 2023, Dalton Leeb and Nicholas Jacobson-Larson were announced to write the film.

==Sizzlers==
The &quot;Sizzlers&quot; were a 1970s Hot Wheels spin off with a built-in motor and a tiny rechargeable battery. (The &quot;X-V racers&quot; of the 1990s were similar.) They were introduced in 1970 and became immediately popular. &quot;Sizzlers&quot; run on the regular &quot;orange&quot; Hot Wheels track, and Mattel created special race sets with U-Turns, multi-level spirals and loops to take advantage of the cars&#x27; electric motor. Two lane race sets such as the California/8 race set were developed that allowed &quot;Sizzlers&quot; to race side-by side, until Mattel created the black &quot;Fat Track&quot; which is three lanes wide with steep banked curves and designed to allow &quot;Sizzlers&quot; to run free. In action, Sizzlers supposedly display a unique, competitive &quot;passing action&quot; when running on the &quot;Fat Track&quot;, as if each car were piloted by an impatient driver trying to jockey ahead of the rest. The &quot;Fat Track&quot; sets included the &quot;Big O&quot;, &quot;California 500&quot;, and &quot;Super Circuit&quot; race sets, and accessories such as the &quot;Scramble Start&quot; (a four-car starting gate), &quot;Lap Computer&quot; four car lap counter, and &quot;Race-Timer&quot; stop watch.

Six cars were made in 1970, 12 cars were made in 1971, and 4 cars were made in 1972. The &quot;&quot;Fat Daddy&quot; Sizzlers&quot; (oversized bodies with huge tires) were introduced in 1973. Mattel put the Sizzlers on a hiatus after that year, and in 1976 they created &quot;Sizzlers II&quot;. That next year, the &quot;Night Ridin&#x27; Sizzlers&quot; (which had headlights you could turn on or off) were created. Mattel permanently stopped &quot;Sizzlers&quot; production in 1978. They were replaced by another spin off named &quot;Scorchers&quot;. The &quot;Scorchers&quot; were &quot;pull back&quot; cars which wound a clock spring when pulled backwards a short distance, which then propelled them forward for several feet.

&quot;Sizzlers&quot; are charged with four or two D battery chargers called the &quot;Juice Machine&quot; and &quot;Goose Pump&quot; respectively. Later, the &quot;Power Pit&quot; was introduced—which was an electric charger that plugged into any household AC outlet and resembled a race track garage or pit stop. A 90-second charge of the tiny internal NiCad battery gives up to five minutes of useful run time. It was claimed by advertisers that the 90-second charge time was &quot;the longest minute and a half in a kid&#x27;s life&quot; as they waited impatiently for the car to charge sufficiently to get back into the race.

The &quot;Sizzler&quot; electric technology spun off into the &quot;Hotline Trains&quot;, which ran on track similar to regular Hot Wheels, and the &quot;Earthshakers&quot; construction vehicles. Both lines of vehicles were charged using the &quot;Sizzler Juice Machine&quot; or &quot;Power Pit&quot;.

In the 1990s, Mattel&#x27;s trademark on the &quot;Sizzlers&quot; name had lapsed and toy company Playing Mantis released a new Sizzlers line based around NASCAR stock car models and copied the &quot;Fat Track&quot; as the &quot;&quot;Stocker 400&quot; and &quot;Mach 500&quot; track sets to capitalize on the booming popularity of NASCAR in that decade. The &quot;Juice Machine&quot; was renamed the &quot;Mega-Charger&quot;&quot; and incorporated a more efficient &quot;trickle charge&quot; rather than the &quot;dump charge&quot; of the original machines. Interest in the toys began to increase once again. They were taken off the market after Mattel filed a lawsuit against Playing Mantis. However, &quot;Sizzlers&quot; returned again in 2006, when Mattel struck an exclusive deal with Target stores to re-release &quot;Sizzlers&quot; cars, the &quot;Big O&quot; Fat track, Juice Machine and car carrying case—all in the original packaging from the 1970s. As of January 2009, the Sizzlers line has been discontinued by Target.

In 2011, &quot;Sizzlers&quot; have been re-released as &quot;Cars 2&quot; characters, and were sold at Target stores. This line was called &quot;Charge Ups&quot; and released under the Mattel brand name but not as part of the Hot Wheels line.

==Promotion and sponsorships==
Hot Wheels appeared in the 2016 Macy&#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade.

===Motorsports===

Starting in 1970, professional drag racers Don Prudhomme (&quot;The Snake&quot;) and Tom McEwen (&quot;The Mongoose&quot;) were sponsored by Hot Wheels, and later on, Hot Wheels created the &quot;Snake and Mongoose Drag Set&quot; in 1970. Later somewhere in 1972, the second versions of both driver&#x27;s self-titled funny cars were released, when McEwen had the &quot;Mongoose 2&quot;, and Prudhomme had the &quot;Snake 2&quot;. The drag set remained the same. Then, Hot Wheels made rail-type dragster versions of them, based on the actual funny cars and was featured in the &quot;Wild Wheelie Set&quot;. Later in Hot Wheels&#x27; lifespan, the normal drag set with Snake and Mongoose were still being produced. The latest set with the Snake and Mongoose is in the &quot;Drag-Strip Demons&quot; lineup.

In 1970, Hot Wheels sponsored Trans-Am Series driver Dan Gurney and his All American Racers car. In 1992, Hot Wheels sponsored the Trans-Am car of Jack Baldwin as he went on to win that year&#x27;s championship. Hot Wheels signed a sponsorship deal in 1997 with NASCAR driver Kyle Petty and the No. 44 PE2 Motorsports car and thus began making replicas of NASCAR stock cars. Three years later, Hot Wheels joined the Craftsman Truck Series team of Carlos Contreras and the No. 12 truck. In 2004, Hot Wheels sponsored the No. 99 car of Jeff Burton for one race at Darlington Raceway. Six years later, the company returned to NASCAR to sponsor the No. 7 JR Motorsports car of Danica Patrick at Michigan International Speedway. Hot Wheels made another one-off sponsorship in 2021 for NASCAR driver Jade Buford&#x27;s No. 48 Big Machine Racing Team car at Darlington Raceway; Buford&#x27;s paint scheme for the race was modeled after Gurney&#x27;s Trans-Am car.

In 1999, Hot Wheels partnered with five Formula One teams to manufacture scale model Formula One cars. In 2016, Hot Wheels opened the &quot;Race to Win&quot; exhibit at The Children&#x27;s Museum of Indianapolis to promote the 100th Indianapolis 500.

From 1999 to 2018, Hot Wheels had a Monster Jam license to release monster truck diecasts and field a Hot Wheels-themed truck in the real-life shows. The partnership ended in 2019 after Feld Entertainment signed a new ten year toy licensing deal with Spin Master for Monster Jam, diecast production stopped and the Hot Wheels team retired. Soon after, Hot Wheels created the Hot Wheels Monster Trucks line and the Hot Wheels Monster Trucks Live show with the non-Monster Jam owned version of the Bigfoot truck as a competitor. Monster Jam claimed this as a plagiarism, causing controversy.

At the 2002 24 Hours of Le Mans, Hot Wheels logos appeared on the sidepods of the pair of MG-Lola EX257 prototypes entered by MG Sport &amp; Racing.

Hot Wheels is a partner and sponsor of the Australian stunt rider Matt Mingay&#x27;s Stuntz Inc team, and also sponsors him in the Stadium Super Trucks. After Mingay suffered serious facial injuries at the Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix in 2016, Robby Gordon drove the No. 2 Hot Wheels truck at the Townsville Street Circuit. Hot Wheels and Castrol returned to support Mingay when he made his racing return in 2020.

===Video games===
Various video games based on Hot Wheels have been released for numerous consoles, PCs and mobile devices:
* &quot;Hot Wheels&quot; (1984), released for the Commodore 64.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Custom Car Designer&quot; (1997), released for Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Stunt Track Driver&quot; (1998), released for Microsoft Windows and later for the Game Boy Color.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Turbo Racing&quot; (1999), released for the Nintendo 64 and the PlayStation.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Crash!&quot; (1999), released for Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Slot Car Racing&quot; (2000), released for the personal computer.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Stunt Track Driver 2: Get&#x27;n Dirty&quot; (2000), released for the personal computer.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Micro Racers&quot; (2000), released for Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Planet Hot Wheels&quot; (2001), a massively multiplayer online game for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Mechanix&quot; (2001), released for Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Extreme Racing&quot; (2001), released for the PlayStation.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Jetz&quot; (2001), released for Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Burnin&#x27; Rubber&quot; (2001), released for the Game Boy Advance.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Williams F1 Team Driver&quot; (2001), released for Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Bash Arena&quot; (2002), released for the personal computer.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Velocity X&quot; (2002), released for the Game Boy Advance, Microsoft Windows, Nintendo GameCube, and PlayStation 2.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: World Race&quot; (2003), released for the Game Boy Advance, Microsoft Windows, Nintendo GameCube, and PlayStation 2.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Stunt Track Challenge&quot; (2004), released for the Game Boy Advance, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, and Xbox.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: All Out&quot; (2006), an isometric racing game, released for the Game Boy Advance.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Ultimate Racing&quot; (2007), released for the PlayStation Portable.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Beat That!&quot; (2007), released for the Microsoft Windows, Nintendo DS, PlayStation 2, Wii, and Xbox 360.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Battle Force 5&quot; (2009), released for the Nintendo DS and Wii.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Track Attack&quot; (2010), released for the Nintendo DS and Wii.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: World&#x27;s Best Driver&quot; (2013), released for iOS, Nintendo 3DS, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Wii U, and Xbox 360.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Showdown&quot; (2014), released for mobile devices (Android and iOS).
* &quot;Need for Speed: No Limits&quot; (2015), released as downloadable content on Google Play for Android and on the App Store for iOS, in partnership with Jun Imai and Mattel, specifically, through an update patch that was named &quot;Hot Wheels&quot; in Version 2.0.6 of the game that was released on March 9, 2017.
* &quot;Drive Ahead&quot; (2015), the mobile game partnered with Hot Wheels in 2019. The update added five new bosses along with new maps and cars only available during the Hot Wheels event. The event concluded later the same year. Developers have stated that there are no current plans to have another Hot Wheels event.
* &quot;Rocket League&quot; (2015), two cars (along with other Hot Wheels branded cosmetic items) released in 2017 as downloadable content.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Race Car Rush&quot; (2016), released for the web browser.
* &quot;Forza Horizon 3: Hot Wheels&quot; (2017), released as an expansion pack for &quot;Forza Horizon 3&quot; (2016) on Windows 10 and Xbox One, in partnership with Xbox Game Studios.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: MindRacer&quot; (2017), released for iPads in partnership with tech startup Osmo.
* &quot;Hot Wheels: Race Off&quot; (2017), released for mobile devices (Android and iOS) and Apple Arcade.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Infinite Loop&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Hot Wheels Open World&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Hot Wheels Unleashed&quot; (2021), released for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStations 4 and 5 and Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Open World&quot; (2021), a game developed by Gamefam on video game platform Roblox. It was released on Android, iOS/iPadOS, Microsoft Windows, MacOS and Xbox One.
* &quot;Forza Horizon 4 Hot Wheels Legends Car Pack&quot; (2021) DLC for Xbox One and Microsoft Windows.
* &quot;Forza Horizon 5: Hot Wheels&quot; (2022), is a DLC pack for &quot;Forza Horizon 5&quot; (2021) similar to &quot;Forza Horizon 3: Hot Wheels&quot; (2016). The expansion was released on Microsoft Windows 11, Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S. The expansion pack has added many assets to the game such as 10 new exclusive cars, a new Hot Wheels Creation Kit to Eventlab and over of track and four different biomes (The Horizon Nexus, The Ice Cauldron, Forest Falls and The Giant&#x27;s Canyon) to explore.
* &quot;Hot Wheels Rift Rally&quot; (2023), a video game developed by Velan Studios released on iOS/iPadOS and PlayStations 4 and 5.
===Pinball===
A coin-operated pinball machine based on Hot Wheels cars and the Hot Wheels City YouTube series was released by American Pinball in June 2020.

== See also ==
* Model car
* &quot;Hotwheels sisyphus&quot;, a species of ground spider named for the brand

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q585537" start="0" end="10" title="Hot Wheels" label="Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="55" end="66" title="scale model" label="scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335161" start="67" end="71" title="model car" label="cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469000" start="84" end="98" title="Elliot Handler" label="Elliot Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="129" end="135" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050690" start="186" end="194" title="Matchbox (brand)" label="Matchbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542657" start="230" end="239" title="Tyco Toys" label="Tyco Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="255" end="279" title="automobile manufacturers" label="automobile manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="383" end="392" title="blueprint" label="blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341283" start="539" end="554" title="limited edition" label="limited edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469000" start="654" end="668" title="Elliot Handler" label="Elliot Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="857" end="864" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146195" start="883" end="893" title="Custom car" label="customized"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="911" end="924" title="Caricature" label="caricaturized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888226" start="953" end="967" title="Racing slick" label="big rear tires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="969" end="981" title="supercharger" label="supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14411149" start="1201" end="1210" title="Jack Ryan (designer)" label="Jack Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467175" start="1509" end="1519" title="Pinstriping" label="pin stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667294" start="1602" end="1623" title="Harry Bentley Bradley" label="Harry Bentley Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="1715" end="1721" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260042" start="1810" end="1821" title="Deora (custom car)" label="Dodge Deora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192297" start="2837" end="2859" title="Disruptive innovation" label="disrupted the industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q852166" start="2870" end="2882" title="Die-cast toy" label="die-cast car"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="3265" end="3273" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="3398" end="3402" title="Internal combustion engine" label="Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="4094" end="4119" title="Volkswagen Type 2" label="VW Type 2 &amp;quot;bus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q457689" start="4133" end="4142" title="surfboard" label="surfboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248631" start="4318" end="4327" title="Surf culture" label="beach bum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165438" start="5038" end="5045" title="sunroof" label="sunroof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="5060" end="5077" title="Center of mass" label="center of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="5242" end="5252" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358105" start="5607" end="5633" title="Petersen Automotive Museum" label="Petersen Automotive Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341283" start="5875" end="5890" title="Special edition" label="limited edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094729" start="5982" end="6000" title="advertising slogan" label="advertising slogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280567" start="6222" end="6238" title="Major Matt Mason" label="Major Matt Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="6239" end="6252" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="6339" end="6343" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="6933" end="6950" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294696" start="6984" end="6995" title="AMC Gremlin" label="AMC Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="7014" end="7025" title="Revolver" label="Six Shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293347" start="7143" end="7152" title="Don Prudhomme" label="the Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816797" start="7157" end="7169" title="Tom McEwen (drag racer)" label="the Mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q46241" start="7237" end="7248" title="Drag racing" label="drag racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80479" start="7304" end="7312" title="Mongoose" label="Mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="7413" end="7430" title="Sponsor (commercial)" label="corporate sponsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="7457" end="7461" title="National Hot Rod Association" label="NHRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="7671" end="7676" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q594930" start="7697" end="7701" title="Plymouth Barracuda" label="Kuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="7837" end="7849" title="Supercharger" label="supercharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853499" start="7881" end="7894" title="Roots-type supercharger" label="Roots blowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982767" start="7920" end="7935" title="Exhaust manifold" label="exhaust headers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386424" start="8503" end="8509" title="Enamel paint" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="8624" end="8632" title="Casting (metalworking)" label="castings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194039" start="8760" end="8797" title="Maritime flag" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Colors&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514869" start="8838" end="8863" title="Pad printing" label="&amp;quot;tampo-printed&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072763" start="9439" end="9449" title="muscle car" label="muscle car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583756" start="9455" end="9463" title="Polyglas" label="Polyglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="9547" end="9554" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333796" start="10031" end="10044" title="Renault Fuego" label="Renault Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q964197" start="10050" end="10059" title="Mazda 626" label="Mazda 626"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="10351" end="10357" title="Sports car" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940332" start="10362" end="10373" title="economy car" label="economy car"/>
<link wikidata="Q348019" start="10385" end="10398" title="Pontiac Fiero" label="Pontiac Fiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q179489" start="10402" end="10416" title="Dodge Omni 024" label="Dodge Omni 024"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="10453" end="10460" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072763" start="10471" end="10481" title="muscle car" label="muscle car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334675" start="10771" end="10783" title="blister pack" label="blister pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="11604" end="11618" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="11625" end="11650" title="Chevrolet Motors Division" label="Chevrolet Motors Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="11665" end="11683" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398017" start="11715" end="11725" title="Mako Shark (concept car)" label="Mako Shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071134" start="11898" end="11909" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C4)" label="C4 Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347787" start="12667" end="12671" title="Epyx" label="Epyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="12700" end="12713" title="PC game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="12748" end="12753" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="12754" end="12763" title="Computing platform" label="platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q585537" start="13464" end="13484" title="Treasure Hunt Series" label="Treasure Hunt Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158074" start="13611" end="13623" title="Pearl Diver" label="Pearl Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="13643" end="13654" title="Iridescence" label="pearlescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q764093" start="15572" end="15578" title="Mercury Cougar" label="Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709643" start="15587" end="15606" title="Nissan Skyline GT-R" label="Nissan Skyline GT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q504481" start="15663" end="15672" title="Backdraft" label="Backdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798664" start="15686" end="15694" title="Overbore" label="Overbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902370" start="15696" end="15699" title="Chevrolet big-block engine" label="454"/>
<link wikidata="Q647404" start="15717" end="15730" title="Toyota Supra" label="Super Tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910630" start="15841" end="15873" title="Hot Wheels Highway 35 World Race" label="Hot Wheels Highway 35 World Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q44359" start="16325" end="16331" title="Bling-bling" label="Blings"/>
<link wikidata="Q647404" start="16573" end="16585" title="Toyota Supra" label="Toyota Supra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119538" start="16590" end="16601" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C6)" label="Corvette C6"/>
<link wikidata="Q145352" start="16789" end="16794" title="Zamac" label="Zamac"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="16826" end="16847" title="Toys &amp;#x27;R&amp;#x27; Us" label="Toys &amp;#x27;R&amp;#x27; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="17421" end="17431" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="17827" end="17840" title="Nickel" label="nickel-plated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="17841" end="17846" title="axles" label="axles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="17949" end="17957" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q338631" start="18175" end="18198" title="Hot Wheels AcceleRacers" label="Hot Wheels AcceleRacers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377219" start="18683" end="18694" title="Toyota AE86" label="Toyota AE86"/>
<link wikidata="Q216747" start="18701" end="18715" title="Honda Civic Si" label="Honda Civic Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081628" start="18717" end="18735" title="Plymouth Superbird" label="Plymouth Superbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q830369" start="18745" end="18762" title="Cadillac Escalade" label="Cadillac Escalade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323565" start="19960" end="19972" title="Transformers" label="Transformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="20533" end="20548" title="Indy Car Series" label="Indy Car Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="20608" end="20625" title="television series" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278689" start="20639" end="20664" title="Hot Wheels Battle Force 5" label="Hot Wheels Battle Force 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q428457" start="20734" end="20741" title="Nelvana" label="Nelvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6995971" start="20746" end="20770" title="Nerd Corps Entertainment" label="Nerd Corps Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700394" start="20777" end="20786" title="WildBrain" label="WildBrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="20832" end="20847" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q152917" start="20974" end="21015" title="Lamborghini Gallardo" label="Lamborghini Gallardo LP570-4 Superleggera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980988" start="21024" end="21035" title="Chevrolet Camaro (fifth generation)" label="2011 Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19932" start="21045" end="21066" title="DeLorean time machine" label="DeLorean time machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q91558" start="21076" end="21101" title="Back to the Future series" label="Back to the Future series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568987" start="21173" end="21183" title="1957 Chevrolet" label="1957 Chevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q226062" start="21188" end="21205" title="Chevrolet Impala" label="1958 Chevy Impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q318094" start="21640" end="21661" title="Lamborghini Aventador" label="Lamborghini Aventador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947496" start="21663" end="21696" title="Boss 302 Mustang" label="Ford Mustang Boss 302 Laguna Seca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088996" start="21698" end="21702" title="KITT" label="KITT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422267" start="21708" end="21720" title="Knight Rider (franchise)" label="Knight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q205683" start="21743" end="21753" title="Scooby-Doo" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165094" start="21840" end="21851" title="Angry Birds" label="Angry Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="22226" end="22236" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386797" start="22346" end="22360" title="Buried treasure" label="treasure chest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22597" end="22632" title="Chevrolet Camaro (fifth generation)#2013 Camaro Hot Wheels Special Edition" label="Chevrolet Camaro Hot Wheels Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="22651" end="22662" title="convertible" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203534" start="22825" end="22832" title="playset" label="playset"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="22963" end="22970" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q385268" start="23082" end="23095" title="Ferrari 599XX" label="Ferrari 599XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q603908" start="23349" end="23365" title="To be announced" label="To Be Determined"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="23560" end="23563" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677888" start="23897" end="23922" title="Honda NSX (second generation)" label="&amp;quot;″16 Acura NSX&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633850" start="24025" end="24038" title="Hudson Hornet" label="Hudson Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="24707" end="24723" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Chevrolet Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561331" start="25303" end="25315" title="display case" label="display case"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="25861" end="25865" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q87749354" start="25875" end="25893" title="Perseverance (rover)" label="Perseverance rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134915" start="26051" end="26067" title="Milestone (Italian company)" label="Milestone S.r.l."/>
<link wikidata="Q107388819" start="26103" end="26123" title="Hot Wheels Unleashed" label="Hot Wheels Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="26191" end="26194" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26247" end="26277" title="Hot Wheels: Ultimate Challenge" label="Hot Wheels: Ultimate Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383522" start="26289" end="26302" title="Rutledge Wood" label="Rutledge Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="26362" end="26369" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q124669051" start="26386" end="26412" title="Hot Wheels Let&amp;#x27;s Race" label="Hot Wheels Let&amp;#x27;s Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="26508" end="26519" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="27035" end="27042" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965741" start="27668" end="27685" title="Nash Metropolitan" label="Nash Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27770" end="27786" title="Pontiac Firebird#Firebird Trans Am" label="Pontiac Trans Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q580424" start="27835" end="27846" title="Volvo P1800" label="Volvo P1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q789339" start="27929" end="27942" title="Autozam Scrum" label="Autozam Scrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127110" start="28013" end="28032" title="Mazda MX-5" label="Mazda MX-5 Roadster"/>
<link wikidata="Q410854" start="28108" end="28119" title="Ford Falcon" label="Ford Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637218" start="28361" end="28375" title="Beatnik Bandit" label="Beatnik Bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025182" start="28378" end="28394" title="Cadillac El Dorado" label="Custom El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="28397" end="28410" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Custom Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="28413" end="28428" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Custom Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071075" start="28431" end="28447" title="Chevrolet C-10" label="Custom Fleetside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260042" start="28450" end="28455" title="Deora (custom car)" label="Deora"/>
<link wikidata="Q183476" start="28458" end="28472" title="Ford Mustang" label="Custom Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133834" start="28475" end="28488" title="Ford T-Bird" label="Custom T-Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="28491" end="28499" title="Ford Model T" label="Hot Heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q291149" start="28502" end="28512" title="Ford GT-40" label="Ford J-Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q764093" start="28515" end="28528" title="Mercury Cougar" label="Custom Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q750254" start="28531" end="28546" title="Pontiac Firebird" label="Custom Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q594930" start="28549" end="28565" title="Plymouth Barracuda" label="Custom Barracuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="28591" end="28608" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Custom Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437510" start="30377" end="30392" title="coin collecting" label="coin collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q856075" start="30394" end="30410" title="stamp collecting" label="stamp collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="30414" end="30420" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072763" start="34529" end="34540" title="muscle cars" label="muscle cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="34542" end="34550" title="hot rods" label="hot rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q287723" start="34784" end="34801" title="Chevrolet Malibu" label="1965 Chevy Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436973" start="34821" end="34840" title="Ford Ranchero" label="1972 Ford Ranchero."/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="35078" end="35081" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071074" start="35177" end="35195" title="Chevrolet Bel Air" label="1957 Chevy Bel Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133834" start="35237" end="35253" title="Ford Thunderbird" label="1963 Ford T-Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339720" start="35275" end="35291" title="Pontiac GTO" label="1965 Pontiac GTO"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35359" end="35369" title="1:18 scale" label="1:18 scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="35521" end="35540" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018821" start="35592" end="35600" title="Oldsmobile 442" label="Olds 442"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="35722" end="35745" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="1967 Camaro Convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287838" start="35763" end="35781" title="Dodge Charger (B-body)" label="1969 Dodge Charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467868" start="35801" end="35816" title="Ford Mustang (first generation)" label="1965 Mustang GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509356" start="35871" end="35888" title="Funny Car" label="Mustang Funny Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q594930" start="35984" end="36012" title="Plymouth Barracuda" label="Plymouth Barracuda Funny Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q750254" start="36183" end="36208" title="Pontiac Firebird" label="&amp;#x27;69 Pontiac Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359400" start="36224" end="36235" title="Meyers Manx" label="Meyers Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q936066" start="36242" end="36252" title="dune buggy" label="dune buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="36262" end="36275" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081628" start="36282" end="36321" title="Plymouth Superbird" label="&amp;#x27;70 Plymouth &amp;quot;Superbird&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138262" start="36636" end="36663" title="Volkswagen Karmann Ghia" label="&amp;quot;VW Karmann Ghia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q764093" start="36673" end="36696" title="Mercury Cougar" label="&amp;#x27;68 Mercury Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393708" start="36718" end="36747" title="The Red Baron (custom car)" label="&amp;quot;Red Baron&amp;quot; hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="36962" end="36967" title="karat" label="karat"/>
<link wikidata="Q309191" start="36986" end="36996" title="white gold" label="white gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="37003" end="37009" title="ruby" label="rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339720" start="37261" end="37277" title="Pontiac GTO" label="1970 Pontiac GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346163" start="37629" end="37646" title="Hot Import Nights" label="Hot Import Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="37783" end="37794" title="scale model" label="scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119538" start="37898" end="37909" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C6)" label="C6 Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303404" start="38158" end="38178" title="Mattel Hot Birds" label="&amp;quot;Hotbirds&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q791285" start="38459" end="38463" title="Avon Products" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438391" start="38465" end="38480" title="Chuck E. Cheese&amp;#x27;s" label="Chuck E. Cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917244" start="38495" end="38506" title="FAO Schwarz" label="FAO Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="38519" end="38532" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104680" start="38534" end="38539" title="Getty Oil" label="Getty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454852" start="38553" end="38559" title="Hormel" label="Hormel"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="38584" end="38593" title="J. C. Penney" label="JC Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107920" start="38595" end="38605" title="JC Whitney" label="JC Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326502" start="38607" end="38619" title="KB Toys" label="Kay-Bee Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="38621" end="38627" title="Kmart (United States)" label="K-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="38629" end="38643" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531983" start="38645" end="38653" title="Kool-Aid" label="Kool-Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="38655" end="38661" title="Kroger" label="Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415501" start="38663" end="38670" title="Lexmark" label="Lexmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192247" start="38736" end="38746" title="Jiffy Lube" label="Jiffy Lube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225273" start="38751" end="38757" title="Penske" label="Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801733" start="38760" end="38780" title="McKee Foods" label="Little Debbie Snacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717053" start="38782" end="38793" title="MOM Brands" label="Malt-O-Meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="38795" end="38810" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820949" start="38812" end="38825" title="Mervyn&amp;#x27;s" label="Mervyn&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118850" start="38827" end="38837" title="Otter Pops" label="Otter Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368644" start="38839" end="38866" title="Roses (store)" label="Rose&amp;#x27;s Discount Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240764" start="38868" end="38873" title="Shell USA" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="38875" end="38881" title="Target Corporation" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618830" start="38883" end="38900" title="Schwan&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Tony&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="38902" end="38923" title="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658320" start="38925" end="38933" title="76 (gas station)" label="Union 76"/>
<link wikidata="Q16531742" start="38935" end="38944" title="Valvoline" label="Valvoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983587" start="38946" end="38964" title="Pinnacle Foods" label="Van de Kamp&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="38966" end="38973" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="39032" end="39053" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="39163" end="39170" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q832799" start="39193" end="39209" title="Yellow Submarine (song)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="39255" end="39266" title="Volkswagen Type 2" label="VW microbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q949376" start="39520" end="39524" title="Muky" label="Muky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325511" start="39833" end="39840" title="Die casting" label="diecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="39878" end="39885" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="39927" end="39933" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="40032" end="40039" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="40342" end="40352" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q259691" start="40360" end="40373" title="Jay Kay" label="Jay Kay&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="40381" end="40393" title="Enzo Ferrari (automobile)" label="Enzo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="41040" end="41050" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="41947" end="41955" title="barcodes" label="barcodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="42353" end="42359" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386797" start="42857" end="42871" title="treasure chest" label="treasure chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="44943" end="44960" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q385058" start="45083" end="45086" title="McG" label="McG"/>
<link wikidata="Q91540" start="45295" end="45313" title="Back to the Future" label="Back to the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="45519" end="45536" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273019" start="45538" end="45564" title="Matt Nix" label="Flying Glass of Milk Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188938" start="45569" end="45584" title="Silver Pictures" label="Silver Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="45603" end="45609" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855811" start="45672" end="45682" title="Turnaround (filmmaking)" label="turnaround"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="45719" end="45740" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="45742" end="45753" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273019" start="45779" end="45787" title="Matt Nix" label="Matt Nix"/>
<link wikidata="Q621364" start="45849" end="45867" title="Legendary Pictures" label="Legendary Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q401976" start="45938" end="45947" title="Fast Five" label="Fast Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275736" start="46002" end="46013" title="Simon Crane" label="Simon Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q461315" start="46018" end="46041" title="Juan Carlos Fresnadillo" label="Juan Carlos Fresnadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004870" start="46098" end="46126" title="Art Marcum and Matt Holloway" label="Art Marcum and Matt Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576873" start="46189" end="46205" title="Fast &amp;amp; Furious" label="Fast and Furious"/>
<link wikidata="Q551876" start="46236" end="46246" title="Justin Lin" label="Justin Lin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46532" end="46554" title="Hot Wheels: World Race" label="Hot Wheels: World Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q130744" start="46611" end="46627" title="Playground Games" label="Playground Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q24646839" start="46721" end="46736" title="Forza Horizon 3" label="Forza Horizon 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q97440962" start="46818" end="46830" title="Mattel Films" label="Mattel Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="46946" end="46968" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q798768" start="47093" end="47102" title="Bad Robot" label="Bad Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574237" start="49063" end="49089" title="Wind-up toy" label="&amp;quot;pull back&amp;quot; cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436472" start="49260" end="49269" title="D battery" label="D battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="49467" end="49469" title="Alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q428795" start="49514" end="49522" title="pit stop" label="pit stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q898377" start="49564" end="49569" title="Nickel–cadmium battery" label="NiCad"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="50014" end="50035" title="Heavy equipment" label="construction vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50242" end="50256" title="Playing Mantis (company)" label="Playing Mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="50299" end="50305" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758324" start="50306" end="50315" title="Stock car racing" label="stock car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350726" start="50616" end="50630" title="Trickle charging" label="trickle charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="50934" end="50940" title="Target Corporation" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q192212" start="51237" end="51243" title="Cars 2" label="Cars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="51368" end="51378" title="Brand" label="brand name"/>
<link wikidata="Q79407" start="51483" end="51518" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293347" start="51583" end="51596" title="Don Prudhomme" label="Don Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816797" start="51625" end="51635" title="Tom McEwen (drag racer)" label="Tom McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509356" start="51858" end="51868" title="Funny Car" label="funny cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q356824" start="52025" end="52034" title="Dragster (car)" label="rail-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q935518" start="52376" end="52391" title="Trans-Am Series" label="Trans-Am Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="52399" end="52409" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q173450" start="52418" end="52437" title="All American Racers" label="All American Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111123" start="52493" end="52505" title="Jack Baldwin (racing driver)" label="Jack Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="52608" end="52614" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795060" start="52622" end="52632" title="Kyle Petty" label="Kyle Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795060" start="52648" end="52663" title="PE2 Motorsports" label="PE2 Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q255911" start="52762" end="52784" title="Craftsman Truck Series" label="Craftsman Truck Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041949" start="52793" end="52809" title="Carlos Contreras (racing driver)" label="Carlos Contreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="52880" end="52891" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166378" start="52908" end="52926" title="Darlington Raceway" label="Darlington Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094266" start="52997" end="53011" title="JR Motorsports" label="JR Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="53019" end="53033" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="53037" end="53068" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q96761050" start="53140" end="53151" title="Jade Buford" label="Jade Buford"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612577" start="53166" end="53189" title="Big Machine Racing Team" label="Big Machine Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166378" start="53197" end="53215" title="Darlington Raceway" label="Darlington Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="53344" end="53355" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336277" start="53473" end="53515" title="The Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Indianapolis" label="The Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20015859" start="53531" end="53553" title="2016 Indianapolis 500" label="100th Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q866784" start="53592" end="53603" title="Monster Jam" label="Monster Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068065" start="53742" end="53760" title="Feld Entertainment" label="Feld Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577375" start="53807" end="53818" title="Spin Master" label="Spin Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906841" start="54052" end="54059" title="Bigfoot (truck)" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216543" start="54154" end="54178" title="2002 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2002 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q63229192" start="54363" end="54374" title="Matt Mingay" label="Matt Mingay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984865" start="54428" end="54448" title="Stadium Super Trucks" label="Stadium Super Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071162" start="54503" end="54532" title="Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix" label="Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q659690" start="54542" end="54554" title="Robby Gordon" label="Robby Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830287" start="54595" end="54620" title="Townsville Street Circuit" label="Townsville Street Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049970" start="54637" end="54644" title="Castrol" label="Castrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451889" start="54845" end="54855" title="Hot Wheels (video game)" label="Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="54887" end="54899" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="54967" end="54984" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259669" start="54994" end="55023" title="Hot Wheels Stunt Track Driver" label="Hot Wheels Stunt Track Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="55087" end="55101" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141103" start="55111" end="55134" title="Hot Wheels Turbo Racing" label="Hot Wheels Turbo Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="55166" end="55177" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="55186" end="55197" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55366" end="55415" title="Hot Wheels Stunt Track Driver#Sequel" label="Hot Wheels Stunt Track Driver 2: Get&amp;#x27;n Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126680" start="55474" end="55497" title="Hot Wheels Micro Racers" label="Hot Wheels Micro Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201109" start="55552" end="55569" title="Planet Hot Wheels" label="Planet Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="55586" end="55619" title="massively multiplayer online game" label="massively multiplayer online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="55646" end="55652" title="MacOS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910621" start="55736" end="55761" title="Hot Wheels Extreme Racing" label="Hot Wheels Extreme Racing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55884" end="55915" title="Hot Wheels: Burnin&amp;#x27; Rubber" label="Hot Wheels: Burnin&amp;#x27; Rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="55947" end="55963" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021014" start="55973" end="56008" title="Williams F1 Team Driver" label="Hot Wheels: Williams F1 Team Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910627" start="56144" end="56165" title="Hot Wheels Velocity X" label="Hot Wheels Velocity X"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="56234" end="56251" title="GameCube" label="Nintendo GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="56257" end="56270" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="56280" end="56302" title="Hot Wheels: World Race (video game)" label="Hot Wheels: World Race"/>
<link wikidata="" start="56417" end="56450" title="Hot Wheels: Stunt Track Challenge" label="Hot Wheels: Stunt Track Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="56538" end="56542" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127189" start="56655" end="56681" title="Hot Wheels Ultimate Racing" label="Hot Wheels Ultimate Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="56713" end="56733" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="" start="56743" end="56765" title="Hot Wheels: Beat That!" label="Hot Wheels: Beat That!"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="56816" end="56827" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="56844" end="56847" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="56853" end="56861" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910618" start="56871" end="56896" title="Hot Wheels Battle Force 5 (video game)" label="Hot Wheels Battle Force 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910624" start="56957" end="56980" title="Hot Wheels Track Attack" label="Hot Wheels Track Attack"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57041" end="57077" title="Hot Wheels: World&amp;#x27;s Best Driver" label="Hot Wheels: World&amp;#x27;s Best Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="57105" end="57108" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="57110" end="57122" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="57143" end="57156" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q56942" start="57158" end="57163" title="Wii U" label="Wii U"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="57250" end="57257" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57276" end="57301" title="Need for Speed: No Limits" label="Need for Speed: No Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="57368" end="57375" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="57401" end="57404" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="57439" end="57445" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20031743" start="57917" end="57930" title="Rocket League" label="Rocket League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="58027" end="58047" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="58114" end="58125" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q24646839" start="58135" end="58150" title="Forza Horizon 3" label="Forza Horizon 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="58249" end="58259" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="58264" end="58272" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q73801" start="58294" end="58311" title="Xbox Game Studios" label="Xbox Game Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="58396" end="58408" title="tech startup" label="tech startup"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58423" end="58443" title="Hot Wheels: Race Off" label="Hot Wheels: Race Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="58487" end="58494" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="58499" end="58502" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62513347" start="58508" end="58520" title="Apple Arcade" label="Apple Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388819" start="58619" end="58639" title="Hot Wheels Unleashed" label="Hot Wheels Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="58686" end="58701" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="58703" end="58717" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStations 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="58722" end="58723" title="PlayStation 5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="58728" end="58736" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q98973368" start="58741" end="58756" title="Xbox Series X and Series S" label="Xbox Series X/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822135" start="58822" end="58829" title="Gamefam" label="Gamefam"/>
<link wikidata="Q692989" start="58853" end="58859" title="Roblox" label="Roblox"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="58880" end="58887" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="58889" end="58892" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q64350339" start="58893" end="58899" title="iPadOS" label="iPadOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="58901" end="58918" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="58920" end="58925" title="MacOS" label="MacOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="58930" end="58938" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q54893555" start="58948" end="58963" title="Forza Horizon 4" label="Forza Horizon 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="59013" end="59021" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="59026" end="59043" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q107214683" start="59053" end="59068" title="Forza Horizon 5" label="Forza Horizon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q24646839" start="59165" end="59180" title="Forza Horizon 3" label="Forza Horizon 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="59247" end="59257" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="59259" end="59267" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q98973368" start="59272" end="59287" title="Xbox Series X/S" label="Xbox Series X/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q105687032" start="59621" end="59634" title="Velan Studios" label="Velan Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="59779" end="59786" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335161" start="59859" end="59868" title="Model car" label="Model car"/>
<link wikidata="Q124328796" start="59877" end="59895" title="Hotwheels sisyphus" label="Hotwheels sisyphus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499013" wikidata="Q57470" url="?curid=499013" title="Otto Liman von Sanders">
<text>Otto Viktor Karl Liman von Sanders (; 17 February 1855 – 22 August 1929) was an Imperial German Army general who served as a military adviser to the Ottoman Army during the First World War. He was born to the family of a Jewish nobleman and like many other Prussians from aristocratic families, he joined the military and rose through the ranks to General. In 1918 he commanded an Ottoman army during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign. On the whole Sanders provided only limited help to the Ottoman forces.

==Early life and career==
Otto Liman was born in Stolp (now Słupsk, Poland) in the Province of Pomerania in the Kingdom of Prussia. He was the son of nobleman Carl Leonhard Liman and his wife Emma née Michaelis. Carl Liman was a prosperous businessman, who purchased the lordship of the manor (Rittergut) of Schwessin (now Świeszyno, Poland). It is generally agreed that Carl&#x27;s father and Otto&#x27;s grandfather was born to a Jewish family by the name of Liepmann and was later baptised a Christian.

After gaining his diploma (Abitur) at the Friedrich Wilhelm Gymnasium in Berlin, Otto Liman entered the army on 13 March 1874 as a Fahnenjunker in the Leibgarde-Infanterie-Regiment (1. Grossherzöglich Hessisches) Nr. 115. From 1878 to 1881 he attended the Military Academy (Kriegsakademie) in Berlin, and was subsequently transferred to Garde-Dragoner-Regiment (1. Grossherzöglich Hessisches) Nr. 23. In 1885 he was promoted to Oberleutnant and in 1887 seconded to the General Staff. Promoted to Hauptmann in 1889, he was appointed a squadron commander (Eskadronschef) in 1891. In 1900 he was assigned command of Husaren-Regiment &quot;Graf Goetzen&quot; (2. Schlesisches) Nr. 6, first as Major, and from 1904 as Oberst. He was promoted to Generalmajor in 1908 and given command of the 22nd Division, based at Kassel. He attained the rank of Generalleutnant in 1911.

On 16 June 1913, on the occasion of the 25th Jubilee of Kaiser Wilhelm II, Liman was personally ennobled with an award. As his nobiliary suffix he chose the maiden name of his late first wife, Amelie von Sanders (1858–1906). He was thereafter known as Otto Liman von Sanders. In accordance with the rules of German nomenclature, this surname is correctly abbreviated &quot;Liman&quot; (and not &quot;von Sanders&quot; or &quot;Sanders&quot;, as is often the case in English-language publications).

==German Military Mission to the Ottoman Empire and World War I==
In 1913, like several other Prussian generals before him (such as Moltke and Goltz), Liman was appointed to head a German military mission to the Ottoman Empire. For nearly eighty years, the Ottomans had been trying to modernize their army along European lines. Liman von Sanders would be the last German to attempt this task.

On 30 July 1914, two days after the outbreak of the war in Europe, the Ottoman leaders agreed to form an alliance with Germany against Russia, although it did not require them to undertake military action, and on 31 October 1914, the Ottoman Empire officially entered the war on the side of the Central Powers. Britain and France declared war on it on 5 November, and the Ottomans declared a &quot;jihad&quot; (holy war) later that month, but the call for jihad failed as many of the Arab nationalists formed an alliance with the British (which led to the Arab Revolt).

===Gallipoli===

The first proposal to attack the Ottoman Empire was made in November 1914 by the French Minister of Justice Aristide Briand and was rejected. Later that month Winston Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, proposed a naval attack on the Dardanelles, based in part on erroneous reports of Ottoman troop strength. An initial attempt to force the Dardanelles by sea failed on 18 March 1915, due to gunfire from Ottoman forts on both sides of the strait. The Allies then turned to planning amphibious operations to capture the forts and clear the strait, which led to the Battle of Gallipoli.

Liman had little time to organize the defences, but he had two things in his favour. First, the Ottoman 5th Army in the Gallipoli peninsula was the best army they had, some 84,000 well-equipped soldiers in six divisions. Second, he was helped by poor Allied leadership. On 25 April 1915, the British landed a major force at Cape Helles. His decision to pull back the strong line of coastal defenses the local Turkish commanders had established and group them inland in preparation for the Allied attack almost gave an early victory to Allies. He was also convinced that Allied landings would take place at Saros Bay and did not believe for a long time the landings at Arıburnu was the main assault, not a ruse. He did not release the main troops in the critical first day of the landings. One of Liman&#x27;s best decisions during this time was to promote Mustafa Kemal (later known as Atatürk) to command the 19th division. Kemal&#x27;s division was crucial to the Ottomans&#x27; defense. His troops marched up on the day of the landings and occupied the ridge line above the ANZAC landing site, just as the ANZAC troops were moving up the slope themselves. Kemal recognized the danger and personally made sure his troops held the ridge line. They were never forced off despite constant attacks for the next five months.

From April to November 1915 (when the decision to evacuate was made), Liman had to fight off numerous attacks against his defensive positions. The British tried another landing at Suvla Bay, but this also was halted by the Ottoman defenders. The only bright spot for the British in this entire operation was that they managed to evacuate their positions without much loss. However, this battle was a major victory for the Ottoman army and some of the credit is given to the generalship of Liman von Sanders.

Early in 1915, the previous head of the German military mission to the Ottoman Empire, Baron von der Goltz, arrived in Istanbul as military advisor to the (essentially powerless) Sultan, Mehmed V. The old Baron did not get along with Liman von Sanders and did not like the three Pashas (Enver Pasha, Cemal Pasha and Talat) who ran the Ottoman Empire during the war. The Baron proposed some major offensives against the British, but these proposals came to nothing in the face of Allied offensives against the Ottomans on three fronts (the Dardanelles, the Caucasus Front, and the newly opened Mesopotamian Front). Liman was rid of the old Baron when Enver Pasha sent him to fight the British in Mesopotamia in October 1915. (Goltz died there six months later, just before the British army at Kut surrendered.)

===Sinai and Palestine===

In 1918, the last year of the war, Liman von Sanders took over command of the Ottoman army during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign, replacing the German General Erich von Falkenhayn who had been defeated by British General Allenby at the end of 1917.

Liman was hampered by the significant decline in power of the Ottoman army. His forces were unable to do anything more than occupy defensive positions and wait for the British attack. The attack was a long time in coming, but when General Allenby finally unleashed his army, the entire Ottoman army was destroyed in a week of fighting (see the Battle of Megiddo). In the rout, Liman was nearly taken prisoner by British soldiers.

==Alleged war crimes==
After one group of 300 Armenians were deported from Smyrna, Liman von Sanders blocked additional deportations by threatening to use military force to obstruct them. However, this action was not motivated by humanitarianism, but by his insistence to avoid chaos in a war zone.

Liman von Sanders has been accused of perpetrating war crimes in his dealings with the Greek civilian population of Aivali, by proposing to the Ottoman authorities their deportation &quot;for the security of the army&quot; (the deportation did occur in 1917 and led to the death of many), or by directly ordering, as an autocratic military dictator, the mass deportation of Greeks and Armenians. British Admiral Sir Somerset Gough-Calthorpe accused him of being behind the deportation of 35,000 Greeks from Aivali &quot;under horrible conditions&quot;, as part of the deportation and partial assassination of 300,000 Ottoman Greeks under his complete authority, and that the 1915 expulsion of 1.5 million Armenians and 450,000 Greeks was overseen by von Sanders. Von Sanders was also accused of &quot;deliberately&quot; cutting a trench system through the British war cemeteries at Gallipoli and of the maltreatment of British prisoners of war.

British authorities arrested him in 1919 on war crime charges, concretely for sanctioning massacres of Greeks and Armenians, kept him for half a year on Malta with the Malta exiles, but then released him.

==Later life==
After being released, Liman returned home and retired from the German army later that year. After former Ottoman Grand Vizier Talaat Pasha was assassinated by Armenian revolutionary Soghomon Tehlirian in Berlin in March 1921, Liman was called upon to testify as an expert witness at Tehlirian&#x27;s trial. Tehlirian was ultimately acquitted.

In 1927 he published &quot;Fünf Jahre Türkei&quot; (&quot;tr. Five Years in Turkey&quot;), a book he had written in captivity in Malta about his experiences before and during the war.

Liman von Sanders died in Munich on 22 August 1929, at the age of seventy-four.

==See also==
* Hans Freiherr von Wangenheim (1859–1915), diplomat for Imperial Germany accused of complicity in the Armenian genocide
* Bund der Asienkämpfer (1918-1938), social welfare organisation for German World War I veterans who had served in the Near East and the Balkans
* Erich Prigge (1878–1955), adjutant to Marshal von Sanders (1914–19) and military memoirist

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* World War One.com Short biography. January 2006.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57470" start="0" end="34" title="Otto Liman von Sanders" label="Otto Viktor Karl Liman von Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="80" end="100" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934938" start="125" end="141" title="military adviser" label="military adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="149" end="161" title="Ottoman Army" label="Ottoman Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="173" end="188" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="567" end="573" title="Słupsk" label="Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q836689" start="590" end="611" title="Province of Pomerania (1815–1945)" label="Province of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="619" end="637" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387608" start="815" end="824" title="Świeszyno, Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Schwessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708387" start="1041" end="1047" title="Abitur" label="Abitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457922" start="1056" end="1083" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Gymnasium" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q837722" start="1145" end="1157" title="Fahnenjunker" label="Fahnenjunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q144242" start="1270" end="1286" title="Prussian Military Academy" label="Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673216" start="1442" end="1454" title="Oberleutnant" label="Oberleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="1483" end="1496" title="German General Staff" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366972" start="1510" end="1519" title="Hauptmann" label="Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738004" start="1703" end="1708" title="Major (Germany)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756713" start="1727" end="1733" title="Oberst" label="Oberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009153" start="1754" end="1766" title="Generalmajor" label="Generalmajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q214184" start="1800" end="1813" title="22nd Division (German Empire)" label="22nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="1824" end="1830" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100519" start="1856" end="1871" title="Generalleutnant" label="Generalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="1945" end="1955" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q300942" start="2009" end="2025" title="von" label="nobiliary suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q44205" start="2513" end="2519" title="Helmuth von Moltke the Elder" label="Moltke"/>
<link wikidata="Q57760" start="2524" end="2529" title="Colmar Freiherr von der Goltz" label="Goltz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2562" end="2585" title="Ministry of War (Ottoman Empire)#German Military Mission" label="German military mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2593" end="2607" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="3331" end="3342" title="Arab Revolt" label="Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="3471" end="3486" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3522" end="3539" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="3541" end="3568" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="3601" end="3612" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="3850" end="3860" title="Amphibious landing" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565174" start="4050" end="4066" title="Fifth Army (Ottoman Empire)" label="Ottoman 5th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728312" start="4278" end="4289" title="Cape Helles" label="Cape Helles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474092" start="4560" end="4569" title="Saros Bay" label="Saros Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4622" end="4630" title="Arıburnu" label="Arıburnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="4840" end="4847" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q433119" start="5031" end="5036" title="Australian and New Zealand Army Corps" label="ANZAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451843" start="5457" end="5466" title="Suvla Bay" label="Suvla Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q57760" start="5873" end="5892" title="Colmar Freiherr von der Goltz" label="Baron von der Goltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="5965" end="5971" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="5973" end="5981" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q153899" start="6073" end="6084" title="Enver Pasha" label="Enver Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317011" start="6086" end="6097" title="Cemal Pasha" label="Cemal Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q315888" start="6102" end="6107" title="Mehmed Talat Pasha" label="Talat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6121" end="6135" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q523154" start="6342" end="6356" title="Caucasus Campaign" label="Caucasus Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="6379" end="6397" title="Mesopotamian Campaign" label="Mesopotamian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q815166" start="6578" end="6581" title="Siege of Kut" label="Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q57153" start="6785" end="6805" title="Erich von Falkenhayn" label="Erich von Falkenhayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="6839" end="6854" title="Edmund Allenby, 1st Viscount Allenby" label="General Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q199371" start="7220" end="7237" title="Battle of Megiddo (1918)" label="Battle of Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="7382" end="7388" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q793383" start="7723" end="7729" title="Ayvalık" label="Aivali"/>
<link wikidata="Q741874" start="8023" end="8047" title="Somerset Gough-Calthorpe" label="Somerset Gough-Calthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q911233" start="8643" end="8662" title="Greek genocide" label="massacres of Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="8667" end="8676" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="8706" end="8711" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744731" start="8721" end="8733" title="Malta exiles" label="Malta exiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q315888" start="8900" end="8912" title="Talaat Pasha" label="Talaat Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q738576" start="8956" end="8974" title="Soghomon Tehlirian" label="Soghomon Tehlirian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="9329" end="9335" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q214421" start="9399" end="9427" title="Hans Freiherr von Wangenheim" label="Hans Freiherr von Wangenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997474" start="9520" end="9541" title="Bund der Asienkämpfer" label="Bund der Asienkämpfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48705062" start="9665" end="9677" title="Erich Prigge" label="Erich Prigge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499014" wikidata="Q98768263" url="?curid=499014" title="Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies">
<text>FUJIFILM Diosynth Biotechnologies, abbreviated and often referred to as FDB, is a biopharmaceutical contract manufacturing organization that develops manufacturing processes and manufactures active ingredients and provides fill and finish services for pharmaceutical companies. FUJIFILM Diosynth Biotechnologies is the world&#x27;s second largest contract manufacturer of biopharmaceuticals, with manufacturing facilities in Morrisville, North Carolina and College Station, Texas in the United States, Teesside, United Kingdom and Hillerød, Denmark in Europe, and recently added sites in Thousand Oaks, California and Watertown, Massachusetts. FUJIFILM Diosynth Biotechnologies operates a highly automated multipurpose manufacturing facility in College Station, Texas under the federal government&#x27;s Center for Innovation in Advanced Development and Manufacturing (CIADM) program, which is the largest scale-out cell culture manufacturing facility in the United States.

In March 2021, the company announced that it had selected Holly Springs, North Carolina, located near its existing operations in Morrisville, for a $2 billion investment to establish a new large-scale cell culture production site, which is expected to be operational in 2025 and create 725 new jobs by the end of 2028. The company plans to install 8 x 20,000L bioreactors at the facility and plan for the ability to add an additional 24 x 20,000L bioreactors, as well as production lines for large scale automated fill and finish, labeling, and packaging services.

== History ==

=== Early history ===
The company started in Oss, Netherlands in 1923 with the extraction of insulin from bovine pancreata, and porcine insulin extraction in 1930. In January 2005, the company became a part of Organon, one of its sister companies in the Akzo Nobel pharma group. Along with its sister companies Organon and Intervet were sold to Schering-Plough in March 2007 by Akzo Nobel. Following the mergers of Schering-Plough with Merck &amp; Co. (MSD) on March 9, 2009, the company temporarily became part of the MSD Nutritionals products company, belonging to the MSD group.

In April 2011, the company was sold to Fujifilm, forming Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies. For most of the company&#x27;s history, Diosynth manufactured biochemical substances and fine chemicals, with pharmaceutical raw materials coming largely from either animal origin or chemical intermediates. Under Fujifilm, it no longer focuses on small molecules, but instead develops processes for and mass manufactures biologics (e.g., proteins and mRNA). On December 18, 2014, Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies acquired Kalon Biotherapeutic Technologies in College Station, TX, which became Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Texas.

In March 2020, Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies named Martin Meeson the company&#x27;s new CEO. He took over from Steve Bagshaw who was set to retire and became a non-executive chairman. In June 2023, Lars Petersen succeeded Martin Meeson as the new CEO. 

Subject to regulatory approval, at least 60 million doses of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine will be manufactured for the UK government from 2021 by Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies at its Billingham site.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q98768263" start="0" end="33" title="Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies" label="FUJIFILM Diosynth Biotechnologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165673" start="100" end="135" title="contract manufacturing organization" label="contract manufacturing organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="191" end="208" title="active ingredient" label="active ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q97676966" start="223" end="238" title="fill and finish" label="fill and finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="252" end="276" title="pharmaceutical company" label="pharmaceutical companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028159" start="425" end="452" title="Morrisville, North Carolina" label="Morrisville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q695511" start="457" end="479" title="College Station, Texas" label="College Station, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293366" start="502" end="526" title="Teesside" label="Teesside, United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27425" start="531" end="548" title="Hillerød" label="Hillerød, Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="588" end="613" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q54172" start="618" end="642" title="Watertown, Massachusetts" label="Watertown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189082" start="916" end="928" title="cell culture" label="cell culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030155" start="1033" end="1062" title="Holly Springs, North Carolina" label="Holly Springs, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9859" start="1601" end="1604" title="Oss" label="Oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1606" end="1617" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q903372" start="1766" end="1773" title="Organon International" label="Organon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50912" start="1810" end="1820" title="Akzo Nobel" label="Akzo Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="1879" end="1887" title="Intervet" label="Intervet"/>
<link wikidata="Q249723" start="1901" end="1916" title="Schering-Plough" label="Schering-Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q50912" start="1934" end="1944" title="Akzo Nobel" label="Akzo Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="1992" end="2007" title="Merck &amp;amp; Co." label="Merck &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="2178" end="2186" title="Fujifilm" label="Fujifilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q97154235" start="3090" end="3114" title="Novavax COVID-19 vaccine" label="Novavax COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q862891" start="3212" end="3222" title="Billingham" label="Billingham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="499017" wikidata="Q532715" url="?curid=499017" title="John Randolph (actor)">
<text>Emanuel Hirsch Cohen (June 1, 1915 – February 24, 2004), better known by the stage name John Randolph, was an American film, television and stage actor.

==Early life==
Randolph was born Emanuel Hirsch Cohen in New York City on June 1, 1915, the son of Jewish immigrants from Russia and Romania. His mother, Dorothy (née Shorr), was an insurance agent, and his father, Louis Cohen, was a hat manufacturer. In the 1930s, he spent his summers at the Pine Brook Country Club in Nichols, Connecticut, which was the summer home of the Group Theatre. He made his Broadway debut in 1938 in &quot;Coriolanus&quot;. Randolph joined the United States Army Air Forces in World War II. He had a small role in the 1948 film &quot;The Naked City&quot;.

He and wife Sarah Cunningham were blacklisted from working in Hollywood films and in New York film and television and radio after 1948. In 1955, they were both called before the House Un-American Activities Committee to testify concerning ongoing investigations regarding Communist infiltration in the American entertainment industry. Both he and his wife refused to answer questions and cited the Fifth Amendment protection against testifying against themselves.

==Career==
Randolph was one of the last blacklisted actors to regain employment in Hollywood films when director John Frankenheimer cast him in a major role in &quot;Seconds&quot; in 1966. Randolph was in the original New York stage productions of &quot;The Sound of Music&quot; (as Von Trapp&#x27;s butler, Franz), &quot;Paint Your Wagon&quot;, and &quot;The Visit&quot;.

He made his last Broadway appearance in 1991 in &quot;Prelude to a Kiss&quot;.

===Film and Television===
Randolph made numerous screen and television appearances in secondary roles. He played Chief Sidney Green in &quot;Serpico&quot; (1973), directed by Sidney Lumet. From 1973 to 1976, he made three appearances as Cornelius &quot;Junior&quot; Harrison, Jr., father of Emily Hartley, in &quot;The Bob Newhart Show&quot; (shows #37, #59, and #106).

In 1974, he played an Air Force Colonel in the &quot;Columbo&quot; episode &quot;Swan Song&quot;. He played a mayor in &quot;Earthquake&quot; (1974), a disaster film. In 1975, Randolph was cast as General Philip Blankenship in &quot;The New Original Wonder Woman&quot; pilot. He was replaced by Richard Eastham in the television series.

In 1975, Randolph took over the role of the principal of fictional Harry S Truman High School in the series &quot;Lucas Tanner&quot; starring David Hartman. He was with the series for the last half of its single season. He had an uncredited role in the 1976 film &quot;All The President&#x27;s Men&quot; as the voice of Richard Nixon&#x27;s Attorney General John Mitchell.

He played Judge J. Waties Waring in &quot;With All Deliberate Speed&quot;, a 1976 episode of CBS&#x27;s mini-series &quot;The American Parade&quot;, dealing with events culminating in the 1954 Supreme Court decision (Brown v Board of Education) barring racial segregation in US public schools. 

In 1979, Randolph had a guest appearance on &quot;M*A*S*H&quot; as an adjutant army general admiring the culinary prowess of a master chef errantly assigned as a foot soldier in a front unit. From 1979 to 1980, he played Donna Pescow&#x27;s father-in-law on the television series &quot;Angie&quot;.

In 1982, he appeared in a first-season episode of &quot;Family Ties&quot; as Jake Keaton, Steven Keaton&#x27;s father. In 1985, he played the father of Charlie Partana (played by Jack Nicholson) in &quot;Prizzi&#x27;s Honor&quot;. He was a special guest star in the 1986 ABC made-for-TV movie &quot;The Right of the People&quot;, playing Police Chief Hollander in a town soon allowing all adults to carry handguns. 

In 1988, Randolph appeared in a Season 2 episode of &quot;Matlock&quot; as the head of a crime family in &quot;The Investigation&quot;. In 1989, he appeared in two episodes of &quot;Roseanne&quot; playing Al, Roseanne&#x27;s dad, who was later revealed to be an abusive parent. Also in 1989, he played Clark W. Griswold, Sr. in &quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Christmas Vacation&quot; (with Chevy Chase). 

In 1990, he landed a regular series role, co-starring as a family patriarch in the NBC comedy &quot;Grand&quot;, co-starring Bonnie Hunt, and Michael McKean. The series only lasted two seasons, despite a timeslot following NBC&#x27;s highly successful &quot;Cheers&quot;. In 1991, he guested in an episode of &quot;Married ... With Children&quot; entitled &quot;Al Bundy, Shoe Dick&quot;.

Randolph co-starred with Alec Guinness, Leo McKern, Jeanne Moreau and Lauren Bacall, in the BBC production of &quot;A Foreign Field&quot; (1993) as a World War II veteran returning to France to find the woman he fell in love with.

Also in 1993, Randolph appeared in the fourth season of the hit television show &quot;Seinfeld&quot;, as the first actor to play George Costanza&#x27;s father, Frank Costanza. In the following season, Randolph was replaced in this role by Jerry Stiller.

One of his last film roles was as Joe Fox&#x27;s grandfather in &quot;You&#x27;ve Got Mail&quot; (1998).

==Death==
On February 24, 2004, Randolph died at his home in Hollywood, California, of natural causes, aged 88. He acted up until the year before his death.

==Selected filmography==
* &quot;The Naked City&quot; (1948) – Police Dispatcher (uncredited)
* &quot;Fourteen Hours&quot; (1951) – Fireman (uncredited)
* &quot;Hamlet&quot; (1964) – Gravedigger
* &quot;The Patty Duke Show&quot; (1965) – Coach
* &quot;Seconds&quot; (1966) – Arthur Hamilton
* &quot;Sweet Love, Bitter&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Borgia Stick&quot; (1967) – Smith
* &quot;Pretty Poison&quot; (1968) – Morton Azenauer
* &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot; (1969) – Marty Sloane
* &quot;Smith!&quot; (1969) – Mr. Edwards
* &quot;Number One&quot; (1969) – Coach Southerd
* &quot;Gaily, Gaily&quot; (1969) – Father
* &quot;There Was a Crooked Man...&quot; (1970) – Cyrus McNutt
* &quot;Little Murders&quot; (1971) – Mr. Chamberlain
* &quot;Escape from the Planet of the Apes&quot; (1971) – Chairman
* &quot;A Death of Innocence&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Conquest of the Planet of the Apes&quot; (1972) – Commission Chairman
* &quot;Serpico&quot; (1973) – Sidney Green
* &quot;Earthquake&quot; (1974) – Mayor
* &quot;The Missiles of October&quot; (1974) - George Ball, Undersecretary of State
* &quot;Lincoln&quot; (1975-76) - Simon Cameron
* &quot;Everybody Rides the Carousel&quot; (1975) – Stage 7 (voice)
* &quot;All The President&#x27;s Men&quot; (1976) – John Mitchell (voice, uncredited)
* &quot;King Kong&quot; (1976) – Captain Ross
* &quot;The Gathering&quot; (1977) – Dr. Hodges
* &quot;Heaven Can Wait&quot; (1978) – Former Owner
* &quot;Lovely But Deadly&quot; (1981) – Franklin Van Dyke
* &quot;The Adventures of Nellie Bly&quot; (1981) – Joseph Pulitzer
* &quot;Frances&quot; (1982) – Kindly Judge
* &quot;Prizzi&#x27;s Honor&quot; (1985) – Angelo &#x27;Pop&#x27; Partanna
* &quot;Means and Ends&quot; (1985) – Bill Henderson
* &quot;The Wizard of Loneliness&quot; (1988) – Doc
* &quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Christmas Vacation&quot; (1989) – Clark Griswold, Sr.
* &quot;Sibling Rivalry&quot; (1990) – Charles Turner Sr.
* &quot;Iron Maze&quot; (1991) – Mayor Peluso
* &quot;The Hotel Manor Inn&quot; (1997) – Gus
* &quot;Here Dies Another Day&quot; (1997) – Brace
* &quot;A Price Above Rubies&quot; (1998) – Rebbe Moshe
* &quot;You&#x27;ve Got Mail&quot; (1998) – Schuyler Fox
* &quot;The Dogwalker&quot; (1999) – Ike
* &quot;Sunset Strip&quot; (2000) – Mr. Niederhaus
* &quot;Numb&quot; (2003) – (final film role)

==References==
==External links==
* 
* In Remembrance: John Randolph
* John Randolph papers, 1921-1998 (bulk 1940-1975), held by the Billy Rose Theatre Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
* John Randolph (Aveleyman)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532715" start="0" end="20" title="John Randolph (actor)" label="Emanuel Hirsch Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q532715" start="88" end="101" title="John Randolph (actor)" label="John Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195077" start="448" end="471" title="Pine Brook Country Club" label="Pine Brook Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026545" start="475" end="495" title="Nichols, Connecticut" label="Nichols, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q378577" start="530" end="543" title="Group Theatre (New York)" label="Group Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q463126" start="589" end="599" title="Coriolanus (play)" label="Coriolanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="627" end="656" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="660" end="672" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587353" start="717" end="731" title="The Naked City" label="The Naked City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563384" start="752" end="768" title="Sarah Cunningham (actress)" label="Sarah Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="918" end="956" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="1138" end="1153" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="1318" end="1336" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195447" start="1371" end="1378" title="Seconds (1966 film)" label="Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022513" start="1459" end="1477" title="The Sound of Music" label="The Sound of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288100" start="1527" end="1543" title="Paint Your Wagon (musical)" label="Paint Your Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q688919" start="1561" end="1570" title="The Visit (play)" label="The Visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983724" start="1633" end="1650" title="Prelude to a Kiss (play)" label="Prelude to a Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q657079" start="1800" end="1807" title="Serpico" label="Serpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="1834" end="1846" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248785" start="1974" end="1994" title="The Bob Newhart Show" label="The Bob Newhart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="2083" end="2090" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q500280" start="2155" end="2165" title="Earthquake (1974 film)" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247495" start="2263" end="2292" title="Wonder Woman (TV series)" label="The New Original Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528694" start="2325" end="2340" title="Richard Eastham" label="Richard Eastham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696327" start="2482" end="2494" title="Lucas Tanner" label="Lucas Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174682" start="2510" end="2523" title="David Hartman (TV personality)" label="David Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q466781" start="2637" end="2665" title="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men (film)" label="All The President&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="2688" end="2701" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="2726" end="2739" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310137" start="2752" end="2774" title="Julius Waties Waring" label="Judge J. Waties Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="2959" end="2985" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q494244" start="3088" end="3095" title="M*A*S*H (TV series)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555929" start="3259" end="3271" title="Donna Pescow" label="Donna Pescow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617327" start="3324" end="3329" title="Angie (TV series)" label="Angie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144624" start="3394" end="3405" title="Family Ties" label="Family Ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="3517" end="3531" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q460664" start="3542" end="3561" title="Prizzi&amp;#x27;s Honor" label="Prizzi&amp;#x27;s Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507192" start="3637" end="3660" title="The Right of the People" label="The Right of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031383" start="3813" end="3820" title="Matlock (1986 TV series)" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217093" start="3866" end="3883" title="The Investigation" label="The Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="3937" end="3945" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421476" start="4089" end="4131" title="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Christmas Vacation" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Christmas Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310926" start="4144" end="4155" title="Chevy Chase" label="Chevy Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594215" start="4254" end="4271" title="Grand (tv series)" label="&amp;quot;Grand&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q272952" start="4285" end="4296" title="Bonnie Hunt" label="Bonnie Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384181" start="4302" end="4316" title="Michael McKean" label="Michael McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="4418" end="4424" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208647" start="4475" end="4500" title="Married ... With Children" label="Married ... With Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="4575" end="4588" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344237" start="4590" end="4600" title="Leo McKern" label="Leo McKern"/>
<link wikidata="Q106099" start="4602" end="4615" title="Jeanne Moreau" label="Jeanne Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q104000" start="4620" end="4633" title="Lauren Bacall" label="Lauren Bacall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4517763" start="4666" end="4681" title="A Foreign Field" label="A Foreign Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q284229" start="5107" end="5127" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587353" start="5334" end="5348" title="The Naked City" label="The Naked City"/>
<link wikidata="Q921033" start="5403" end="5417" title="Fourteen Hours" label="Fourteen Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481391" start="5462" end="5468" title="Hamlet (1964 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988658" start="5504" end="5523" title="The Patty Duke Show" label="The Patty Duke Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195447" start="5553" end="5560" title="Seconds (1966 film)" label="Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q48674018" start="5600" end="5618" title="Sweet Love, Bitter (film)" label="Sweet Love, Bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719413" start="5640" end="5656" title="The Borgia Stick" label="The Borgia Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q641941" start="5686" end="5699" title="Pretty Poison (film)" label="Pretty Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="5739" end="5752" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486998" start="5789" end="5795" title="Smith!" label="Smith!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069522" start="5831" end="5841" title="Number One (1969 film)" label="Number One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491295" start="5880" end="5892" title="Gaily, Gaily" label="Gaily, Gaily"/>
<link wikidata="Q431225" start="5923" end="5949" title="There Was a Crooked Man... (1970 film)" label="There Was a Crooked Man..."/>
<link wikidata="Q3902621" start="5986" end="6000" title="Little Murders" label="Little Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q469639" start="6040" end="6074" title="Escape from the Planet of the Apes" label="Escape from the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602990" start="6107" end="6127" title="A Death of Innocence" label="A Death of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q469646" start="6149" end="6183" title="Conquest of the Planet of the Apes" label="Conquest of the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q657079" start="6227" end="6234" title="Serpico" label="Serpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q500280" start="6271" end="6281" title="Earthquake (1974 film)" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751721" start="6311" end="6334" title="The Missiles of October" label="The Missiles of October"/>
<link wikidata="Q997635" start="6350" end="6361" title="George Wildman Ball" label="George Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892253" start="6363" end="6386" title="Under Secretary of State for Economic and Agricultural Affairs" label="Undersecretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348975" start="6421" end="6434" title="Simon Cameron" label="Simon Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061513" start="6443" end="6471" title="Everybody Rides the Carousel" label="Everybody Rides the Carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q466781" start="6511" end="6539" title="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men (film)" label="All The President&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="6555" end="6568" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142862" start="6597" end="6606" title="King Kong (1976 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735947" start="6643" end="6656" title="The Gathering (1977 film)" label="The Gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q637180" start="6691" end="6706" title="Heaven Can Wait (1978 film)" label="Heaven Can Wait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692268" start="6743" end="6760" title="Lovely But Deadly" label="Lovely But Deadly"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999858" start="6802" end="6830" title="The Adventures of Nellie Bly" label="The Adventures of Nellie Bly"/>
<link wikidata="Q926198" start="6870" end="6877" title="Frances (film)" label="Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q460664" start="6914" end="6933" title="Prizzi&amp;#x27;s Honor" label="Prizzi&amp;#x27;s Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775375" start="7042" end="7066" title="The Wizard of Loneliness (film)" label="The Wizard of Loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421476" start="7094" end="7136" title="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Christmas Vacation" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Christmas Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306730" start="7180" end="7195" title="Sibling Rivalry (film)" label="Sibling Rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154525" start="7238" end="7247" title="Iron Maze" label="Iron Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q112077853" start="7284" end="7303" title="The Hotel Manor Inn" label="The Hotel Manor Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896442" start="7382" end="7402" title="A Price Above Rubies" label="A Price Above Rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q284229" start="7438" end="7458" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q116265548" start="7495" end="7508" title="The Dogwalker (1999 film)" label="The Dogwalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977067" start="7536" end="7548" title="Sunset Strip (2000 film)" label="Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013890" start="7788" end="7835" title="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts" label="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
