<doc id="74268" wikidata="Q9965" url="?curid=74268" title="Yongle Emperor">
<text>The Yongle Emperor (2 May 1360 – 12 August 1424), also known by his temple name as the Emperor Chengzu of Ming, personal name Zhu Di, was the third emperor of the Ming dynasty, reigning from 1402 to 1424. He was the fourth son of the Hongwu Emperor, the founder and first emperor of the dynasty.

In 1370, he was granted the title of Prince of Yan. By 1380, he had relocated to Beijing and was responsible for protecting the northeastern borderlands. In the 1380s and 1390s, he proved himself to be a skilled military leader, gaining popularity among soldiers and achieving success as a statesman. In 1399, he rebelled against his nephew, the Jianwen Emperor, and launched a civil war known as the Jingnan campaign, or the campaign to clear away disorders. After three years of intense fighting, he emerged victorious and declared himself emperor in 1402. After ascending the throne, he adopted the era name Yongle, which means &quot;perpetual happiness&quot;.

His reign is often referred to as the &quot;second founding&quot; of the Ming dynasty, as he made significant changes to his father&#x27;s political policies. Upon ascending the throne, he faced the aftermath of a civil war that had devastated the rural areas of northern China and weakened the economy due to a lack of manpower. In order to stabilize and strengthen the economy, the emperor first had to suppress any resistance. He purged the state administration of supporters of the Jianwen Emperor as well as corrupt and disloyal officials. The government also took action against secret societies and bandits. To boost the economy, the emperor promoted food and textile production and utilized uncultivated land, particularly in the prosperous Yangtze Delta region. Additionally, he made the decision to elevate Beijing to the capital in 1403, reducing the significance of Nanjing. The construction of the new capital, which took place from 1407 to 1420, employed hundreds of thousands of workers daily. At the heart of Beijing was the official Imperial City, with the Forbidden City serving as the palace residence for the emperor and his family. The emperor also oversaw the reconstruction of the Grand Canal, which was crucial for supplying the capital and the armies in the north.

The emperor was a strong supporter of both Confucianism and Buddhism. He supported the compilation of the massive &quot;Yongle Encyclopedia&quot; by employing two thousand scholars. This encyclopedia surpassed all previous ones, including the &quot;Four Great Books of Song&quot; from the 11th century. He also ordered the texts of the Neo-Confucians to be organized and used as textbooks for training future officials. The civil service examinations, held in a three-year cycle, produced qualified graduates who filled positions in the state apparatus. While the emperor was known for his strict punishments for failures, he was also quick to promote successful servants. Unlike his father, he did not engage in frequent purges. This led to longer tenures for ministers and a more professional and stable state administration. The emperor primarily ruled &quot;from horseback&quot;, traveling between the two capitals, similar to the Yuan emperors. He also frequently led military campaigns into Mongolia. However, this behavior was opposed by officials who felt threatened by the growing influence of eunuchs and military elites, who relied on imperial favor for their power.

The emperor also made significant efforts to strengthen and consolidate the empire&#x27;s hegemonic position in East Asia through foreign policy. Diplomatic messages and military expeditions were sent to &quot;all four corners of the world&quot;. Missions were sent to countries near and far, including Manchuria, Korea, Japan, the Philippines, and the Timurid Empire in Central Asia. Zheng He&#x27;s famous voyages even reached the shores of Southeast Asia, India, Persia, and East Africa. A major threat to the security of the empire was posed by the Mongols, who were divided into three groups—the Uriankhai in the southeast were mostly loyal, while the eastern Mongols and western Oirats were problematic. Ming China alternately supported and opposed them. The Yongle Emperor personally led five campaigns into Mongolia, and the decision to move the capital from Nanjing to Beijing was motivated by the need to keep a close eye on the restless northern neighbors. 

The Yongle Emperor was a skilled military leader and placed great emphasis on the strength of his army, but his wars were ultimately unsuccessful. The war in Jiaozhi (present-day northern Vietnam), which began with an invasion in 1407, lasted until the end of his reign. Four years after his death, the Ming army was forced to retreat back to China. Despite his efforts, the campaigns against the Mongols did not significantly alter the balance of power or ensure the security of the northern border.

==Early years==
===Childhood===
Zhu Di, the future Yongle Emperor, was born on 2 May 1360 as the fourth son of Zhu Yuanzhang. At the time, Zhu Yuanzhang was based in Nanjing and was an independent general of the Han Song dynasty. This dynasty was one of the states formed during the Red Turban Rebellion, which was a rebellion against the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty that controlled China. In the 1360s, Zhu Yuanzhang conquered China, established the Ming dynasty, and declared himself emperor. He is commonly known by his era name as the Hongwu Emperor. 

After taking the throne, Zhu Di claimed to be the son of Zhu Yuanzhang&#x27;s primary wife, Lady Ma, who had been empress since 1368, but other sources suggest that his real mother was a concubine of the Hongwu Emperor with the title Consort Gong, who was either Mongolian (from the Khongirad tribe) or possibly Korean. After becoming emperor, Zhu Di attempted to present himself as the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s legitimate successor by declaring himself and his fifth son, Zhu Su, as the only sons of Empress Ma in the 1403 edition of the official &quot;Veritable Records of Emperor Taizu&quot;. This was clearly absurd, as it was unlikely that a son of the empress would not be named as successor during the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s lifetime. Therefore, in the later version of 1418, all five of the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s sons were recognized as her descendants.

Zhu Di spent his childhood in Nanjing, where he was raised with a strong emphasis on discipline and modesty, along with the other children of Zhu Yuanzhang. Out of all his siblings, he had a special fondness for Princess Ningguo (), Zhu Fu (), and Zhu Su, who was only 15 months younger. Despite their contrasting personalities, Zhu Di and Zhu Su became the closest of friends. While Zhu Di enjoyed activities such as archery and horseback riding, Zhu Su preferred studying literature and tending to plants.

The emperor took great care in the education of his sons, enlisting the help of prominent scholars from the empire. Initially, Song Lian was appointed as the teacher for the crown prince, and also gave lectures to the other princes. Song Lian&#x27;s successor, Kong Keren (), had a significant influence on Zhu Di, teaching him philosophy and ethics. Zhu Di&#x27;s favorite subject was the history of the Han dynasty, particularly the emperors Gaozu and Wudi. In fact, he often referenced examples from the life of Qin Shi Huang in his decrees.

===Youth===
On 22 April 1370, the emperor&#x27;s sons, with the exception of the crown prince, were granted princely titles. Zhu Di was bestowed with the title of Prince of Yan. Yan was a region located in the northeast of China, with its most significant city being Beiping (present-day Beijing). During the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty, Beiping served as the capital of China. After being conquered by the Ming dynasty in 1368, it became a crucial stronghold for the troops guarding the northern border of China and was also designated as the capital of the province with the same name.

At that time, Zhu Di was given his own household, with adviser Hua Yunlong and tutor Gao Xian at its head. Gao Xian spent the next four to five years lecturing him on Confucian classics, history, agriculture, and irrigation. He also trained the prince in poetry and prose writing, and explained the rules of governance and the selection of subordinates. After Hua&#x27;s death and Gao&#x27;s dismissal, Fei Yu, Qiu Guang, Wang Wuban, and Zhu Fu took over Zhu Di&#x27;s education. Despite receiving a comprehensive education from esteemed teachers, Zhu Di&#x27;s true passion always lay in military pursuits rather than scholarly pursuits and palace discussions.
In early 1376, he married Lady Xu, the daughter of Xu Da, who was ranked first among all of the early Ming generals. She was two years younger than him. Lady Xu was known for her intelligence, decisiveness, and energy. The couple welcomed their first son, Zhu Gaochi, on 16 August 1378, followed by their second son, Zhu Gaoxu, in 1380. Their third son, Zhu Gaosui, was born three years later.

A few weeks after the wedding, he traveled to Fengyang (then known as Zhongdu—the Central Capital) where he underwent seven months of military training alongside his elder brothers, Zhu Shuang and Zhu Gang. Two years later, he returned to Fengyang with his younger brothers, Zhu Su, Zhu Zhen, and Zhu Fu, and stayed for an additional two years. During this time, he not only trained in command and combat, but also gained knowledge in logistics and the acquisition and transportation of materials and supplies for warfare. It was during this period that his organizational skills began to emerge, which he later utilized effectively in his battles. He also took the opportunity to disguise himself as a regular soldier and immerse himself in the lives of ordinary people. Looking back, he considered his time in Fengyang to be the happiest days of his life.

In 1376, Li Wenzhong, the nephew and adopted son of the Hongwu Emperor, who was responsible for defending the north, was given the responsibility of preparing the prince&#x27;s palace in Beijing. He utilized the former palaces of the Yuan emperors, providing Zhu Di with a larger and more fortified residence compared to his brothers, some of whom resided in converted temples or county offices. General Li also focused on fortifying the city, a decision that would have consequences during the civil war when his son, Li Jinglong, unsuccessfully attempted to besiege Beiping in 1399.

===Prince of Yan in Beiping===
In April 1380, at the age of twenty, he moved to Beiping. He encountered a strong Mongolian influence, which the government tried to suppress by banning Mongolian customs, clothing, and names. The city had recovered from the famine and wars of the 1350s and 1360s and was experiencing growth. Along with the hundreds of thousands of soldiers stationed in the region, the city was also home to officials administering the province, as well as artisans and laborers from all over the country. The main concern of the local authorities was providing enough food for the population. Peasants were relocated to the north, soldiers and convicts were sent to cultivate the land, and merchants were granted licenses to trade salt in exchange for bringing grain to the region. The government also transported food supplies to the city.

Zhu Di&#x27;s interest in the military was put into practice when he personally trained his own guard. He used his detachments as a means of balancing the power of the provincial commander, who was unable to mobilize troops without authorization from the emperor and approval from the prince. Meanwhile, the prince had the freedom to train and deploy his own guard. In 1381, Zhu Di had his first experience in the field when he joined Xu Da&#x27;s campaign against the Mongols, led by Nayur Buqa.

In the 1380s, Zhu Di served in border defense under the leadership of his father-in-law, Xu Da. After Su&#x27;s death in 1385, Fu Youde, Xu&#x27;s deputy, took over leadership. In 1387, Zhu Di participated in a successful attack on the Mongols in Liaodong, led by Feng Sheng. The following year, a Ming army led by Lan Yu made a foray into eastern Mongolia and defeated the Mongol khan Tögüs Temür, capturing many prisoners and horses, but both generals were accused of mistreating captives and misappropriating booty, which was reported to the emperor by the prince.

In January 1390, the emperor entrusted his sons with independent command for the first time. The princes of Jin (Zhu Gang), Yan (Zhu Di), and Qi (Zhu Fu) were given the task of leading a punitive expedition against the Mongol commanders Nayur Buqa and Alu Temür, who were threatening Shanxi and Gansu. Zhu Di demonstrated excellent command skills when he defeated and captured both Mongol commanders in battle. They then served under him with their troops. The emperor himself appreciated Zhu Di&#x27;s success, which contrasted with the hesitancy of the Prince of Jin. Zhu Di continued to lead armies into battle against the Mongols repeatedly and with great success.
In 1392, the emperor&#x27;s eldest son and crown prince, Zhu Biao, died. The court then discussed who would succeed him, and ultimately, the primogeniture viewpoint, advocated by scholars from the Hanlin Academy and high officials, prevailed. As a result, Zhu Biao&#x27;s son, Zhu Yunwen, was appointed as the new successor. Generals Feng Sheng, Fu Youde, and Lan Yu (who were related to the successor by blood) were chosen as his tutors and teachers, but due to a recommendation from Zhu Di, the Hongwu Emperor began to suspect the three generals of treason. Zhu Di did not have a good relationship with Lan Yu, and according to historian Wang Shizhen (; 1526–1590), he was responsible for Lan Yu&#x27;s execution in March 1393. The other two generals also died under unclear circumstances at the turn of 1394 and 1395. In their place, princes were appointed. For example, in 1393, the Prince of Jin was given command of all the troops in Shanxi province, and the Prince of Yan was given command in Beiping province. Additionally, Zhu Shuang, Prince of Qin, was in charge of Shaanxi, but he died in 1395.

The Hongwu Emperor, who was deeply affected by the death of his two eldest sons and the strained relations between his remaining sons and the heir, made the decision to revise the rules governing the imperial family for the fourth time. The new edition significantly limited the rights of the princes. However, these changes had little impact on Zhu Di&#x27;s status as they did not affect his main area of expertise—the military. Furthermore, the prince was cautious not to give any reason for criticism. For example, he did not object to the execution of his generals Nayur Buqa and Alu Temür, who were accused of treason. He also exercised caution in diplomatic relations, such as when he welcomed Korean delegations passing through Beiping, to avoid any indication of disrespect towards the emperor&#x27;s authority.

Out of the six princes responsible for guarding the northern border, Zhu Di was the second oldest but also the most capable. He had operated in a vast territory, stretching from Liaodong to the bend of the Yellow River. He was not afraid to take risks, as demonstrated by his defeat of the Mongols led by Polin Temür at Daning in the summer of 1396. He also went on a raid with the Prince of Jin several hundred kilometers north of the Great Wall, which earned them a sharp reprimand from the emperor. In April 1398, Zhu Di&#x27;s elder brother, the Prince of Jin, died, leaving Zhu Di as the undisputed leader of the northern border defense. Two months later, Zhu Di&#x27;s father, the Hongwu Emperor, also died.

==Rise to power==

===Conflict with the Jianwen Emperor===
After the death of the Hongwu Emperor, Zhu Yunwen ascended the throne as the Jianwen Emperor. His closest advisers immediately began reviewing the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s reforms, with the most significant change being an attempt to limit and eventually eliminate the princes who were the sons of the Hongwu Emperor and served as the emperor&#x27;s support and controlled a significant portion of the military power during his reign. The government employed various methods to remove the five princes, including exile, house arrest, and even driving them to suicide.

Zhu Di was considered the most dangerous of all the princes. He was an experienced military leader and the oldest surviving descendant of the Hongwu Emperor. Due to this, the government treated him with caution and limited his power. They replaced military commanders in the northeast with generals loyal to the Jianwen Emperor and transferred Zhu Di&#x27;s personal guard outside of Beiping. Despite this, Zhu Di managed to convince the emperor of his loyalty. He even asked for mercy for his friend Zhu Su and begged for permission to return his sons, who had been staying in Nanjing since the funeral of the Hongwu Emperor. This was done by the government as a precaution, effectively holding them as hostages. In June 1399, the emperor&#x27;s adviser, Huang Zicheng, convinced the emperor that releasing Zhu Di&#x27;s sons would help calm the situation. The result was the exact opposite.

In early August 1399, Zhu Di used the arrest of two of his officials as a pretext for rebellion. He claimed that he was rising up to protect the emperor from the corrupt court officials. With the support of Beijing dignitaries, he gained control of the city&#x27;s garrison and occupied the surrounding prefectures and counties. He attempted to justify his actions through letters sent to the court in August and December 1399, as well as through a public statement.

In his letters and statements, he repeatedly asserted that he had no desire for the throne, but as the eldest living son of the deceased emperor, he felt a duty to restore the laws and order that had been dismantled by the new government. He explained that this was out of respect for his late father. He also accused the current emperor and his advisors of withholding information about his father&#x27;s illness and preventing him from attending the funeral. Furthermore, he condemned their unjust treatment of the emperor&#x27;s uncles, who were his own younger brothers. He justified his actions as necessary self-defense, not against the emperor himself, but against his corrupt ministers. He referred to these actions as the Jingnan campaign, a campaign to clear away disorders.

===Civil war===

At the start of the war, Zhu Di commanded a force of 100,000 soldiers and only held control over the immediate area surrounding Beiping. Despite the Nanjing government&#x27;s larger number of armies and greater material resources, Zhu Di&#x27;s soldiers were of higher quality and he possessed a strong Mongol cavalry. Most importantly, his military leadership skills were superior to the indecisiveness and lack of coordination displayed by the government&#x27;s generals.

In September 1399, a government army of 130,000 soldiers, led by the experienced veteran general Geng Bingwen, marched towards Zhending, a city located southwest of Beiping, but by the end of the month, they were defeated. In response, the court appointed a new commander, Li Jinglong, who then led a new army to besiege Beiping on 12 November. Zhu Di, who had been gathering troops in the northeast, swiftly returned and defeated the surprised Li army. The soldiers from the south, who were not accustomed to the cold weather, were forced to retreat to Dezhou in Shandong.

In 1400, there were battles in the southern part of Beiping province and northwestern Shandong, with varying levels of success. In the spring, Zhu Di led a successful attack into Datong, defeating Li Jinglong near Baoding in May and outside Dezhou in June. However, due to concerns about potential enemy reinforcements, Zhu Di ended the siege of Jinan in September and retreated to Beiping. Li Jinglong&#x27;s lackluster performance led the government to appoint Sheng Yong as the new commander of the counterinsurgency army.

In 1401, Zhu Di attempted to weaken the enemy by attacking smaller units, which disrupted the supply of government troops. Both sides then focused on breaking through along the Grand Canal. In January, Zhu Di suffered a defeat at Dongchang, but in April he was victorious at Jia River. The front continued to move back and forth for the rest of the year.
In 1402, instead of launching another attack along the Grand Canal, Zhu Di advanced further west and bypassed Dezhou. He then conquered Xuzhou in early March. The government troops retreated south to Zhili and were repeatedly defeated. In July, the rebels reached the north bank of the Yangtze River. The commander of the government fleet defected to Zhu Di&#x27;s side, allowing the rebel army to cross the river without resistance and advance on Nanjing. Due to the betrayal of Li Jinglong and Zhu Hui, Zhu Di&#x27;s younger brother, the capital city was captured on 13 July 1402, with little resistance. During the clashes, the palace was set on fire, resulting in the deaths of the emperor, his empress, and his son.

===Accession to the throne===
On 17 July 1402, Zhu Di ascended the throne, officially succeeding his father, the Hongwu Emperor. Even as late as the summer of 1402, the new emperor was still dealing with the followers of the Jianwen Emperor. These followers denied the legitimacy of Zhu Di&#x27;s rule and he responded by erasing the Jianwen Emperor&#x27;s reign from history. This included abolishing the Jianwen era and extending the Hongwu era until the end of 1402. In addition, Zhu Di abolished the reforms and laws implemented by the Jianwen government, restored the titles and privileges of the princes, and destroyed government archives (with the exception of financial and military records). He also attempted to involve respected supporters of the Jianwen Emperor, such as Fang Xiaoru and Liu Jing (), in his administration, but they refused and were subsequently executed. Similarly, Huang Zicheng and Qi Tai were executed, along with their family members, teachers, students, and followers. Many others were imprisoned or deported to the border, resulting in a purge that affected tens of thousands of people.

After Zhu Di ascended to the imperial throne, the &quot;Veritable Records of Emperor Taizu&quot; were rewritten. The original version, created in 1402 at the court of the Jianwen Emperor, was deemed unacceptable by the new regime. In late 1402, the authors of the original version began to revise their work, completing it in July 1403, but the emperor was dissatisfied with the revised version and in 1411, he ordered a new version to be prepared. This new version was completed in June 1418, and changes focused primarily on Zhu Di&#x27;s claim to the throne. It included claims that he was the son of Empress Ma, that the Hongwu Emperor had considered appointing him as successor, that he was to be the regent of the Jianwen Emperor, and that he was an exceptionally talented military leader who was highly favored by his father.

==Government==

In contrast to the frequent changes in offices during the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s reign, the high levels of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s administration remained stable. While the emperor did occasionally imprison a minister, the mass purges seen in the Hongwu era did not occur again. The most significant political matters were overseen by eunuchs and generals, while officials were responsible for managing finances, the judiciary, and routine tasks. As a result, the atomization of administration that was characteristic of the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s rule diminished, allowing the emperor to focus less on routine details.

The political influence of the bureaucratic apparatus gradually increased, and under the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s rule, ministers were able to challenge the emperor, even at the cost of their freedom or lives. The most significant change was the emergence of the Grand Secretariat, which played a crucial role in the politics of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s successors. Led by the Grand Secretaries, officials gained control of the government.

===Princes and generals===
The emperor restored the titles of the princes of Zhou, Qi, and Min, which had been abolished by the Jianwen Emperor, but these titles did not come with the same power and authority as before. During the latter half of his reign, the Yongle Emperor accused many of these princes of committing crimes and punished them by removing their personal guards. Interestingly, he had previously condemned the same actions when they were carried out by the Jianwen Emperor. In order to reduce political threats, the Yongle Emperor relocated several border princes from the north to central and southern China. By the end of his reign, the princes had lost much of their political influence.

One of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s first actions upon assuming the throne was to reorganize the military command. He promoted loyal generals and granted them titles and ranks. In October 1402, he appointed two dukes (&quot;gong&quot;; )—Qiu Fu and Zhu Neng (), thirteen marquises (&quot;hou&quot;; ), and nine counts (&quot;bo&quot;; ). Among these appointments were one duke and three counts from the dignitaries who had defected to his side before the fall of Nanjing—Li Jinglong, Chen Xuan (), Ru Chang (), and Wang Zuo (). In June 1403, an additional nine generals from the civil war were appointed as marquises or counts. In the following years, meritorious military leaders from the campaign against the Mongols were also granted titles of dukes, marquises, and counts, including those of Mongolian origin.

The emperor established a new hereditary military nobility. While their income from the state treasury (2200–2500 &quot;shi&quot; of grain for dukes, 1500–800 for marquises, and 1000 for counts; with 1 &quot;shi&quot; being equivalent to 107 liters) was not particularly high, the prestige associated with their titles was more significant. They commanded armies in the emperor&#x27;s name, without competition from the princes who had been stripped of their influence. The nobility also held immunity from punishment by local authorities, but there were notable differences from the Hongwu era. During that time, the generals, who were former comrades-in-arms of the emperor, held a higher status, had their own followers, and wielded considerable power in their assigned areas. This eventually posed a threat to the emperor, leading to their elimination. Under the Yongle Emperor, members of the nobility did not participate in regional or civil administration, nor were they assigned permanent military units. Instead, they were given &quot;ad hoc&quot; assembled armies. Additionally, the emperor often personally led campaigns accompanied by the nobility, strengthening their personal relationships. As a result, the military nobility was closely tied to the emperor and remained loyal. There was no need for purges, and any isolated cases of punishment were due to the failures and shortcomings of those involved. Overall, the nobility elevated the emperor&#x27;s prestige and contributed to the military successes of his reign.

===Officials and authorities===
The emperor reorganized the civilian administration, gaining the support of officials who had often served under the previous government. He restored the administrative structure of the Hongwu era, while also making some changes. First and foremost, in 1402, the Grand Secretariat was created to act as an intermediary between the emperor and the government, partially replacing the Central Secretariat that had been abolished in 1380. Despite their informal position, the Grand Secretaries quickly gained dominance in the civil administration.

The Grand Secretariat was established in August 1402, when the emperor began to address current administrative issues during a working dinner with Huang Huai and Xie Jin after the evening audience. In September 1402, he appointed five additional Grand Secretaries. These Grand Secretaries were all from the south or southeast and were highly educated and skilled in administration, having previously served in lower positions in the Jianwen Emperor administration. Despite their relatively low status (at most fifth rank), they were given high titles in the crown prince&#x27;s household. Over time, they evolved from subordinate assistants responsible for organizing correspondence and formulating responses to becoming influential politicians who proposed solutions to problems. Their close proximity to the emperor gave them an advantage over the ministers. The emperor kept his Grand Secretaries with him, and some even accompanied him on his Mongol campaigns. During this period, the empire was governed by the crown prince with the assistance of other Grand Secretaries and selected ministers. The crown prince developed a close relationship with the Grand Secretaries and became the &quot;de facto&quot; representative of the officials.

The Yongle Emperor was meticulous in his selection of the top officials for the state apparatus, including the members of the Grand Secretariat and the ministers. He placed particular trust in those who had served him during the civil war, such as Jin Zhong (), Guo Zi, Lü Zhen (), and Wu Zhong (). These ministers came from all over China, but were all highly educated and capable administrators. Among them, Minister of Revenue Xia Yuanji was the most trusted by the emperor. Xia advocated for moderation in spending and using resources for the benefit of the population, which earned him the respect of the Yongle Emperor for his honesty and transparency. Xia held this position for nineteen years until 1421, when he, along with Minister of Justice Wu Zhong and Minister of War Fang Bin, protested against the costly campaign into Mongolia. Despite their objections, the emperor ultimately prevailed and Fang Bin committed suicide, while Wu Zhong and Xia Yuanji were imprisoned. After the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s death, they were exonerated and returned to their positions of authority. Other notable ministers who served for many years included Jian Yi (), Song Li (), Liu Quan (), and Zhao Hong, who held various ministerial positions.

During most of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, four out of the six ministries (Personnel, Revenue, Rites, and Works) were headed by the same minister. This continuity of leadership continued even after the emperor&#x27;s death, with many ministers remaining in their positions.

The regular cycle of civil service examinations also contributed to the improvement and stabilization of administration at lower levels. In the second decade of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the examinations were held every three years. A total of 1,833 individuals passed the examinations in the capital, and the majority of these graduates were appointed to government positions. The Imperial University, which was previously responsible for selecting officials, lost its significance and became a place for candidates to study for the palace examinations. By the end of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the Ministry of Personnel had a sufficient number of examination graduates to fill important positions at the county level and above. Overall, the administration became more qualified and stable.

===Eunuchs===

The Yongle Emperor relied heavily on eunuchs, more so than his father did. He even recruited eunuchs from the Jianwen era, with whom he had been associated during the civil war. These eunuchs came from various backgrounds, including Mongolian, Central Asian, Jurchen, and Korean. In addition to their duties within the Forbidden City, the Yongle Emperor trusted their unwavering loyalty and often assigned them tasks outside the palace&#x27;s walls, such as surveillance and intelligence gathering.

Eunuchs also held positions of military command and led diplomatic missions, but their role as the emperor&#x27;s secret agents, responsible for monitoring both civilian and military officials, was well-known but also unpopular and feared. While they were known for exposing corrupt officials, they also had a reputation for abusing their power and succumbing to corruption themselves. In 1420, a special investigation office was established, informally known as the &quot;Eastern Depot&quot; due to its location in the palace. This office was responsible for overseeing the judiciary, but it became infamous for its role in the disappearance of individuals. Stories of innocent imprisonment, torture, and unexplained deaths involving the office circulated until the end of the dynasty.

===Succession disputes===
The Yongle Emperor had four sons, the first three by Empress Xu, while the fourth, Zhu Gaoxi, died in infancy. The eldest son, Zhu Gaochi, was not physically fit and instead of warfare, he focused on literature and poetry. The second son, Zhu Gaoxu, was a tall and strong, a successful warrior, but the third son, Zhu Gaosui, was mediocre in character and ability.

Many influential officials, including General Qiu Fu, convinced the emperor that the second son should be the crown prince. They argued for his prowess and military skills, citing his past actions of saving his father from danger and turning the tide of battles during the civil war. Grand Secretary Xie Jin disagreed and argued that the eldest son would win the hearts of the people with his humanity. He also reminded the emperor of the future accession of Zhu Zhanji, the emperor&#x27;s favorite grandson and Zhu Gaochi&#x27;s eldest son. Ultimately, on 9 May 1404, Zhu Gaochi was appointed as the crown prince, with the Yongle Emperor appointing Qiu Fu as his tutor the following day.

At the same time, he appointed Zhu Gaoxu as the Prince of Han and entrusted him with control of Yunnan. Zhu Gaosui became the Prince of Zhao, based in Beijing. Zhu Gaoxu refused to go to Yunnan, and his father gave in to his wishes, which allowed him to provoke conflicts with his older brother. In the spring of 1407, he succeeded in slandering Xie Jin, who was accused of showing favoritism towards Jiangxi natives in the examinations. As a result, Xie Jin was transferred to the province and later imprisoned. Huang Huai (from 1414 until the end of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign) and Yang Shiqi (briefly in 1414), both accused of not observing the ceremony, also faced imprisonment due to their support of the crown prince and resulting enmity with Zhu Gaoxu. In 1416, Zhu Gaoxu was given a new fief in Qingzhou Prefecture in Shandong. Once again, he refused to leave, which led to a reprimand from his father. He then began to raise his own army and even had an army officer killed. As a result, his father stripped him of his titles, demoted him to a common subject, and later imprisoned him. The following year, he was deported to Shandong.

===Military===

During the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the military underwent significant changes. He implemented four major reforms, including the abolition of the princely guards (&quot;huwei&quot;; ), the relocation of the majority of the capital guards (&quot;jingwei&quot;; ) from Nanjing to Beijing, the establishment of the capital training camps (&quot;jingying&quot;; ), and the reorganization of the defenses along the northern border.

The emperor reorganized the Embroidered Uniform Guard (&quot;Jinyiwei&quot;), which was responsible for carrying out secret police duties. Its main focus was handling politically sensitive cases, such as investigating members of the imperial family, but there were instances of corruption and abuse of power within the organization, most notably the case of Ji Gang (). Ji Gang, who had been the emperor&#x27;s favorite during the civil war, was eventually accused of plotting against the throne and executed in 1416. By 1420, the Embroidered Uniform Guard had been overshadowed by the Eastern Depot, which also conducted investigations on its officers.

The abolition of the princes&#x27; armies was a logical decision. Zhu Di&#x27;s military strength as the Prince of Yan played a crucial role in his rise to the throne, and he was determined to prevent history from repeating itself. The existing princely guards were mostly integrated into the regular army, and although the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s sons had played an active and successful role in the civil war, they were not given command of the armies after it ended. Instead, campaigns were led by dependable generals or the emperor himself.

One significant and permanent step taken during this time was the relocation of a large portion of the army to the Beijing area. As the capital moved to Beijing, the majority of the 41 guard units of the Nanjing garrison also made the move. Among the troops stationed in Beijing were 22 guard units of the Imperial Guard (&quot;qinjun&quot;; ), totaling 190,800 men. This included the original three guard units of Zhu Di&#x27;s princely guard. Overall, approximately 25–30% of the Ming army (74 guard units in the mid-1430s) was now concentrated in and around Beijing, with a total strength of over two million men under the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign. As a result, soldiers and their families made up a significant portion of the population in the Beijing area. To oversee the remaining guard units in and around Nanjing, a military commander position was established, often filled by eunuchs.

After the second campaign in Mongolia, the emperor made the decision to enhance the training of his soldiers. He established the capital training camps, known as the Three Great Camps (&quot;Sandaying&quot;), in the vicinity of Beijing. In 1415, he issued a decree requiring all guards in the northern provinces and the southern metropolitan area to send a portion of their troops to these camps for training. The camps were specifically designed for the training of infantry, cavalry, and units equipped with firearms. Each camp was under the leadership of a eunuch and two generals. The emperor placed great emphasis on the importance of cavalry in successful combat in the steppe. As a result, the number of horses in the army significantly increased from 37,993 in 1403 to 1,585,322 in 1423.

At the beginning of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the defense system on the northern border was reorganized. Under the Hongwu Emperor, the defense of the north was organized in two lines. The first, the outer line, consisted of eight garrisons located in the steppe north of the Great Wall. These garrisons served as bases for forays into Mongolian territory. The second line of defense was along the Great Wall, but at the time, the Great Wall had not yet been built. This strategic placement allowed for the prevention of Mongol raids even in the steppe. Under the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the outer line was abandoned with the exception of the garrison in Kaiping. The emperor then resettled friendly Mongolian Uriankhai on the vacated territory.

The border troops along the northern borders were placed under the authority of nine newly established border regional commands. These commands were under the control of provincial military commanders (&quot;zongbing guan&quot;; ) and were located in Liaodong, Jizhou, Xuanfu, Datong, Shanxi, Yansui, Guyuan (in Shaanxi), Ningxia, and Gansu. Unlike in the Hongwu era, the soldiers stationed on the border were not from nearby guards, but were instead from the three capital training camps. The commanders of these areas were chosen from officers of the inland garrisons or higher commands. By the end of the Yongle era, there were 863,000 soldiers stationed in garrisons along the northern border.

The withdrawal to the Great Wall was a significant decline in security, as evidenced by later Ming officials debating the occupation of Ordos. The main fortress of the inner line, Xuanfu, was vulnerable to Mongol attacks after the withdrawal. Under the Yongle Emperor, however, the negative effects of the withdrawal were overshadowed by Ming power and strength. After his death, the Chinese did not make any attempts to reclaim the steppe for the rest of the Ming dynasty.

The navy was not a separate branch of the army; only the coastal guards had ships. By 1420, there were approximately 1,350 small patrol ships and an equal number of large warships scattered among the coastal garrisons. The Nanjing fleet consisted of 400 warships, 400 cargo ships manned by soldiers from Nanjing garrison guards, who were trained for naval combat (four of the ten Nanjing guards had &quot;naval&quot; names), and 250 treasure ships and other ships used for long-distance voyages.

==Economy==
===Population, agriculture, and crafts===
Around 1400, the Ming dynasty had a population of 90 million. During the first third of the 15th century, the weather was more stable and warmer compared to before and after. This favorable climate allowed for rich harvests, making agriculture the foundation of the country&#x27;s prosperity. Although there were occasional local disasters such as epidemics or floods, they did not significantly alter the overall situation. The government provided assistance to affected regions using state funds.

The Yongle Emperor recognized that the most effective way to ensure his own rule and that of his descendants was by supporting the peasants. For example, in 1403, when the crops were destroyed by a locust invasion in Henan, he took the initiative to organize relief efforts for the affected population. He also punished negligent officials and rejected the suggestion of Minister of Revenue, Yu Xin (), to punish officials who were unable to collect taxes in full. The emperor argued that the root of the problem was the natural disaster, not the officials. In 1404, when he was informed of the increase in silk production in Shandong, he responded that he would not be satisfied until there was enough food and clothing for everyone in the empire, ensuring that no one suffered from hunger or cold.

The northern provinces were impoverished and unproductive, and their local army and administration had become reliant on importing rice from the south during the Hongwu era. The relocation of the capital to Beijing resulted in an increase in the number of soldiers, officials, artisans, and laborers, exacerbating the issue. In response, the government attempted to resettle people from the densely populated south to the north, but the southerners struggled to adapt to the harsh northern climate and many returned to their homes. By 1416, the government had abandoned this forced resettlement policy and instead implemented a strategy of supporting local development. As part of this, the government began selling salt trading licenses to merchants in exchange for rice deliveries to the north. On the other hand, the influx of impoverished immigrants from other parts of north China resulted in an increase in cultivated land and the production of agricultural and textile goods. This also led to the establishment of foundries in Zunhua, located in Hebei.

===Finance and currency===
The Yongle Emperor was unfamiliar with the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s frugal ways, as his reign saw significant spending on foreign expansion (such as wars in Jiaozhi and Mongolia, and naval voyages) and internal politics (such as the construction of a new capital and the restoration of the Grand Canal). This resulted in a significant increase in state spending, which doubled or even tripled compared to the Hongwu era, but the exact size of this spending is difficult to determine as there was no official state budget and each source of income was allocated to cover specific expenses. The government attempted to generate revenue by issuing paper money and demanding more grain from hereditary soldiers, but these measures were not enough to solve the fiscal problems. In some areas, taxes were even reduced, but the state still managed to meet its needs through requisitions and an increase in the work obligation. As a result of these financial challenges, the state&#x27;s reserves, which were typically equivalent to one year&#x27;s income during the Ming period, reached a record low under the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s rule.
The economic growth was supported by the government&#x27;s expansion of precious metal mining, particularly copper and silver, in southern China and Jiaozhi. The government also increased the emission of paper money (banknotes, &quot;baochao&quot;). Revenues from silver mining, which previously accounted for only 30% of output, rose significantly from 1.1 tons in 1390 to over 10 tons in 1409, and remained at this level for the rest of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign. The government also produced coins from the mined copper, which were stored in state treasuries and given as gifts to foreign embassies, but these coins continued to circulate on the domestic market alongside the &quot;baochao&quot;, in contrast to the Xuande and Zhengtong eras (1425-1447) when they were removed from circulation under government pressure.

The Yongle Emperor, like his father, believed that banknotes were the foundation of currency. In order to cover the deficit caused by expensive foreign policies and the relocation of the capital, he printed large volumes of these banknotes, but this excessive printing led to inflation, the most severe in the Ming period. By 1425, paper money was only worth 2% of its nominal value, causing the population to reject it. In an attempt to encourage its circulation, the government required fees to be paid with these banknotes, but this had little impact. Additionally, the repeated bans on the use of silver in commercial transactions (in 1403, 1404, 1419, and 1425) were also unsuccessful.

Officials and title holders were no longer solely compensated with grain, as the Hongwu Emperor rules had originally intended. Instead, senior officials received only 60% of their salary in grain, while lower officials received a mere 20%. The remaining portion was paid in bills and coins. However, this method of payment using devalued banknotes resulted in a significant decrease in the already low salaries of these officials. As a result, many officials and officers resorted to seeking illegal sources of income.

The Yongle Empror, in particular, sought to increase income from military farms (&quot;juntun&quot;; ). However, the northern borderland, where most of the military units were located, was largely barren. In order to make up for the lack of resources, officers resorted to becoming landowners and using the labor of their soldiers, leading to desertion among the ranks. Despite the government&#x27;s efforts to control and increase production, the hereditary soldiers consistently delivered less each year. For example, their production dropped from 23 million &quot;shi&quot; of grain in 1403 to 14 million in 1407 and eventually to 5 million in 1423.

===Taxation and levies===
Under the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the amount of land tax collected was significantly higher than in previous decades, with a yield of 31–34 million &quot;shi&quot; of grain. In comparison, the land tax in 1393 was only 29.4 million &quot;shi&quot;. However, the actual burden of the tax was also influenced by transportation costs and additional fees that were collected to cover them. In some cases, the tax was not collected in grain, but rather in silk and other commodities, based on calculations determined by the state. These calculations often did not reflect the current market prices, resulting in the tax being increased multiple times.

The taxation in Jiangnan remained exceptionally high, with Suzhou and Songjiang prefectures supplying 14% of the empire&#x27;s land taxes. The residents of Jiangnan were not able to pay these high taxes, leading to a significant amount of arrears in the early 1430s. For example, Suzhou Prefecture alone had 8 million &quot;shi&quot; of grain in arrears. In response to this issue, the Xuande Emperor eventually reduced their taxes.

Part of the materials and labor required for government construction projects were purchased using surpluses collected in state granaries, but these purchases were made at prices set by the state, which were lower than market prices. As a result, the increased demands of the state had a significant impact on the population, primarily through the implementation of more and more extraordinary levies and the growth of compulsory work for the state. For example, the work duty of artisans, which was typically 30 days a year, was often extended for periods longer than a year. Additionally, the cost of importing rice to Beijing fell on the peasants of the Yangtze River Delta. These taxpayers were responsible for supplying rice to southern port cities, from where it was then transported north by the army. To cover these costs, a tax surcharge was imposed, which had to be paid in money. However, both the sea route to the north and the inland route were expensive and inefficient. Fortunately, the opening of the Grand Canal in 1415 greatly improved transportation conditions. By 1418, taxpayers themselves were responsible for transporting rice all the way to Beijing. In 1431, the government relieved them of this duty and soldiers once again began to transport grain along the Grand Canal.

In an effort to reduce the government&#x27;s demands on its subjects and limit government spending, the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s successors implemented reforms. Despite these efforts, maintaining a large army and supplying Beijing continued to be a difficult task.

==Constructions==
===New capital city===

The Yongle Emperor&#x27;s most significant accomplishment was the relocation of the capital to Beijing. The idea of moving the capital from Nanjing (then known as Yingtian) to the north was first considered by the Hongwu Emperor in the early 1390s. Despite Nanjing&#x27;s proximity to the empire&#x27;s economic center in the Yangtze Delta, both Hongwu and Yongle emperors faced the challenge of governing from a great distance from the empire&#x27;s northern and western borders, which required a significant amount of attention. Additionally, as a foreigner in Nanjng, the Yongle Emperor likely felt more at home in Beijng, which served as his political base. Beijing was also strategically located on the northern border, accessible by the Grand Canal and in close proximity to the sea, making it a convenient location for supplies. Its history as the capital of the Liao, Jin, and Yuan empires also added to its significance.

The relocation of the capital was a highly challenging undertaking that demanded a significant mobilization of both people and resources from all corners of the country to be transferred to the outskirts of the empire. The emperor initiated the move of the metropolis in February 1403 by elevating Beijing to a secondary capital and renaming it from Beiping (Pacified North) to Shuntian (Obedient to Heaven), but it was commonly referred to as Beijing (Northern Capital). He appointed his eldest son, Zhu Gaochi, to administer the city and province, and established branches of ministries and chief military commissions in Beijing. In 1404, he relocated 10,000 families from Shanxi to the city and exempted it and the surrounding area from taxes for two years. The following year, over 120,000 landless households from the Yangtze Delta were relocated to the north, and construction of government buildings began. The government also began felling trees in the forests of Jiangxi, Huguang, Zhejiang, Shanxi, and Sichuan to provide wood for the palaces in Beijing. Artisans and laborers were sent from all over the country, but the work was slowed by supply issues.

In March 1409, the emperor arrived in the north for the first time in seven years, following the end of the first Mongol campaign, but upon his arrival in Nanjing the following year, officials protested the excessive spending on construction in Beijing. As a result, spending was reduced and the pace of construction slowed for several years.
From 1414 to the end of 1416, the emperor remained in Beijing during the campaign in Mongolia. During this time, the reconstruction of the Grand Canal was completed in 1415, which greatly aided in the supply of the north. Construction then resumed at a faster pace. The exact number of workers involved in building the city is unknown, but it is estimated to have been several hundred thousand. The chief architects and engineers include Cai Xin (), Nguyễn An, a Viet eunuch, Kuai Xiang, Lu Xiang () and others. By the end of 1417, most of the palaces were completed, but construction on the walls continued. In 1420, the city was deemed ready for the relocation of the government. On 28 October 1420, Beijing was officially declared the principal capital of the empire, and by February 1421, ministries and other government agencies had relocated to Beijing.

In 1421, a famine broke out in the northern provinces. At the same time, three major audience halls in the newly built Forbidden City were destroyed by fire. This event shook the emperor, who saw it as a sign of displeasure from Heaven. In response, he called upon government officials to critique the mistakes of the government. One of the officials, a junior secretary named Xiao Yi, strongly criticized the decision to build the capital in the north and was subsequently executed. This effectively silenced any further discussion on the matter.

The empire was administered by the Beijing authorities from 1421, although some ministries remained in Nanjing, but their powers were limited to the southern metropolitan area and held little political significance. The cost of supplying Beijing, which was located far from the economically developed regions of the country, was a constant burden on the state treasury. Despite this, Beijing remained the permanent capital of the Ming dynasty.

===Grand Canal===

During the centuries leading up to the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the Grand Canal was neglected and partially disappeared. In the early years of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s rule, there were two routes for transporting rice to Beijing to feed the city&#x27;s inhabitants and northern troops. The first route began at Liujiagang in the Yangtze Delta and went through the East China Sea to Tianjin, but this route was risky due to weather and pirates. The second route, which went through the rivers and canals of Anhui, Shandong, and Hubei, was problematic because cargo had to be transferred multiple times. Every year, 480,000 to 800,000 &quot;shi&quot; of rice were transported by sea, and even more was transported by inland waterways, with a total of 2 to 2.5 million &quot;shi&quot; delivered to the north in 1410–1414. This slow and difficult transportation of rice put a heavy burden on the population. Local officials in Shandong petitioned the emperor to improve transportation by restoring a continuous waterway from south to north, and the emperor approved. The government then sent 165,000 workers to reconstruct the waterway, and they built a system of fifteen locks in western Shandong. After the reconstruction was completed in 1415, transportation became faster and cheaper. In 1417 and 1418, the amount of rice shipped increased to 5 and 4.7 million &quot;shi&quot;, respectively, due to the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s projects, before falling again to 2–3 million per year. The transportation was provided by 160,000 soldiers with 15,000 ships, and maintenance was carried out by 47,000 workers. The opening of the Grand Canal led to the economic growth of the regions it passed through. It also resulted in the end of sea transportation of rice to the north, which caused a decline in naval shipbuilding.

The reopening of the Grand Canal had a positive impact on Suzhou. Its strategic location in the middle of the canal network south of the Yangtze (which was reconstructed after 1403) allowed the city to regain its status as a major commercial hub and experience a return to prosperity after being deprived of it during the reign of the Hongwu Emperor. Meanwhile, Nanjing&#x27;s political and economic influence declined, relegating it to a regional center, but it remained the foremost cultural center of the empire.

===Other construction projects===
The Yongle Emperor completed the Xiao Mausoleum, where his father and founder of the dynasty, the Hongwu Emperor, was buried. A grand Sifangcheng pavilion was constructed, featuring an eight-meter stele carried by a bixi turtle. The stele bore an inscription honoring the virtues and accomplishments of the deceased emperor. Originally planned to be 73 meters tall, the stele was ultimately left unfinished at the Yangshan Quarry due to difficulties in transportation and erection.

While the Hongwu Emperor had intended for the tombs of future Ming emperors to be located near his own tomb, only his eldest son Zhu Biao was buried there. When the capital was relocated to Beijing, the Yongle Emperor made the decision to also move the dynastic burial grounds. After consulting with feng shui experts, a site was chosen on the southern slopes of the Tianshou Mountains, approximately 50 km north of downtown Beijing. This became the final resting place for the Yongle Emperor and his twelve successors.

In Huguang, a large-scale construction project was undertaken by the Yongle Emperor, who employed twenty thousand workers over a period of twelve years to build a complex of Taoist temples and monasteries on the Wudang Mountains. The result was a grand structure consisting of 9 palaces, 81 temples, and 36 monasteries, all connected by over 100 bridges. The main objective of this project was to gain popularity among the people and to erase any negative impressions left by the previous emperor&#x27;s overthrow and harsh treatment of secret societies.

Another notable construction project during this time was the Porcelain Tower in Nanjing, which was built between 1412 and 1422 by over a hundred thousand soldiers and workers. This impressive structure, made entirely of white &quot;porcelain&quot; bricks, stood at over 70 meters tall and served as a prominent landmark in Nanjing until its destruction during the Taiping Rebellion.

==Culture==
The emperor portrayed himself as a patron of education and a model Confucian leader in order to solidify his legitimacy. He actively promoted traditional education, commissioned the compilation of Confucian classics, and declared Confucianism as the official state ideology. In 1414, he tasked scholars from the Hanlin Academy with creating a comprehensive collection of commentaries on the Four Books and Five Classics by Zhu Xi and other prominent Confucian thinkers of his school. This project was completed by October 1415 and became the official guide for teaching and examinations.
The &quot;Yongle Encyclopedia&quot; was the most significant and extensive collection of encyclopedias during the Yongle era. The emperor commissioned Grand Secretary Xie Jin to compile a collection that included all known books, either partially or completely. This project involved 2,169 scholars from the Hanlin Academy and the Imperial University and took four years to complete, finishing in December 1407. The scope of the encyclopedia was vast, consisting of 22,277 &quot;juan&quot;, with the contents alone spanning 60 &quot;juan&quot;. but it was not published and only a few manuscripts were kept in the imperial libraries. Currently, only 700 &quot;juan&quot; have survived. This encyclopedia covered a wide range of topics and included materials from all fields of Chinese literature. Its significance lies in its contribution to the preservation of Chinese literature, as it was used by compilers in the 17th century.

The emperor was known for his tolerance towards Chinese philosophical and religious schools, even those that he personally disagreed with. While he did support Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism, he showed a preference for Confucianism. He also considered strict Confucians to be hypocritical. In addition to his respect for Chinese culture, he actively rejected Mongolian customs, language, clothing, and names. He also displayed benevolence towards Muslims, providing financial support for the repair of mosques. As a result, mosques built during the Yongle era in Nanjing and Xi&#x27;an have been preserved.

He was impressed by the lamas invited from Tibet. In Beijing, there were several monasteries staffed by Tibetans, with a population of no less than two thousand, but his reverence for Buddhism had its boundaries. He only allowed his subjects to become monks to a limited extent, following the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s decree that only one man out of forty could do so. On the other hand, he promoted the spread of Buddhism among the non-Chinese peoples of the empire, but with purely political motives—to pacify conflicts and maintain peaceful rule over them.

==Foreign policy==
===General characteristics===
During the Yongle era, Ming China was considered the strongest, wealthiest, and most populous country in the world. The Yongle Emperor, along with the Xuande Emperor to a large extent, stood out from their predecessors and successors due to their active and expensive military and diplomatic efforts. Their main goal was to expand the influence of the Ming dynasty beyond the borders of China. In just over twenty years of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, his envoys visited to numerous nearby and distant countries, seeking to establish at least a symbolic recognition of the Ming emperor&#x27;s supremacy and sovereignty. Similar to his father, the Yongle Emperor had hoped to conquer Mongolia in order to resolve security concerns in the north. To the east and south, the Ming dynasty controlled the seas from Japan to the Strait of Malacca. Chinese naval forces maintained peace on trade routes in Southeast Asia and regularly visited the Indian Ocean, a region that had previously been rarely explored by the Chinese. In addition to Mongolia, Ming missions also ventured into Manchuria in the north and the Timurid Empire in the west.

In an effort to incorporate countries from around the world into the tributary system of subordination to the Ming dynasty, the emperor utilized a combination of military force, diplomatic contacts, trade exchange, and the spread of Chinese culture. According to Confucian political thought, China was to be seen as the center of civilization by other nations and states. These missions not only demonstrated the power of the Ming dynasty, but also enforced recognition of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s supremacy and brought valuable local products. The strength of the Ming dynasty is evident in the number of rulers from Asian states who made the journey to China. It was rare for monarchs to leave their own country, highlighting the immense pressure they were under.

===Foreign trade===

One of the main reasons for engaging in foreign activities during the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign was to revive China&#x27;s declining foreign trade, which had suffered under the isolationist policies of the Hongwu Emperor. Foreign trade was seen as a valuable source of additional income for the imperial treasury, which was necessary given the high government expenditures at the time, but the Ming emperor maintained a monopoly on foreign trade and entrusted it to his personal servants—eunuchs. He also strictly prohibited his subjects from engaging in overseas trade and only allowed foreigners to enter China for tributary missions. Any violation of this state monopoly, known as the &quot;Haijin&quot; policy, was considered a serious offense and was punished by the government as piracy or smuggling.

During the Yongle era, there was a significant increase in foreign trade. Large quantities of porcelain were exported to traditional markets in East and Southeast Asia, Central Asia, and the Ottoman Empire. The export of silk and silk clothing was even more significant, as it had a major impact on economies throughout Asia. For example, Bengali textile mills imported Chinese silk for processing and re-export, while Egyptian textile manufacturers suffered from competition from the East.

The revival of trade in East Asia was accompanied by an outflow of copper coins from China to other regions such as Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia, and India. This led to the growth of Malacca and ports in northern Java, which became more important than older trading centers. The influx of Chinese coins also boosted local trade. Chinese copper coins were the standard currency in Brunei, Sumbawa, and the Moluccas until the early 16th century. 

China&#x27;s prosperity also had a positive impact on other regions such as Central and Western Asia, Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, and East Africa. In more distant countries, where silver was the only valuable commodity for trade, its outflow to China&#x27;s economy became a concern. In the first decades of the 15th century, governments from London to Cairo complained about the outflow of silver to the East.

===Tibet and Nepal===
In Tibet, the Hongwu Emperor did not establish contacts with the kings of the Phagmodrupa dynasty, but instead with the Karmapa, who ruled southeastern Tibet (Kham), which was adjacent to China. The first envoy from the Karmapa arrived in Nanjing in late 1372. The 5th Karmapa, Deshin Shekpa, was known for his reputation as a miracle worker and had already caught the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s attention while he was still a Prince of Yan. After ascending the throne, he sent a mission led by the eunuch Hou Xian () and the monk Zhiguang () to request a visit from Deshin Shekpa. In 1407, Deshin Shekpa finally arrived in Nanjing, where he was gifted and admired by the Yongle Empror. He also took the opportunity to visit Mount Wutai. According to Tibetan records, the Yongle Empror even offered to provide an army to help secure Deshin Shekpa&#x27;s rule over Tibet, but the Karmapa graciously declined. Missions from the Karmapas continued to come to China until the late 1540s.

After the Karmapa&#x27;s visit, the Yongle Empror sent several delegations to other religious leaders in Tibet. These delegations were led by Yang Sanbao (), who visited multiple monasteries and convinced several princes to pledge their allegiance to the Ming dynasty. Yang even traveled as far as Nepal, where delegations from Hou Xian and Deng Cheng also visited. In response to an invitation from the Ming government, representatives from the Tibetan Buddhist schools of Sakya and Gelug also journeyed to Nanjing. This strategy of maintaining relationships with various religious schools while ignoring the Tibetan kings ultimately contributed to the fragmentation of Tibet, which was likely a deliberate policy.

===Central Asia===
In the western regions, the Yongle Emperor sent embassies to various cities and states in Central Asia, ranging from the Chinese border to the Timurid Empire. His goal was to establish his superiority and receive tribute by offering Chinese titles and goods in exchange. This tactic proved successful as local rulers, such as Engke Temür of Hami, accepted the title of king (&quot;wang&quot;) in 1404. Even the three leaders of the Oirats, who were the dominant Western Mongols in Dzungaria, submitted to Ming demands in 1409. However, not all rulers were as receptive. In Samarkand, the emperor&#x27;s embassies were unsuccessful and were executed by Emir Timur, who controlled Central Asia. This was similar to the fate of the Hongwu Emperor&#x27;s embassies before. Timur then gathered an army of 200,000 in Otrar, with the intention of conquering China. He died in February 1405 before he could carry out his plans. His descendants were too preoccupied with internal conflicts and had no interest in waging war against China.

The most significant aspect of the Ming dynasty&#x27;s relations with Central Asian states was the lucrative trade that existed between them. This trade was so profitable that local states were willing to acknowledge their formal subordination to the Ming emperor. Between the years 1402 and 1424, a total of 20 missions were sent from the Timurid capitals of Samarkand and Herat, 44 from Hami, 13 from Turpan, and 32 from other Central Asian states. These missions brought tribute to China in the form of precious metals, jade, horses, camels, sheep, and even lions. In return, they received silk and other luxury goods, as well as paper money which they could use to purchase goods in Chinese markets.

In Central Asia, Hami maintained close relations with the government of the Yongle Emperor. He sent envoys multiple times a year, but the Ming government attempted to control trade and discourage independent private activities. Trade with Turpan and Oirats occurred with less frequency. The Ming government also opposed the ongoing conflicts between Central Asian states, although their efforts were not always successful. They were unable to influence the internal affairs of these states.

Timur&#x27;s successors, Khalil Sultan and from 1407, Shah Rukh, maintained positive relations with the Ming court. In fact, the Yongle Emperor even sent his chief experts on foreign affairs, Chen Cheng, Li Xian (), and the eunuch Li Da (), to Samarkand and Herat. Furthermore, in his correspondence with Shah Rukh, the Yongle Emperor gradually stopped insisting on his subordination, showing a shift towards a more equal relationship. This was likely due to a shared interest in trade, which was prioritized over maintaining prestige.

===Mongolia===

The Ming government attempted to incorporate the Mongols into the tributary trade system. In this system, the Mongols would provide horses and other domestic animals in exchange for paper money, silver, silk, cloth, and titles and ranks for their leaders, but the Ming government placed restrictions on the amount of trade allowed. If the nomads were unable to obtain enough goods through peaceful means, they resorted to raiding. As a result, many Mongols migrated to China and often served in the military instead of being conscripted into the declining &quot;Weisuo&quot; system.

The Mongols were divided into two main groups: the Western (Oirats) and Eastern Mongols. In addition, the Uriankhai formed a separate group. The Ming dynasty had a strong relationship with the Uriankhai, who aided the Yongle Emperor during the civil war and earned his trust. As a result, the Yongle Emperor resettled them in the territory that had been vacated by Ming troops in 1403.
During the early years of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the Mongols of eastern Mongolia remained persistently hostile. However, the Ming government was able to establish relations with the weaker Oirats and their envoys began to visit China regularly from 1408. In 1409, the Oirats, encouraged by the Ming, launched an attack on the Eastern Mongols. In response, the Ming army also attacked the Eastern Mongols, but suffered a defeat in September of that year, resulting in the death of their commander Qiu Fu. This prompted the emperor to personally take action against the Mongols. In March 1410, he led an army of hundreds of thousands from Beijing and after a three-month campaign, he was able to defeat Öljei Temür Khan Bunyashiri and the Mongol chingsang Arughtai. Following this victory, the emperor returned to China. As a result, the Ming dynasty enjoyed peaceful relations with the Eastern Mongols, who were now led by Arughtai, for the next ten years.

The period of peace in the north was short-lived. In April 1414, the Yongle Emperor launched a second campaign into Mongolia, this time against the formidable Oirats. The Oirat cavalry suffered heavy losses in a battle along the upper Tuul River due to the superior firepower of the Ming artillery. In August, a content Yongle Emperor returned to Beijing.

The period of peace in the north came to an end in 1421 when the Eastern Mongols began to launch raids across the border. Despite facing opposition from his ministers, the Yongle Emperor decided to march against them in 1422, 1423, and 1424, but his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful. The large amount of money spent on equipping the armies proved to be a waste when the Mongols refused to engage in battle. The emperor died while returning from his fifth campaign in Mongolia. 

Despite his best efforts, the Yongle Emperor was unable to subdue the Mongols. The campaign into Mongolia did not result in any lasting changes and proved to be extremely costly. Although the Chinese had larger troops, more resources, and better weaponry, the nomads&#x27; mobility and the vastness of the battlefield negated these advantages. The constant feuding among the Mongol leaders eventually led them to become hostile towards China. In the end, the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s policies, particularly the decision to withdraw to the Great Wall, weakened the Ming dynasty&#x27;s position in the steppe.

===Manchuria, Korea, and Japan===
Among the Jurchens living in Manchuria, the Ming government aimed to maintain peace on the borders, counter Korean influence, acquire horses and other local products such as furs, and promote Chinese culture and values among them. In 1403, the Yongle Emperor sent the first mission to Manchuria, offering Chinese goods and titles in exchange for the Jurchens&#x27; recognition of their subordination. From 1411 onwards, the Yongle Emperor dispatched expeditions led by the eunuch Yishiha to the distant hunting tribes of northern Manchuria. Yishiha&#x27;s squadron sailed down the Amur River, reaching as far as its mouth at Tyr, and declared the local Jurchens as subjects of the Ming dynasty.

By acknowledging their subordination to the Ming emperors, the Koreans were able to secure their northern border. This not only brought stability to the border, but also strengthened the legitimacy of the Korean government through official recognition from China. The ruling Joseon dynasty only came into power in 1392. The exchange of envoys, which had been frequent under previous emperors, continued during the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign. The Yongle Emperor&#x27;s first ambassadors arrived in Korea in 1402 to announce the new emperor&#x27;s ascension. In the years that followed, there were regular contacts between the two countries, with the Koreans sending two to three delegations per year. Some of the Ming&#x27;s demands were seen as excessive and difficult by the Koreans, but they still fulfilled them. These demands included providing horses and oxen for military purposes, bronze Buddha statues, relics, paper for printing Buddhist literature, and even sending girls to serve in the imperial harem. However, the Koreans maintained their autonomy in internal affairs.

During the Hongwu era, relations with the Ashikaga government of Japan were at a standstill. Hu Weiyong, who was executed in 1380, was accused of conspiring with Japanese assistance. In 1399, Shōgun Yoshimitsu took the initiative to restore contacts in order to make profit from trade with China. This led to another mission being sent in 1403, during which the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s sovereignty was recognized. In the same year, the Ming government opened maritime trade offices in Ningbo, Quanzhou, and Guangzhou, which allowed Japanese merchants with government licenses to trade. In 1411, new Shōgun Yoshimochi implemented an isolationist policy and interrupted official relations. He also rejected the Ming&#x27;s attempt to re-establish relations in 1417. Despite this, the allure of Chinese coins and goods was too strong for the Japanese to resist, and illegal private trade continued from the ports of southern Japan.

===Đại Việt===

In the late 14th century, Đại Việt (present-day northern Vietnam) was facing internal weakness. In 1400, Lê Quý Ly overthrew the Trần dynasty and changed the name of the state to Đại Ngu. Despite pleas from Viet refugees to the Ming government to restore the fallen dynasty, the Yongle Emperor recognized the new Viet government and confirmed Lê Quý Ly&#x27;s son as the ruler of Đại Ngu in the winter of 1403, but relations between the two countries were strained due to escalating border disputes. Lê Quý Ly prepared for the impending conflict and continued to engage in border skirmishes. In the spring of 1406, his soldiers even ambushed a Ming diplomatic envoys accompanying the Trần pretender. In response, the Yongle Emperor ordered an invasion. By late 1406, the Ming army had attacked Đại Ngu from two directions, quelling resistance by mid-1407. In July, the country was officially annexed to the Ming dynasty as Jiaozhi Province.

In 1408, a rebellion led by supporters of the Trần dynasty broke out and was eventually suppressed by the Ming army in 1409. However, this was not the end of unrest as another rebellion erupted shortly after and was only fully crushed in 1414 when the Chinese captured the rebel leader, Trần Quý Khoáng. Despite this, the majority of the Ming army was unable to withdraw until 1416. By the end of 1417, the Viet people rose up in rebellion once again. This time, they were led by Lê Lợi, a skilled military leader who gained widespread support from the population. Despite their efforts, until the end of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the Ming generals were unable to suppress the rebellion.

===Other Southeast Asian countries===

In Southeast Asia, the Ming dynasty had a strong presence during the Yongle era. From 1402 to 1424, the Ming government sent 62 missions to Southeast Asian countries and states (excluding Đại Việt), and received 95 in return. This included important countries such as Champa, Malacca, Ayutthaya (in present-day Thailand), Majapahit (centered in Java), Samudera in Sumatra, Khmer, and Brunei, all of which paid tribute to the Yongle Emperor. These local rulers sent precious metals, spices, and rare animals to China, and in return received Chinese goods and coins. The Ming government showed a strong interest in trade and left a lasting impression of their naval power in Southeast Asia, although their focus shifted to northern affairs after 1413.

The ruler of Brunei was the first foreign ruler to sail to Nanjing and visit the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s court. This visit resulted in more favorable terms of trade relations for Brunei compared to other countries, but tributary exchange with the Philippines was limited. Champa was a significant ally against insurgents in Jiaozhi, as they were traditional enemies, but relations cooled in 1414 when the Yongle Emperor refused to return territories previously conquered by the Viets. Despite this, official missions between the two countries continued. Ayutthaya was viewed positively by the Ming dynasty and had a peaceful relationship with them. In exchange for Ming protection of Malacca, Ayutthaya provided tribute and received profits from the trade.

The rise of Malacca as a significant trading center can be attributed to the support of the Ming dynasty. This support was crucial for the Chinese as it provided them with a strategic foothold in the Strait of Malacca and a reliable vassal. In fact, three successive rulers of Malacca made visits to the imperial court to pledge their loyalty to the Yongle Emperor. As a result, the Ming dynasty established a fortified trading post in Malacca, which served as a supply base for their missions to the Indian Ocean. Additionally, during the first third of the 15th century, the sultan of Samudera, had a close association with the Ming dynasty, with the Ming fleet stationed on a nearby island to support him in times of war.

The Javanese Majapahit Empire weakened in the early 15th century due to the division of Java and civil war. The presence of the Ming dynasty suppressed its influence in Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, Borneo, and the southern Philippines. In Java itself, the Ming fleet forcibly subdued the local rulers. In 1407, the Ming expedition became involved in the local conflicts, resulting in the loss of 170 Chinese soldiers. Ming envoys then coerced the Javanese king into paying an indemnity of 60,000 &quot;liang&quot; (2,238 kg) of gold, threatening that Java would suffer the same fate as Đại Việt if they did not comply.

===Indian Ocean===
In 1405, the Yongle Emperor appointed his favorite commander, the eunuch Zheng He, as admiral of a fleet with the purpose of expanding China&#x27;s influence and collecting tribute from various nations. A total of two thousand ships were constructed to aid Zheng He in his seven voyages, including numerous large &quot;treasure ships&quot;.

In the early years of the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, Timur&#x27;s campaigns disrupted traditional trade connections with Central Asia. As a result, one of the initial goals of sending emissaries by sea to the Indian Ocean may have been to find potential allies against the Timurid Empire of Timur, but this goal became less relevant when Timur died in 1405, at the beginning of the campaign to China. The Ming dynasty then established proper relations with his successors.

From 1405 to 1421, Zheng He embarked on six voyages to the Indian Ocean. The first voyage took place from 1405 to 1407 and consisted of 250 or 317 ships, including 62 large &quot;treasure ships&quot;. A total of 27,800 people were on board. The final voyage was made during the reign of the Xuande Emperor from 1431 to 1433. Chinese sailors followed the main trade routes of Southeast and South Asia, sailing into the Indian Ocean. During the first three expeditions, they sailed to South India, with their main destination being Calicut, the commercial center of the region. In the following four voyages, they reached Hormuz in Persia, while separate squadrons visited various ports in the Arabian Peninsula and East Africa.
In addition to foreign policy and trade goals, Zheng He&#x27;s expeditions also had the task of mapping the countries visited and had an educational aspect as well. The Chinese were interested in bringing back exotic animals and plants for medicinal purposes.

After the deaths of the Xuande Emperor and Zheng He, the practice of large-scale expeditions was discontinued. The loss of key supporters of long-distance sailing was just one factor in the decision to abandon an active maritime policy. The officialdom saw the high cost of equipping the fleet as a way for the eunuchs to gain disproportionate power. As a result, reducing spending on the navy also reduced the influence of the eunuchs at court.

==Death and legacy==

On 1 April 1424, the emperor embarked on his final campaign into Mongolia, but the campaign was unsuccessful and the emperor fell into a deep depression. He died on 12 August 1424 in Yumuchuan, located north of Duolun. While official annals do not provide a specific cause of death, private records suggest that the emperor suffered from multiple strokes in his final years, with the last one ultimately proving to be fatal. He was buried in the Chang Mausoleum (), the first of the Ming tombs located north of Beijing.

He was given the posthumous name Emperor Wen (Cultured Emperor) and the temple name Taizong (Grand Ancestor), which was customary for second emperors of the dynasty. In 1538, the Jiajing Emperor changed the temple name to Chengzu (Accomplished Progenitor) in order to strengthen the legitimacy of his decision to elevate his father to imperial status after his death. However, the use of the character &quot;cheng&quot;, which means perfection, completion, or accomplishment, shows a high level of respect for the Yongle Emperor and his accomplishments.

For Chinese historians in the following centuries, he represented the ideal ruler—an energetic and capable general who led China to power, while also being a Confucian and a restorer of traditional institutions. He was also credited with unifying northern and southern China, but they also criticized his violent overthrow of his predecessor and the subsequent purges. His high spending on foreign expansion and domestic projects, particularly the relocation of the capital, was met with sharp disapproval even during his lifetime. Late Ming historians, however, justified the negative effects of his rule as necessary for building a powerful empire. They also strongly condemned the Yongle Emperror&#x27;s interventions in education, as his promotion of neo-Confucian orthodoxy led to a decline in scholarship and intellectual development.

Modern historians, such as Chan Hok-lam and Wang Yuan-Kang, argue that the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s desire for a unified China and domination over the world ultimately led to decisions that proved problematic in the long run. They believe that abandoning the outer defense line north of the Great Wall was a strategic mistake, making the country more vulnerable to attacks. Additionally, the economic downturn at the time made it difficult to support large military operations, while the strict control over trade with the Mongols only worsened relations between the two. The invasion of Đại Việt was also a mistake, as the Ming defeat weakened the empire&#x27;s reputation in Southeast Asia.

==Family==
Consorts and issue:
* Empress Renxiaowen, of the Xu clan (1362–1407)
** Princess Yong&#x27;an (1377–1417), personal name Yuying, first daughter
*** Married Yuan Rong, Marquis of Guangping () in 1395, and had issue (one son, three daughters)
** Zhu Gaochi, the Hongxi Emperor (16 August 1378 – 29 May 1425), first son
** Princess Yongping (; 1379 – 22 April 1444), personal name Yuegui, second daughter
*** Married Li Rang, Marquis of Fuyang () in 1395, and had issue (one son)
** Zhu Gaoxu, Prince of Han (30 December 1380 – 6 October 1426), second son
** Zhu Gaosui, Prince Jian of Zhao (19 January 1383 – 5 October 1431), third son
** Princess Ancheng (; 1384 – 16 September 1443), third daughter
*** Married Song Hu, Marquis of Xining () in 1402, and had issue (one son)
** Princess Xianning (; 1385 – 27 July 1440), fourth daughter
*** Married Song Ying, Marquis of Xining (; d. 1449) in 1403, and had issue (one son)
* Noble Consort Zhaoxian, of the Wang clan (d. 1420)
* Noble Consort Zhaoyi, of the Zhang clan ()
* Consort Gongxianxian, of the Korean Andong Gwon clan (1391–1410)
* Consort Zhongjingzhaoshunxian, of the Yu clan (d. 1421)
* Consort Kangmuyigonghui, of the Wu clan ()
** Zhu Gaoxi (; 18 January 1392 – January/February 1392), fourth son
* Consort Gongshunrongmuli, of the Chen clan (; d. 1424)
* Consort Duanjinggonghuishu, of the Yang clan ()
* Consort Gongherongshunxian, of the Wang clan ()
* Consort Zhaosujinghuixian, of the Wang clan ()
* Consort Zhaohuigongyishun, of the Wang clan ()
* Consort Huimuzhaojingshun, of the Qian clan ()
* Consort Kanghuizhuangshuli, of the Korean Cheongju Han clan (d. 12 August 1424)
* Consort Kangjingzhuanghehui, of the Korean Choi clan (; 1395–1424)
* Consort Anshunhui, of the Long clan ()
* Consort Zhaoshunde, of the Liu clan ()
* Consort Kangyishun, of the Li clan ()
* Consort Huimushun, of the Guo clan ()
* Consort Zhenjingshun, of the Zhang clan ()
* Consort Shun, of the Korean Im clan ( 1392–1421)
* Consort Hwang, of the Korean Hwang clan (d. 1421)
* Lady of Bright Deportment, of the Korean Yi clan (1392–1421)
* Lady of Handsome Fairness, of the Korean Yeo clan (1393–1413)
* Beauty Gongrong, of the Wang clan ()
* Beauty Jinghui, of the Lu clan ()
* Beauty Zhuanghui ()
* Unknown 
** Princess Changning (; 1387 – 5 April 1408), fifth daughter
*** Married Mu Xin, Marquis of Xiping (; 1386–1453), the fourth son of Mu Ying, on 20 June 1403, and had issue (one son)

== See also ==
* Chinese emperors family tree (late)
* Ming dynasty in Inner Asia
* Yongle Tongbao

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="4" end="18" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q706208" start="68" end="79" title="temple name" label="temple name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="87" end="110" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Emperor Chengzu of Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="126" end="132" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Zhu Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q10075" start="148" end="155" title="List of emperors of the Ming dynasty" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="163" end="175" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="234" end="248" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="378" end="385" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9961" start="643" end="658" title="Jianwen Emperor" label="Jianwen Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207697" start="698" end="714" title="Jingnan campaign" label="Jingnan campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q845538" start="899" end="907" title="Chinese era name" label="era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="1711" end="1718" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="1840" end="1847" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="2036" end="2050" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="2166" end="2177" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q696077" start="2373" end="2392" title="Yongle Encyclopedia" label="Yongle Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273580" start="2502" end="2526" title="Four Great Books of Song" label="Four Great Books of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="2677" end="2703" title="Imperial examination" label="civil service examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="3522" end="3531" title="Hegemony" label="hegemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="3544" end="3553" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="3735" end="3744" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="3746" end="3751" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3753" end="3758" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3764" end="3775" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="3785" end="3799" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="3817" end="3847" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="Zheng He&amp;#x27;s famous voyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="3875" end="3889" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3891" end="3896" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3898" end="3904" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="3910" end="3921" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721999" start="4033" end="4042" title="Uriankhai" label="Uriankhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="4117" end="4123" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q124167384" start="4553" end="4567" title="Ming-Việt War" label="war in Jiaozhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="4590" end="4597" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087883" start="4777" end="4806" title="Yongle Emperor&amp;#x27;s campaigns against the Mongols" label="campaigns against the Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="5015" end="5028" title="Zhu Yuanzhang" label="Zhu Yuanzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="5070" end="5077" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q112524" start="5187" end="5207" title="Red Turban Rebellion" label="Red Turban Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="5254" end="5266" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5351" end="5363" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q845538" start="5423" end="5431" title="Chinese era name" label="era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068941" start="5549" end="5556" title="Empress Ma (Hongwu)" label="Lady Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345184" start="5740" end="5749" title="Khongirad" label="Khongirad"/>
<link wikidata="Q838433" start="5927" end="5933" title="Zhu Su" label="Zhu Su"/>
<link wikidata="Q28772" start="6008" end="6042" title="Ming Veritable Records" label="Veritable Records of Emperor Taizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q713013" start="6952" end="6961" title="Song Lian" label="Song Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7230" end="7241" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="7269" end="7274" title="Emperor Gaozu of Han" label="Gaozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="7279" end="7283" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Wudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="7340" end="7353" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7659" end="7666" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="7691" end="7703" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135688" start="8644" end="8651" title="Empress Xu (Ming dynasty)" label="Lady Xu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355886" start="8669" end="8674" title="Xu Da" label="Xu Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q9972" start="8874" end="8884" title="Zhu Gaochi" label="Zhu Gaochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044371" start="8935" end="8944" title="Zhu Gaoxu" label="Zhu Gaoxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494297" start="8972" end="8982" title="Zhu Gaosui" label="Zhu Gaosui"/>
<link wikidata="Q44212" start="9059" end="9067" title="Fengyang County" label="Fengyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313878" start="10391" end="10402" title="Li Jinglong" label="Li Jinglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488636" start="11942" end="11950" title="Fu Youde" label="Fu Youde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499157" start="12079" end="12089" title="Feng Sheng (general)" label="Feng Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187958" start="12130" end="12136" title="Lan Yu (general)" label="Lan Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8937" start="12201" end="12212" title="Uskhal Khan Tögüs Temür" label="Tögüs Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="12668" end="12674" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="12679" end="12684" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194876" start="13110" end="13118" title="Zhu Biao" label="Zhu Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q546633" start="13250" end="13264" title="Hanlin Academy" label="Hanlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9961" start="13330" end="13340" title="Zhu Yunwen" label="Zhu Yunwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="14129" end="14136" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176194" start="17078" end="17091" title="Huang Zicheng" label="Huang Zicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207697" start="18415" end="18431" title="Jingnan campaign" label="Jingnan campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11610844" start="19059" end="19071" title="Geng Bingwen" label="Geng Bingwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q197678" start="19089" end="19097" title="Zhengding County" label="Zhending"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313878" start="19235" end="19246" title="Li Jinglong" label="Li Jinglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q162880" start="19516" end="19522" title="Dezhou" label="Dezhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="19623" end="19631" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q72877" start="19716" end="19722" title="Datong" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q58584" start="19751" end="19758" title="Baoding" label="Baoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q170247" start="19883" end="19888" title="Jinan" label="Jinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="20241" end="20252" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57719" start="20555" end="20561" title="Xuzhou" label="Xuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604022" start="20619" end="20624" title="Zhili" label="Zhili"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="20705" end="20718" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q707875" start="21924" end="21935" title="Fang Xiaoru" label="Fang Xiaoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180155" start="22054" end="22060" title="Qi Tai" label="Qi Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q28772" start="22320" end="22354" title="Ming Veritable Records" label="Veritable Records of Emperor Taizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208709" start="23995" end="24012" title="Grand Secretariat" label="Grand Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494320" start="25118" end="25124" title="Qiu Fu" label="Qiu Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503394" start="27646" end="27665" title="Zhongshu Sheng" label="Central Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280964" start="29484" end="29494" title="Xia Yuanji" label="Xia Yuanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q708971" start="30375" end="30384" title="Ministry of Personnel" label="Personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q709003" start="30386" end="30393" title="Ministry of Revenue (imperial China)" label="Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q704788" start="30395" end="30400" title="Ministry of Rites" label="Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635700" start="30406" end="30411" title="Ministry of Works (imperial China)" label="Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="30596" end="30622" title="Imperial examination" label="civil service examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q20791844" start="30960" end="30983" title="Guozijian" label="The Imperial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="31715" end="31729" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9378261" start="32369" end="32382" title="Eastern Depot" label="Eastern Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9972" start="32837" end="32847" title="Hongxi Emperor" label="Zhu Gaochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044371" start="32949" end="32958" title="Zhu Gaoxu" label="Zhu Gaoxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494297" start="33024" end="33034" title="Zhu Gaosui" label="Zhu Gaosui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9977" start="33535" end="33545" title="Xuande Emperor" label="Zhu Zhanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="33862" end="33868" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="34167" end="34174" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360781" start="34574" end="34582" title="Qingzhou" label="Qingzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q873615" start="35392" end="35417" title="Embroidered Uniform Guard" label="Embroidered Uniform Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="38540" end="38550" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q471765" start="38924" end="38931" title="Shangdu" label="Kaiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q31888393" start="39267" end="39275" title="Liaodong Garrison" label="Liaodong"/>
<link wikidata="Q31888200" start="39277" end="39283" title="Jizhou Garrison" label="Jizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482110" start="39285" end="39291" title="Xuanfu Garrison" label="Xuanfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q31888432" start="39293" end="39299" title="Datong Garrison" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367898" start="47650" end="47658" title="Jiangnan" label="Jiangnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="47693" end="47699" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q662380" start="47704" end="47713" title="Songjiang, Shanghai" label="Songjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929688" start="49445" end="49464" title="government spending" label="government spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="49766" end="49773" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="49811" end="49818" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="50541" end="50545" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="50547" end="50550" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="50556" end="50560" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235155" start="51583" end="51590" title="Huguang" label="Huguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="51592" end="51600" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="51602" end="51608" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="51614" end="51621" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q713236" start="52561" end="52570" title="Nguyễn An" label="Nguyễn An"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513613" start="52587" end="52597" title="Kuai Xiang" label="Kuai Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="53184" end="53207" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="displeasure from Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="54057" end="54068" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654051" start="54301" end="54311" title="Liuhe, Taicang" label="Liujiagang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="54372" end="54379" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="55862" end="55868" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q28769" start="56388" end="56402" title="Xiao Mausoleum" label="Xiao Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28770" start="56571" end="56575" title="bixi" label="bixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q986628" start="56769" end="56784" title="Yangshan Quarry" label="Yangshan Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170537" start="57138" end="57147" title="feng shui" label="feng shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q24835562" start="57205" end="57223" title="Tianshou Mountain" label="Tianshou Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235155" start="57362" end="57369" title="Huguang" label="Huguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034" start="57571" end="57587" title="Wudang Mountains" label="Wudang Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063425" start="57977" end="57992" title="Porcelain Tower of Nanjing" label="Porcelain Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="58280" end="58297" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q546633" start="58624" end="58638" title="Hanlin Academy" label="Hanlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="58703" end="58731" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="Four Books and Five Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="58735" end="58741" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q696077" start="58910" end="58929" title="Yongle Encyclopedia" label="Yongle Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="60487" end="60492" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="61864" end="61869" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="61877" end="61894" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="61953" end="61967" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="61994" end="62006" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="62132" end="62141" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="62163" end="62177" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="63189" end="63203" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569008" start="63677" end="63683" title="Haijin" label="Haijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="63982" end="63996" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q61089" start="64466" end="64473" title="Malacca City" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q186367" start="64671" end="64678" title="Sumbawa" label="Sumbawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="64688" end="64696" title="Maluku Islands" label="Moluccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126416" start="65267" end="65286" title="Phagmodrupa dynasty" label="Phagmodrupa dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q747371" start="65309" end="65316" title="Karmapa" label="Karmapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125990" start="65348" end="65352" title="Kham" label="Kham"/>
<link wikidata="Q950798" start="65467" end="65480" title="5th Karmapa, Deshin Shekpa" label="Deshin Shekpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q120314" start="65909" end="65920" title="Mount Wutai" label="Mount Wutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q650035" start="66643" end="66648" title="Sakya" label="Sakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q319218" start="66653" end="66658" title="Gelug" label="Gelug"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="66995" end="67007" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="67048" end="67062" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q989892" start="67246" end="67250" title="Hami" label="Hami"/>
<link wikidata="Q284027" start="67386" end="67395" title="Dzungaria" label="Dzungaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="67478" end="67487" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="67562" end="67567" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q956911" start="67716" end="67721" title="Otrar" label="Otrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="68310" end="68315" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q868527" start="68339" end="68345" title="Turpan" label="Turpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367188" start="69158" end="69171" title="Khalil Sultan" label="Khalil Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="69187" end="69196" title="Shah Rukh" label="Shah Rukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q603609" start="69325" end="69335" title="Chen Cheng (Ming dynasty)" label="Chen Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="70330" end="70336" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914182" start="70342" end="70357" title="Tatar (Mongolia)" label="Eastern Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721999" start="70376" end="70385" title="Uriankhai" label="Uriankhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9226" start="71367" end="71394" title="Öljei Temür Khan" label="Öljei Temür Khan Bunyashiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616301" start="71420" end="71428" title="Arughtai" label="Arughtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q643058" start="71858" end="71868" title="Tuul River" label="Tuul River"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="73113" end="73121" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="73132" end="73141" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q713247" start="73583" end="73590" title="Yishiha" label="Yishiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="73684" end="73688" title="Amur" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467096" start="73728" end="73731" title="Tyr, Russia" label="Tyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="73862" end="73869" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="74074" end="74088" title="Joseon dynasty" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="74925" end="74944" title="Ashikaga shogunate" label="Ashikaga government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317110" start="74976" end="74986" title="Hu Weiyong" label="Hu Weiyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q248381" start="75082" end="75092" title="Ashikaga Yoshimitsu" label="Yoshimitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="75366" end="75372" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="75374" end="75382" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="75388" end="75397" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q466287" start="75487" end="75497" title="Ashikaga Yoshimochi" label="Yoshimochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430309" start="75853" end="75861" title="Đại Việt" label="Đại Việt"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="75884" end="75891" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319152" start="75932" end="75941" title="Hồ Quý Ly" label="Lê Quý Ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111454" start="75956" end="75968" title="Trần dynasty" label="Trần dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269873" start="76170" end="76190" title="Hồ Hán Thương" label="Lê Quý Ly&amp;#x27;s son"/>
<link wikidata="Q10829478" start="76511" end="76525" title="Trần Thiêm Bình" label="Trần pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q10882986" start="76750" end="76766" title="Jiaozhi Province" label="Jiaozhi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q705535" start="77056" end="77071" title="Trùng Quang Đế" label="Trần Quý Khoáng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195391" start="77249" end="77255" title="Lê Lợi" label="Lê Lợi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="77507" end="77521" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="77772" end="77778" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61089" start="77780" end="77787" title="Malacca City" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="77789" end="77798" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="77826" end="77835" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284315" start="77856" end="77864" title="Samudera Pasai Sultanate" label="Samudera"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="77877" end="77882" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="77888" end="77894" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="78500" end="78511" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="79211" end="79228" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="79919" end="79934" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="79936" end="79942" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="80450" end="80458" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q702138" start="80696" end="80710" title="Chinese treasure ship" label="treasure ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="81725" end="81732" title="Kozhikode" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q695265" start="81815" end="81821" title="Hormuz Island" label="Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266442" start="82863" end="82869" title="Duolun County" label="Duolun"/>
<link wikidata="Q41135" start="83135" end="83145" title="Ming tombs" label="Ming tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10011" start="83352" end="83367" title="Jiajing Emperor" label="Jiajing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135688" start="85294" end="85312" title="Empress Xu (Ming dynasty)" label="Empress Renxiaowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11131595" start="85344" end="85365" title="Princess Yong&amp;#x27;an" label="Princess Yong&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q9972" start="85532" end="85546" title="Hongxi Emperor" label="Hongxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044371" start="85752" end="85761" title="Zhu Gaoxu" label="Zhu Gaoxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291877" start="85763" end="85776" title="Prince of Han of Ming dynasty" label="Prince of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494297" start="85828" end="85838" title="Zhu Gaosui" label="Zhu Gaosui"/>
<link wikidata="Q15913830" start="85840" end="85859" title="Prince of Zhao of Ming dynasty" label="Prince Jian of Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250863" start="86196" end="86218" title="Noble Consort Zhaoxian" label="Noble Consort Zhaoxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250435" start="86294" end="86314" title="Consort Gwon (Ming dynasty)" label="Consort Gongxianxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370434" start="86330" end="86341" title="Gwon" label="Andong Gwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30944909" start="86361" end="86390" title="Consort Yu (Yongle)" label="Consort Zhongjingzhaoshunxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250391" start="86837" end="86863" title="Consort Han (Yongle)" label="Consort Kanghuizhuangshuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12619259" start="86872" end="86896" title="Cheongju Han clan" label="Korean Cheongju Han clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16603757" start="87246" end="87259" title="Consort Hwang (Yongle)" label="Consort Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250728" start="87298" end="87323" title="Consort Yi (Ming dynasty)" label="Lady of Bright Deportment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250236" start="87361" end="87386" title="Consort Yeo" label="Lady of Handsome Fairness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127888" start="87664" end="87671" title="Mu Ying" label="Mu Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100764" start="87732" end="87767" title="Chinese emperors family tree (late)" label="Chinese emperors family tree (late)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123038515" start="87770" end="87796" title="Ming dynasty in Inner Asia" label="Ming dynasty in Inner Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192962" start="87799" end="87813" title="Yongle Tongbao" label="Yongle Tongbao"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74274" wikidata="Q46821" url="?curid=74274" title="Numerian">
<text>Numerian (; died November 284) was Roman emperor from 283 to 284 with his older brother Carinus. They were sons of Carus, a general raised to the office of praetorian prefect under Emperor Probus in 282.

==Early life and Carus&#x27; reign==

Numerian was the younger son of Carus. In 282, the legions of the upper Danube in Raetia and Noricum proclaimed as emperor Numerian&#x27;s father, the praetorian prefect Marcus Aurelius Carus, after a mutiny against the emperor Probus, in which the latter was killed. By one account, Carus had &quot;himself&quot; rebelled against the emperor, and Probus&#x27; army, stationed in Sirmium (Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia), decided they did not wish to fight Carus and assassinated their emperor instead. According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Carus was not responsible for Probus&#x27;s death, and inflicted severe punishment upon the murderers. Carus, already sixty, wished to establish a dynasty and immediately elevated Carinus and Numerian to the rank of Caesar.

In 283, Carus left Carinus in charge of the West and moved with Numerian and his praetorian prefect Arrius Aper to the East to wage war against the Sassanid Empire. The Sassanids had been embroiled in a succession dispute since the death of Shapur and were in no position to oppose Carus&#x27; advance.

According to Zonaras, Eutropius, and Festus, Carus won a major victory against the Persians, taking Seleucia and the Sassanid capital of Ctesiphon (near modern Al-Mada&#x27;in, Iraq), cities on opposite banks of the Tigris. In celebration, Numerian, Carus, and Carinus all took the title &quot;Persici maximi&quot;. Carus died in July or early August of 283, allegedly due to a strike of lightning.

=== Numerian and Carinus as Augusti ===
The death of Carus left Numerian and Carinus as the new Augusti. Carinus quickly made his way to Rome from Gaul, arriving in January 284, while Numerian lingered in the East. The Roman retreat from Persia was orderly and unopposed, for the Persian King, Bahram II, was still struggling to establish his authority.

By March 284, Numerian had only reached Emesa (Homs) in Syria; by November, only Asia Minor. In Emesa he was apparently still alive and in good health, as he issued the only extant rescript in his name there. Coins were issued in his name in Cyzicus at some time before the end of 284, but it is impossible to know whether he was still in the public eye by that point.

After Emesa, Numerian&#x27;s staff, including the prefect Aper, reported that Numerian suffered from an inflammation of the eyes and had to travel in a closed coach. When the army reached Bithynia, or Thrace, some of Numerian&#x27;s soldiers smelled an odor reminiscent of a decaying corpse emanating from the coach. They opened its curtains and found Numerian dead.

=== After Numerian&#x27;s death ===
Aper officially broke the news of Numerian&#x27;s death in Nicomedia (İzmit) in November 284, and the discovery, which the prefect attempted to conceal, as due to the forwardness of the soldiery, who forced open the Imperial tent to investigate for themselves the situation of their invisible monarch. Numerian&#x27;s generals and tribunes called a council for the succession, which met at Chalcedon across the Bosphorus, where they chose as emperor Diocletian, commander of the cavalry arm of the imperial bodyguard, despite Aper&#x27;s attempts to garner support. The army of the east unanimously saluted their new Augustus. Diocletian accepted the purple imperial vestments and raised his sword to the light of the sun, swearing an oath denying responsibility for Numerian&#x27;s death. He asserted that Aper had killed Numerian and concealed the deed. In full view of the army, Diocletian then turned and killed Aper, who had been hauled bound before the assembly.

== Character ==
According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Numerian was a man of considerable literary attainments, remarkably amiable, and known as a great orator and poet. Allegedly, the Senate raised him a statue, inscribed &quot;To the most powerful of orators&quot;.

==Family tree==



==Citations==
==References==

===Primary sources===

* Aurelius Victor, Epitome de Caesaribus
* Eutropius, 
* Historia Augusta, Life of Carus, Carinus and Numerian
* Joannes Zonaras, Compendium of History extract: Zonaras: Alexander Severus to Diocletian: 222–284
===Secondary sources===

* Barnes, Timothy D. &quot;Constantine and Eusebius&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1981. 
* Barnes, Timothy D. &quot;The New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1982. 
* Bowman, Alan K. &quot;Diocletian and the First Tetrarchy.&quot; In &quot;The Cambridge Ancient History, Volume XII: The Crisis of Empire&quot;, edited by Alan Bowman, Averil Cameron, and Peter Garnsey, 67–89. Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
* Leadbetter, William. &quot;Carus (282–283 A.D.).&quot; &quot;De Imperatoribus Romanis&quot; (2001a). Accessed 16 February 2008.
* Leadbetter, William. &quot;Numerianus (283–284 A.D.).&quot; &quot;De Imperatoribus Romanis&quot; (2001b). Accessed 16 February 2008.
* Leadbetter, William. &quot;Carinus (283–285 A.D.).&quot; &quot;De Imperatoribus Romanis&quot; (2001c). Accessed 16 February 2008.
* Mathisen, Ralph W. &quot;Diocletian (284–305 A.D.).&quot; &quot;De Imperatoribus Romanis&quot; (1997). Accessed 16 February 2008.
* Potter, David S. &quot;The Roman Empire at Bay: AD 180–395&quot;. New York: Routledge, 2005. Hardcover Paperback 
* Southern, Pat. &quot;The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine&quot;. New York: Routledge, 2001. 
* Williams, Stephen. &quot;Diocletian and the Roman Recovery&quot;. New York: Routledge, 1997. 
== External links ==

* Leadbetter, William. &quot;Numerianus (283–284 A.D.)&quot;, &quot;DIR&quot; (2001).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46821" start="0" end="8" title="Numerian" label="Numerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="35" end="48" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190097" start="88" end="95" title="Carinus" label="Carinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187004" start="115" end="120" title="Carus" label="Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="156" end="174" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q187068" start="189" end="195" title="Marcus Aurelius Probus" label="Probus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187004" start="275" end="280" title="Carus" label="Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="325" end="331" title="Raetia" label="Raetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="336" end="343" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="394" end="412" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q187004" start="429" end="434" title="Carus" label="Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187068" start="471" end="477" title="Marcus Aurelius Probus" label="Probus"/>
<link wikidata="Q833060" start="623" end="630" title="Sirmium" label="Sirmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q242733" start="632" end="649" title="Sremska Mitrovica" label="Sremska Mitrovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="651" end="657" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="764" end="780" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="1004" end="1010" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132171" start="1113" end="1124" title="Arrius Aper" label="Arrius Aper"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1161" end="1176" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32052" start="1330" end="1337" title="Joannes Zonaras" label="Zonaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q314694" start="1339" end="1348" title="Eutropius (historian)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q666127" start="1354" end="1360" title="Festus (historian)" label="Festus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136681" start="1417" end="1425" title="Seleucia" label="Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192541" start="1454" end="1463" title="Ctesiphon" label="Ctesiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378794" start="1477" end="1492" title="Al-Mada&amp;#x27;in" label="Al-Mada&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1494" end="1498" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="1533" end="1539" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1599" end="1604" title="Victory title#Roman victory titles" label="title"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="1813" end="1820" title="Augustus (title)" label="Augusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q299255" start="2011" end="2020" title="Bahram II" label="Bahram II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="2119" end="2123" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="2128" end="2133" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2153" end="2163" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418386" start="2253" end="2261" title="rescript" label="rescript"/>
<link wikidata="Q615449" start="2314" end="2321" title="Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="2630" end="2638" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="2643" end="2649" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="2905" end="2914" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129649" start="2916" end="2921" title="İzmit" label="İzmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="3236" end="3245" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="3257" end="3266" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="3296" end="3306" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="3855" end="3871" title="Augustan History" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="4167" end="4182" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q314694" start="4208" end="4217" title="Eutropius (historian)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="4222" end="4238" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q32052" start="4278" end="4293" title="Joannes Zonaras" label="Joannes Zonaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q287819" start="4403" end="4421" title="Timothy Barnes (classicist)" label="Barnes, Timothy D."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74276" wikidata="Q2427163" url="?curid=74276" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day">
<text>Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day (), also known in English as &quot;St John the Baptist Day&quot;, is a holiday celebrated on June 24 in the Canadian province of Quebec. It was brought to Canada by French settlers celebrating the traditional feast day of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist. It was declared a public holiday in Quebec in 1925, with publicly financed events organized province-wide by a &quot;Comité organisateur de la fête nationale du Québec&quot;.

==Origins==

The tradition landed in Canada with the first French colonists. The first mention of celebrations of Saint-Jean-Baptiste in North America dates back to 1606, when settlers en route to the future Acadia rested on the coast of Newfoundland, June 23. The second mention of celebrations, according to the Jesuit &quot;Relations&quot;, occurred on the banks of the Saint Lawrence River on the evening of June 23, 1636, with a bonfire and five cannon shots.

In Lower Canada, the celebration of the nativity of St. John the Baptist took a patriotic tone in 1834 on the initiative of one of the founders of the newspaper &quot;La Minerve&quot;, Ludger Duvernay, who would later become the first president of the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society. In the spring of 1834, Duvernay and other &quot;patriotes&quot; attended the celebrations of the first St. Patrick&#x27;s Day, the celebration of the Irish diaspora, in Montreal. This would give him and others the idea of organizing something similar for all the &quot;Canadiens&quot; and their friends.

On that June 24, George-Étienne Cartier&#x27;s &quot;Ô Canada! mon pays, mes amours&quot; was first sung during a grand patriotic banquet gathering about sixty francophones and anglophones of Montreal, in the gardens of lawyer John McDonnell, near the old Windsor Station. The &quot;Canada&quot; in the song refers to Lower Canada, today&#x27;s southern Quebec. Rounds of toasts went to the &quot;Parti patriote&quot;, the United States, Ireland, and the Ninety-Two Resolutions.

Two days later, &quot;La Minerve&quot; concluded: &quot;This holiday, whose goal is to solidify the union of the &quot;Canadiens&quot;, will not go without bearing fruit. It will be celebrated annually as a national holiday and will not miss producing the happiest results.&quot; The celebration recurred in 1835, 1836, 1837.

Following the defeat of the insurrectional movement during the Lower Canada Rebellion and the military repressions which followed, the day was not celebrated for several years.

In 1834, Duvernay established the charitable Association Saint-Jean Baptiste in order to have the Saint-Jean-Baptiste celebrated that year. The association was chartered in 1849 with the mission of promoting social and moral progress. (See Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society.)

The celebrations were supported by the Catholic Church and were primarily religious around that time. The lighting of bonfires, a traditional custom on the Nativity of Saint John which ultimately reached back to pre-Christian Midsummer celebrations were still lit at night. In addition, the first Saint-Jean-Baptiste parades were organized. They became an important tradition over time. The procession of allegorical floats was introduced in 1874.

On June 24, 1880, the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society organized the gathering of all francophone communities across North America. The event was the first National Congress of French Canadians (&quot;Congrès national des Canadiens français&quot;). On this occasion, the citizens of Quebec City were the first ones to hear the &quot;Ô Canada&quot; of Calixa Lavallée, based on a poem by a Quebec Superior Court judge, Adolphe-Basile Routhier. The song was commissioned by the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society. It was well received but did not become a widely known song for many years. English words were later written for a royal tour in 1901. In 1980, &quot;O Canada&quot; became the official national anthem of Canada.

In 1908, Pope Pius X designated St. John the Baptist as the patron saint of French Canadians. From 1914 to 1923 the processions were not held. In 1925, 91 years after the Ludger Duvernay&#x27;s banquet in Montreal, June 24 became provincially a legal holiday in Quebec.

==The &quot;Fête nationale&quot;==
In Quebec, June 24 (Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day), or Provincial Holiday, is officially a paid statutory public holiday covered under the &quot;Act Respecting Labour Standards&quot;. In 1977, an Order in Council by Lieutenant Governor Hugues Lapointe, on the advice of Premier René Lévesque, declared June 24 the provincial holiday in Quebec.

The following year, the National Holiday Organizing Committee () was created. The committee initially entrusted the organization of the events to the &quot;Société des festivals populaires du Québec&quot;. In 1984, on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of the SSJB, the organization of the celebrations was entrusted to the sovereigntist &quot;Mouvement national des Québécoises et des Québécois&quot; (MNQ).

By making it a statutory holiday, the day became a holiday for all Quebecers rather than only those of French-Canadian or Catholic origins. Celebrations were gradually secularized, primarily due to actions taken by the MNQ, and June 23 and 24 became as they are now known. Many festivities take place on the night before the holiday proper.

While the religious significance of the civic celebration is gone, the day remains popularly called &quot;la St-Jean-Baptiste&quot; or simply &quot;la St-Jean&quot; (notably by businesses), and is still observed in churches.

In 2010 and 2011, Franco-Ontarian New Democratic MP Claude Gravelle introduced a private member&#x27;s bill in the House of Commons to recognize Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day as a federal holiday in Canada.

==Political nature of the celebration==

During and immediately after the Quiet Revolution, Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day became highly politicized. The religious symbolism associated with the celebrations was replaced by political ideals of Quebec separatism.

Governor General Georges Vanier, who, as viceroy, had always fostered unity and biculturalism, found himself the target of Quebec sovereigntists in Montreal, on Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, 1964, wherein a group of sovereigntists held placards reading &quot;Vanier vendu&quot; (&quot;Vanier the sell-out&quot;) and &quot;Vanier fou de la Reine&quot; (&quot;Vanier, jester to the Queen&quot;).

Four years later, with the new Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau in attendance on the eve of a general election, a riot broke out on Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day. A group of agitators threw bottles at the Prime Minister in an effort to make him feel unwelcome at the ceremony. Trudeau was filmed refusing to take cover or leave the grandstand, saying that he was a Québécois and would not be intimidated by a drunken mob. The scene was broadcast on Télévision de Radio-Canada&#x27;s and CBC&#x27;s evening news. Many saw it as an open act of courage, and the Prime Minister&#x27;s defiance impressed the electorate and contributed to his Liberal Party winning a significant majority the next day.

During the French-language network SRC&#x27;s televised coverage of the 1969 Montreal parade, filmmakers Bernard Gosselin and Pierre Perrault were asked to withdraw from the airwaves after nationalist and sarcastic comments. At one point they suggested the creation of a Ministry of Boastfulness and a High Commissioner of kvetching. There was a riot and the Saint-Jean-Baptiste icon was destroyed. This led to the interruption of the parade, which did not take place the next year.

In June 2009, Quebec bands Lake of Stew and Bloodshot Bill, whose members are bilingual anglophone Quebecers, were added to the program of a local celebration in Montreal called &quot;L&#x27;Autre St-Jean&quot; (&quot;The Other St-Jean&quot;). When it became known that they would be performing their songs in English, there were several complaints and later the musicians were barred from the celebrations. The Société Saint-Jean-Baptiste President, Mario Beaulieu, defended the decision to cancel these musicians&#x27; performances, by stating that the official language of the province of Quebec is French. However, after public outrage from both the anglophone and francophone communities, these two bands were returned to the program when it was clarified that the bands were free to sing songs in English as well as French.

By government regulation, however, the St-Jean program must be conducted in French (even by such internationally and nationally famous anglophone artists such as Martha Wainwright and Patrick Watson).

The festival has attempted to be more inclusive, as groups have sung in Creole and for the 2008 celebrations, Samian, &quot;the world&#x27;s first aboriginal Algonquin language rapper&quot;, sang at Montreal&#x27;s celebration.

The Montreal Metro attempts to symbolize the inclusive nature of the celebration through the motto it displays on information screens on stations and on-board trains on Saint-Jean-Baptiste day: &quot;Bonne Saint-Jean-Baptiste à tous et à toutes avec surtout ce sentiment de se sentir membre à part entière de cette communauté québécoise diverse et fière!&quot; (English: &quot;Happy Saint-Jean-Baptiste to one and all and especially the feeling of being an integral part of this diverse and proud Quebec community!&quot;).

In 2017, there was a controversy at the Fête nationale parade when a float featuring white performers was performing a popular Québécois anthem, and pushed by several black youths dressed in beige. Spectators interpreted the sight as racist, and symbolic of slavery.

==Notes==
==References==

;In English
* Suzanne Thomas: Saint-Jean-Baptiste celebrations, in &quot;The Canadian Encyclopedia&quot;, 2013
* Gouvernement du Québec. &quot;National Holiday Act&quot;, in &quot;CanLII&quot;, Federation of Law Societies of Canada, updated to May 1, 2008
* Gouvernement du Québec. &quot;The National Holiday &quot;, in the site of the &quot;Commission des normes du travail&quot;, June 17, 2008
* Le Moine, James MacPherson, &quot;Origin of the festival of Saint-Jean-Baptiste ...&quot;, Québec: Morning Chronicle Office, 1880 (online)
;In French
* Joly, Diane. &quot;Les processions de la Saint-Jean-Baptiste à Montréal&quot;, in &quot;Encyclopédie du patrimoine culturel de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, July 21, 2008
* RDAQ. &quot;La Saint-Jean-Baptiste&quot;, in the site of the &quot;Réseau des services d&#x27;archives du Québec&quot;, 2001
* Prémont, Donald. &quot;24 juin 1834 – Le premier banquet de la Saint-Jean-Baptiste&quot;, in Les Patriotes de 1837@1838, March 10, 2000
* Nadeau, Claude, &quot;Histoire de la fête nationale des Québécois : la Saint-Jean Baptiste &quot;, in Claudenadeau.net, 1998 (her personal Web site)
* Bizier, Hélène-Andrée and Paulette, Claude (1997). &quot;Fleur de lys, d&#x27;hier à aujourd&#x27;hui&quot;, Montréal: Édition Art Global, 158 p. ()
* Rumilly, Robert (1975). &quot;Histoire de la Société Saint-Jean-Baptiste de Montréal, des Patriotes au fleurdelysé, 1834–1948&quot;, Montréal: Éditions de l&#x27;Aurore, 564 p. ()
* Vaugeois, Denis (1978). &quot;La Saint-Jean, fête de la fierté&quot;, in &quot;Forces&quot;, XLIII, 2nd quarter, 1978
* SSJBM (1926). &quot;Processions de la Saint-Jean-Baptiste en 1924 et 1925; [...]&quot;, Montréal: L. Beauchemin, 315 p. (online)
* SSJBM (1904). &quot;70ème anniversaire de l&#x27;Association nationale St-Jean-Baptiste, Montréal, 1834–1904&quot;, Montréal: Société Saint-Jean-Baptiste, 66 p. (online)
* SSJBQ (1902). &quot;Programme des fêtes du soixantenaire de la Société Saint-Jean-Baptiste de Québec, 1842–1902 : fête nationale des Candiens-français, lundi, 23 juin 1902&quot;, Québec: Impr. Darveau, J. Baeuchamp, 16 p. (online)
* SSJBM (1903). &quot;Souvenir patriotique de la St-Jean-Baptiste, 1903 : dédié aux familles canadiennes&quot;, Montréal: Association Saint-Jean-Baptiste de Montréal, 44 p. (online)
* SSJBM (1901). &quot;Souvenir de la fête de la St-Jean-Baptiste, 1901&quot;, Montréal: Association Saint-Jean-Baptiste de Montréal, 32 p. (online)
* Chouinard, H.-J.-J.-B. (1890). &quot;Fête nationale des Canadiens-français célébrée à Québec, 1881–1889&quot;, Québec: L&#x27;Imprimerie Belleau &amp; cie éditeurs, 537 p. (online)
* SSJBM (1884). &quot;Souvenir de la St-Jean-Baptiste à Montréal, 1884&quot;, Montréal: Canada Railway News Co., 48 p. (online)
* Chouinard, H.-J.-J.-B. (1881). &quot;Fête nationale des Canadiens français célébrée à Québec en 1880&quot;, Québec: L&#x27;Imprimerie A. Coté &amp; cie éditeurs, 1881, 632 p. (online)

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="0" end="23" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="132" end="149" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="153" end="159" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="189" end="195" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="233" end="242" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870479" start="250" end="284" title="Nativity of Saint John the Baptist" label="Nativity of Saint John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="499" end="505" title="Canada, New France" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q923974" start="776" end="804" title="Jesuit Relations" label="Jesuit &amp;quot;Relations&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="835" end="855" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="931" end="943" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870479" start="968" end="1000" title="nativity of St. John the Baptist" label="nativity of St. John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210722" start="1095" end="1105" title="La Minerve" label="La Minerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266045" start="1113" end="1128" title="Ludger Duvernay" label="Ludger Duvernay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487605" start="1180" end="1207" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="1312" end="1334" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="1359" end="1373" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="1478" end="1487" title="Canadiens" label="Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q669955" start="1531" end="1553" title="George-Étienne Cartier" label="George-Étienne Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593665" start="1567" end="1597" title="Ô Canada! mon pays, mes amours" label="Ô Canada! mon pays, mes amours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="1674" end="1685" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388245" start="1691" end="1702" title="English-speaking Quebecker" label="anglophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1706" end="1714" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328711" start="1770" end="1785" title="Windsor Station (Montreal)" label="Windsor Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="1832" end="1844" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818696" start="1969" end="1991" title="Ninety-Two Resolutions" label="Ninety-Two Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466441" start="2384" end="2406" title="Lower Canada Rebellion" label="Lower Canada Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487605" start="2739" end="2766" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="2996" end="3005" title="Midsummer" label="Midsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="3497" end="3508" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q93359" start="3547" end="3555" title="O Canada" label="Ô Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027051" start="3565" end="3580" title="Calixa Lavallée" label="Calixa Lavallée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824752" start="3632" end="3655" title="Adolphe-Basile Routhier" label="Adolphe-Basile Routhier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375090" start="3834" end="3844" title="Royal tours of Canada" label="royal tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="3946" end="3952" title="Pius X" label="Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="3964" end="3984" title="St. John the Baptist" label="St. John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="3992" end="4004" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870479" start="4258" end="4281" title="Nativity of St. John the Baptist" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q901597" start="4328" end="4352" title="Public holidays in Canada" label="statutory public holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="4428" end="4444" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="4448" end="4467" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256679" start="4468" end="4483" title="Hugues Lapointe" label="Hugues Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="4502" end="4509" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q381007" start="4510" end="4523" title="René Lévesque" label="René Lévesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q941842" start="4924" end="4975" title="Mouvement national des Québécoises et des Québécois" label="Mouvement national des Québécoises et des Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="5592" end="5606" title="New Democratic Party (Canada)" label="New Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977497" start="5610" end="5625" title="Claude Gravelle" label="Claude Gravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="5639" end="5665" title="private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private member&amp;#x27;s bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="5673" end="5689" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q239514" start="5834" end="5850" title="Quiet Revolution" label="Quiet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="6003" end="6013" title="separatism" label="separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="6016" end="6032" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q974089" start="6033" end="6047" title="Georges Vanier" label="Georges Vanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="6057" end="6064" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="6139" end="6160" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec sovereigntists"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="6164" end="6172" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="6452" end="6466" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q245507" start="6762" end="6771" title="Québécois people" label="Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q986985" start="6846" end="6872" title="Télévision de Radio-Canada" label="Télévision de Radio-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="6884" end="6887" title="CBC Television" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="7035" end="7048" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q986985" start="7130" end="7133" title="Ici Radio-Canada Télé" label="SRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897991" start="7200" end="7216" title="Bernard Gosselin" label="Bernard Gosselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386563" start="7221" end="7236" title="Pierre Perrault" label="Pierre Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663273" start="7378" end="7383" title="Boast" label="Boast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7418" end="7424" title="List of English words of Yiddish origin#Kvetch" label="kvetch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7606" end="7618" title="Lake of Stew" label="Lake of Stew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7623" end="7637" title="Bloodshot Bill" label="Bloodshot Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174697" start="8030" end="8044" title="Mario Beaulieu" label="Mario Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="8134" end="8151" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q236613" start="8572" end="8589" title="Martha Wainwright" label="Martha Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q728641" start="8594" end="8608" title="Patrick Watson (musician)" label="Patrick Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470812" start="8722" end="8728" title="Samian (rapper)" label="Samian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28092" start="8770" end="8788" title="Algonquin language" label="Algonquin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="8845" end="8859" title="Montreal Metro" label="Montreal Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161239" start="10057" end="10083" title="James MacPherson Le Moine" label="Le Moine, James MacPherson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10801" end="10822" title="Hélène-Andrée Bizier" label="Bizier, Hélène-Andrée"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10827" end="10843" title="Claude Paulette" label="Paulette, Claude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10952" end="10967" title="Robert Rumilly" label="Rumilly, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022962" start="11134" end="11149" title="Denis Vaugeois" label="Vaugeois, Denis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74280" wikidata="Q362306" url="?curid=74280" title="Aggregation">
<text>Aggregation may refer to:

==Business and economics==
* Aggregation problem (economics)
* Purchasing aggregation, the joining of multiple purchasers in a group purchasing organization to increase their buying power
* Community Choice Aggregation, the joining of geographically contiguous communities to bypass a conventional energy utility monopoly and seek a greener energy service

==Computer science and telecommunication==
* Aggregate function, a type of function in data processing
* Aggregation, a form of object composition in object-oriented programming
* Link aggregation, using multiple Ethernet network cables/ports in parallel to increase link speed
* Packet aggregation, joining multiple data packets for transmission as a single unit to increase network efficiency
* Route aggregation, the process of forming a supernet in computer networking
* Aggregation, a process by which Australian country television markets were combined in the late 1980s and 1990s; see Regional television in Australia

==Natural sciences and statistics==
* Aggregation (ethology), any gathering of organisms
* Aggregation of soil granules to form soil structure
* Particle aggregation, direct mutual attraction between particles (atoms or molecules) via van der Waals forces or chemical bonding
* The accumulation of platelets to the site of a wound to form a platelet plug or a thrombus
* Flocculation, a process where a solute comes out of solution in the form of floccules or flakes
* Overdispersion or statistical aggregation, where the variance of a distribution is higher than which we expect.
* Aggregation pheromone
* Protein aggregation, the aggregation of mis-folded proteins

==Other uses==
* Aggregation (linguistics), a merging of syntactic constituents
* &quot;Aggregation&quot; (magazine), a 2010–2012 Canadian online magazine

== See also ==
* Aggregate (disambiguation)
* Aggregator (disambiguation), a web site or computer software that aggregates syndicated web content
* Agrégation, in French-speaking countries, higher-level competitive examinations for teachers and professors
* :Category:Aggregation-based digital libraries, digital libraries that are primarily based on aggregation or harvesting of other digital libraries or repositories
* Composition (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362306" start="0" end="11" title="Aggregation" label="Aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692266" start="56" end="75" title="Aggregation problem" label="Aggregation problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q844526" start="154" end="183" title="group purchasing organization" label="group purchasing organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154673" start="217" end="245" title="Community Choice Aggregation" label="Community Choice Aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115063" start="429" end="447" title="Aggregate function" label="Aggregate function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="512" end="530" title="Object composition#Aggregation" label="object composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q352072" start="564" end="580" title="Link aggregation" label="Link aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122999" start="664" end="682" title="Packet aggregation" label="Packet aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711430" start="825" end="833" title="supernet" label="supernet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="976" end="1008" title="Regional television in Australia#Aggregation" label="Regional television in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002092" start="1048" end="1070" title="Aggregation (ethology)" label="Aggregation (ethology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q889539" start="1138" end="1152" title="soil structure" label="soil structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q393340" start="1155" end="1175" title="Particle aggregation" label="Particle aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="1308" end="1316" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q900689" start="1381" end="1393" title="Flocculation" label="Flocculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113620" start="1479" end="1493" title="Overdispersion" label="Overdispersion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1593" end="1614" title="Pheromone#Aggregation" label="Aggregation pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251455" start="1617" end="1636" title="Protein aggregation" label="Protein aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692263" start="1695" end="1720" title="Aggregation (linguistics)" label="Aggregation (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822700" start="1760" end="1794" title="Aggregation (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Aggregation&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q235025" start="1851" end="1877" title="Aggregate (disambiguation)" label="Aggregate (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057063" start="1880" end="1907" title="Aggregator (disambiguation)" label="Aggregator (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q397610" start="1982" end="1992" title="Agrégation" label="Agrégation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2092" end="2137" title=":Category:Aggregation-based digital libraries" label=":Category:Aggregation-based digital libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q226952" start="2256" end="2284" title="Composition (disambiguation)" label="Composition (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74285" wikidata="Q2335892" url="?curid=74285" title="Steer">
<text>Steer(s) or steering may refer to:

== Animals ==
* Steer or bullock, castrated male cattle
* Ox, a bovine (usually a steer) used as a draft animal

== People ==

* Steer (surname)
* Steers (surname)

== Places ==
* Steer Creek (West Virginia), a tributary of the Little Kanawha River in central West Virginia in the United States
* Steer Island, a former bar island in Summers County, West Virginia
* Steer Stadium, a baseball park located in Graham, Texas

== Other uses ==
* Steering, mechanism used to turn a vehicle
* &quot;Steer&quot; (song), a 2007 song by Missy Higgins
* Steers, South African fast food chain
* STEER, part of the Energy policy of the European Union
* STEER, a variant of PEST analysis, a technique used in business analysis

== See also ==
* Steers (disambiguation)
*Steerage (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2335892" start="0" end="5" title="Steer" label="Steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335892" start="6" end="7" title="Steer" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335892" start="12" end="20" title="Steer" label="steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="52" end="57" title="Steer (cattle)" label="Steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="94" end="96" title="Ox" label="Ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883821" start="165" end="180" title="Steer (surname)" label="Steer (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81286022" start="183" end="199" title="Steers (surname)" label="Steers (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442636" start="216" end="243" title="Steer Creek (West Virginia)" label="Steer Creek (West Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605945" start="333" end="345" title="Steer Island" label="Steer Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605946" start="402" end="415" title="Steer Stadium" label="Steer Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18891017" start="478" end="486" title="Steering" label="Steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605940" start="523" end="547" title="Steer (song)" label="&amp;quot;Steer&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056765" start="580" end="586" title="Steers (restaurant)" label="Steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q535437" start="639" end="674" title="Energy policy of the European Union" label="Energy policy of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q568174" start="697" end="710" title="PEST analysis" label="PEST analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19929460" start="768" end="791" title="Steers (disambiguation)" label="Steers (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13565756" start="793" end="818" title="Steerage (disambiguation)" label="Steerage (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74286" wikidata="Q450100" url="?curid=74286" title="Ashland, Oregon">
<text>Ashland is a city in Jackson County, Oregon, United States. It lies along Interstate 5 approximately 16 miles (26 km) north of the California border and near the south end of the Rogue Valley. The city&#x27;s population was 21,360 at the 2020 census.

The city is the home of Southern Oregon University (SOU) and the Oregon Shakespeare Festival (OSF). These are important to Ashland&#x27;s economy, which also depends on restaurants, galleries, and retail stores that cater to tourists. Lithia Park along Ashland Creek, historic buildings, and a paved intercity bike trail provide additional visitor attractions.

Ashland, originally called &quot;Ashland Mills&quot;, was named after Ashland County, Ohio, the original home of founder Abel Helman, and secondarily for Ashland, Kentucky, where other founders had family connections. Ashland has a council-manager government assisted by citizen committees. Historically, its liberal politics have differed, often sharply, with much of the rest of southwest Oregon.

==History==
Prior to the arrival of White settlers in mid-19th century, the Shasta people lived in the valley along Ashland Creek approximately where today&#x27;s city is located. Early Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company hunters and trappers following the Siskiyou Trail passed through the site in the 1820s. In the late 1840s, mainly American settlers following the Applegate Trail began passing through the area. By the early 1850s, the Donation Land Claim Act brought many to the Rogue Valley and into conflict with its native people. These often violent clashes, known ultimately as the Rogue River Wars, continued until 1856.
In 1851, gold was discovered at Rich Gulch, a tributary of Jackson Creek, and a tent city grew on its banks, today&#x27;s Jacksonville. Settlers arrived in the Ashland area in January 1852, including Robert B. Hargadine, Sylvester Pease, Abel D. Helman, Eber Emery, and others. Helman and Hargadine filed the first donation land claims in Ashland. Helman and Emery built a sawmill along what was then called Mill Creek to turn timber into lumber for settlers. In 1854, they and another settler, M. B. Morris, built a second mill, Ashland Flouring Mills, to grind local wheat into flour. The community around the mill became known as &quot;Ashland Mills&quot;. A post office was established in Ashland Mills in 1855 with Helman as postmaster.

During the 1860s and 1870s the community grew, establishing a school, churches, businesses and a large employer, Ashland Woolen Mills, which produced clothing and blankets from local wool. In 1871, the Post Office dropped &quot;Mills&quot; from Ashland&#x27;s name. In 1872 Reverend J. H. Skidmore opened a college, Ashland Academy, a predecessor of Southern Oregon University.
In 1887, Portland, Oregon, and San Francisco, California, were joined by rail at Ashland. Until 1926, when most rail service began taking a different route (east through Klamath Falls to avoid the steep grade through the Siskiyou Mountains), Ashland thrived on rail trade of local products, including pears, peaches, and apples.

In 1908, the Women&#x27;s Civic Improvement Club petitioned for the creation of community space along Ashland Creek, which became Ashland Canyon Park. The discovery of lithia water near Emigrant Lake around the same time led to a plan to establish a mineral spa at the park. Voters approved bonds to pay for the project, which included piping the mineral water from its source to Ashland. The town engaged John McLaren, landscape architect of San Francisco&#x27;s Golden Gate Park, to design the park, renamed Lithia Springs Park, later shortened to Lithia Park. Although the park was popular, the mineral spa plans proved too expensive for local taxpayers and were abandoned in 1916. Meanwhile, entrepreneurs took to bottling and selling mineral waters from the area&#x27;s springs.

During the Fourth of July celebration in 1935, Angus L. Bowmer arranged the first performances of what would become the Oregon Shakespeare Festival. The festival has grown since then, and has become an award-winning and internationally known regional theater company.

Ashland was a sundown town at least until World War II.

Many of Ashland&#x27;s historic buildings have been preserved and restored. The city has 59 individual structures and four historic districts (Downtown District, Siskiyou-Hargadine District, Railroad District, Skidmore Academy District) on the National Register of Historic Places. The structures include the Enders Building (home of the Columbia Hotel), which from 1910 to 1928 contained the largest mercantile establishment between Sacramento and Portland. Some of Ashland&#x27;s houses built before 1900 are: the Orlando Coolidge House (1875), the Isaac Woolen House (1876), the W. H. Atkinson House (1880), the John McCall House (1883), the Nils Ahlstrom House (1888), the H. B. Carter House (1888), and the Colonel William H. Silsby House (1896). The E. V. Carter House (built in 1909) is in a remarkably good state of preservation.

==Geography==

Ashland is at above sea level in the foothills of the Siskiyou and Cascade ranges, about north of the California border on Interstate 5 (I-5). About south of Ashland and north of the California border is Siskiyou Summit, which at is the highest point on I-5. Ashland is about southeast of Medford and south of Portland. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of about , all land.

Ashland Creek and its tributaries begin on the flanks of Mount Ashland, at above sea level in the Siskiyou Mountains south of the city. Upstream (south) of the city boundary, these streams flow mainly through the Rogue River–Siskiyou National Forest. The creek flows through the city to meet Bear Creek, which roughly parallels I-5 along the east side of Ashland. Bear Creek, one of many streams in the Rogue Valley, flows generally northwest to join the Rogue River near Gold Hill, and from there the river flows generally west to its mouth on the Pacific Ocean.

Oregon Route 99, running roughly parallel to I-5, passes through downtown Ashland. Oregon Route 66 enters Ashland from the east and intersects Route 99 near the city center. Route 66 leads east to Klamath Falls.

===Climate===
Ashland lies within Oregon&#x27;s southwest interior climate zone, in which all but the higher-elevation sites are in the rain shadow of the Oregon Coast Range to the west. The largest urban areas in this zone in addition to Ashland are Medford and Grants Pass in the Rogue Valley, and Roseburg in the Umpqua River Valley further north. Although the mountain peaks in this zone receive up to of precipitation a year, the urban areas and the valleys in which they lie generally get or less. This valley climate is particularly good for growing fruit, especially pears, and for producing other crops and farm goods such as hay, grain, poultry, and beef.

Cloud cover in nearby Medford varies from an average of 21 percent in July to 86 percent in December. On average, precipitation falls in Ashland on 114 days each year and totals about . The average annual snowfall is only . The average relative humidity, measured at 4 p.m. daily, is 47 percent in Medford, varying from 26 percent in July to 76 percent in December. According to the Köppen climate classification system, Ashland has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (&quot;Csb&quot;).

On average, Ashland tends to be 2-3 °F cooler than Medford due to being 600 feet higher in elevation. The coolest month is December, with an average high temperature of , and the warmest month is July, with an average high of about . The highest temperature ever recorded in Ashland was , observed in August 1981, and the record low of occurred in December 1972. The wettest &quot;rain year&quot; has been from July 1926 to June 1927 with and the driest from July 1954 to June 1955 with only . The wettest month on record has been December 1964 with , but the only other months with over have been December 1996 with , November 1903 with and November 1998 with .

Ashland&#x27;s coldest recorded daytime temperature was in December 1972. During the full year, the coldest day of the year averages around or just above freezing. Warm summer nights are rare, with the record of being set as far back as 1910. The mean for the warmest summer night between 1991 and 2020 was at a mild .

==Demographics==
At the census of 2010, there were 20,078 people, 9,409 households, and 4,542 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 10,455 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was about 90% White, 2% Asian, 1% African American, 1% Native American, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 1.4% from other races, and 4% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were about 5% of the population.

There were 9,409 households, out of which about 21% had children under the age of 18 living with them. About 34% were married couples living together; 10% had a female householder with no husband present, about 4% had a male householder with no wife present, and about 52% were non-families. About 38% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.03 and the average family size was 2.63.

The median age in the city was 42.9 years. About 16% of residents were under the age of 18, and about 16% were between the ages of 18 and 24. Rounded to the nearest whole number, 21% were from 25 to 44 years old; 30% were from 45 to 64; and 18% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was about 46% male and 54% female.

In 2010, the median income for a household in the city was $41,334, and the median income for a family was $58,409. Males had a median income of $50,368 versus $34,202 for females. The per capita income for the city was $28,941. About 21% of the population and 13% of families had incomes below the poverty line. Out of the total population, about 30% of those under the age of 18 and 3.5% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

By 2020, the population had risen to 21,360. The per capita income had risen to about $45,000 and the median household income to $64,000. Of the total population, 96% of Ashland residents 25 and older had graduated from high school while 62% had a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher.

==Government==
Ashland has a council-manager government since a Charter Amendment was passed by the voters in a Special Election in May 2020, (changing the form of government from Mayor/Administrator). It consists of a city manager, a mayor, and six council members. The mayor and council members are elected by the city&#x27;s voters to serve staggered four-year terms.

Julie Akins, after serving a partial term as a city councilor, was elected as mayor in 2020. On January 23, 2023, she announced her resignation effective January 27. On February 7, the council unanimously elected Tonya Graham to serve the remainder of Akins&#x27; term.

Pam Marsh, a Democrat from Ashland, represents Ashland and all of Oregon House District 5 in the state legislature. As part of Oregon Senate District 3, Ashland is represented by Democrat Jeff Golden. At the federal level, Cliff Bentz, a Republican, represents Ashland as part of Oregon&#x27;s 2nd congressional district in the United States House of Representatives. Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley, both Democrats, serve the state of Oregon in the United States Senate.

Historically, Ashland has been a political outlier in southwest Oregon. In the presidential election of 1860, Ashland favored Abraham Lincoln while its neighbors strongly preferred pro-slavery candidates. In the early 1900s, Ashland voters supported women&#x27;s suffrage and prohibition, generally out of step with the rest of the region. In more recent elections, Ashland has supported tax levies and environmental regulations opposed by voters elsewhere in Jackson and nearby counties. Critics sometimes refer to the city as the &quot;People&#x27;s Republic of Ashland&quot;.

==Economy==
Income from tourism is important to Ashland&#x27;s economy. A large number of restaurants, galleries, and retail stores cater to thousands of visitors who attend plays each year at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival. In 2011, the festival sold more than 390,000 tickets to its theater productions.

The town&#x27;s largest employer is Southern Oregon University (SOU), which has a faculty and staff of more than 750. In addition to the Oregon Shakespeare Festival and the university, health-service providers make significant contributions to the economy. Businesses related to outdoor recreation, transportation, technology, and light manufacturing are also important. In 2010, the Shakespeare Festival employed about 500 people, the hospital about 400, the public schools about 300, and the City of Ashland about 250. The Bathroom Readers&#x27; Press, which produces the Uncle John&#x27;s Bathroom Reader books, is based in Ashland and San Diego. Brammo, specializing in battery-electric motorcycles, was based in Ashland but moved to Talent.

==Arts and culture==
The Oregon Shakespeare Festival has grown from a summer outdoor series in the 1930s to a season that stretches from February to October, incorporating Shakespearean and non-Shakespearean plays at three theaters. The OSF has become the largest regional repertory theater in the United States.

The Oregon Cabaret Theater features musicals and comedy throughout the year. Opened in 1986, the dinner theater occupies a former First Baptist Church built in Mission Revival style. The Ashland Independent Film Festival, which shows international and domestic films of almost every genre, takes place each April in the Varsity Theatre downtown. About 90 films are shown during the five days of the festival. In 2009, Ashland was the setting for the film adaptation of Neil Gaiman&#x27;s &quot;Coraline&quot;.

The Oregon Center for the Arts at Southern Oregon University focuses on academic programs including creative arts (art, emerging media and creative writing), music, and theater. Affiliated with the center is the Schneider Museum of Art, which has rotation exhibitions of works featuring professional contemporary artists. Also affiliated with the center are chamber music concerts, a Shakespeare institute, a piano series, and other art-related events.

The annual Ashland New Plays Festival (ANPF) is a nonprofit organization that encourages playwrights to develop new work through public readings. Each year, the ANPF holds an international competition that winnows hundreds of submissions to four plays that are read to live audiences by professional actors during a five-day festival in October.

===Museums and other points of interest===
The National Fish and Wildlife Forensics Laboratory in Ashland is the world&#x27;s only laboratory dedicated to solving crimes against wildlife. Using forensic science, experts at the laboratory help wildlife officers to investigate possible crimes against animals and to establish links between victims and suspects in cases that go to court. The laboratory has assisted the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and foreign agencies concerned with the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).

The Ashland City Band (ACB) was organized in the late 19th century as the Ashland Brass Band. The band used an octagonal gazebo-style bandstand in Lithia Park until the Butler Memorial Band Shell was built in Lithia Park in 1946. The ACB gives public concerts there each summer between June and August.

==Parks==

Lithia Park is a park, including on the National Register of Historic Places, that begins near the downtown shopping area and extends upstream along Ashland Creek near the center of the city. It includes two ponds, a Japanese garden, tennis courts, two public greens, a bandshell (outdoor stage) and miles of hiking trails. The name &quot;Lithia&quot; comes from natural mineral water found in the Ashland area. It has a strong mineral taste and slight effervescence, and the lithia water fountains found on the town plaza are frequently tasted by unsuspecting tourists (often at the behest of residents or frequent visitors who use the fountains as a cheap, humorous Ashland initiation rite).

A hiking and biking path, the Bear Creek Greenway, begins in Ashland near the intersection of West Nevada Street with Helman Street, close to the confluence of Ashland Creek (which flows through Lithia Park). The path follows Bear Creek between Ashland and Central Point and passes through Talent, Phoenix, and Medford.

Calle Guanajuato is a small park bordering Ashland Creek, with several restaurants offering outdoor dining.
==Education==
Southern Oregon University, a public co-ed four-year university founded in 1926, offers courses of study toward degrees in the liberal arts, science, business, and education. With an enrollment of about 4,400 undergraduates as of Fall 2020, this urban university also offers graduate-level programs on its campus.

In 2020–21, about 59 percent of the university&#x27;s students were women, and about 38 percent were men, while 3 percent were listed as other/unknown. The student–faculty ratio in 2020–21 was 19 to 1. Full-time undergraduate tuition in 2020–21 was about $11,000 per year for Oregon residents and $28,000 for non-residents.

The Oregon Extension is a college educational extension program located near Ashland in the Cascade–Siskiyou National Monument.

The Ashland School District oversees three elementary schools, three optional alternative programs for children in kindergarten through eighth grade; one middle school, and Ashland High School.

==Media==

The &quot;Mail Tribune&quot;, a newspaper based in Medford that published print editions several days a week, served Ashland until it ceased operations on January 13, 2023. The newspaper also owned the &quot;Ashland Daily Tidings&quot;, which ran Monday through Saturday until 2019. A non-profit news organization, &quot;Ashland.news&quot;, was founded in 2022 by a former &quot;Daily Tidings&quot; editor.

Fifteen radio stations operate in the region around Ashland, including Jefferson Public Radio and KSKQ, an independent non-profit broadcasting at 89.5 FM. A former student-run radio station with the call letters KSOC and the nickname &quot;Radio Free Ashland&quot; shut down in February 2013 after 14 years of broadcasting. Rogue Valley Community Television, based at Southern Oregon University, serves Jackson and Josephine counties. Ashland has no commercial television stations, but nearby Medford has seven.

==Infrastructure and public services==
The Asante Ashland Community Hospital is a general medical and surgical hospital that is part of the Asante health network based in Medford. As of 2015, it has 49 inpatient beds.
The Ashland Public Library building was expanded from the city&#x27;s original Carnegie library. In 2003, the historic Carnegie portion of the library was restored. In 2006, budget problems led to the closing in April 2007 of the Ashland Library and 14 others in Jackson County. The event, which lasted until October 2007, was the largest library closure in U.S. history. Although some of its services are handled by a private company, Library Systems and Services, the Ashland branch remains part of the Jackson County network of public libraries.

Rogue Valley Transportation District (RVTD) provides bus service to much of the city, with connections to Medford, Central Point, Talent, Phoenix, White City, and Jacksonville. In Medford, passengers can connect to other regional bus lines, including the Southwest POINT, a daily shuttle carrying passengers between Brookings and the Amtrak station in Klamath Falls. The Klamath Falls Amtrak Station serves the Coast Starlight long-haul passenger train on track owned by the Union Pacific Railroad. Ashland Municipal Airport, with a asphalt runway, offers general aviation services. Medford International Airport, from Ashland, also serves the city.

The City of Ashland moved to improve local broadband Internet access in the late 1990s by creating the Ashland Fiber Network (AFN) and building a fiber optic ring inside the city boundaries. However, by 2006 the city faced difficulties servicing AFN&#x27;s debt load, which was approaching $15.5 million. The city hired a new AFN director, Joe Franell, who suggested scrapping cable television service while retaining the more profitable high-speed Internet access. In October 2006, the cable television service was transferred to a local company, Ashland Home Net, while the City retained both the infrastructure and the wholesale Internet business.

==In popular culture==
* The Bakeshop Mystery series by Ellie Alexander, which began with the 2014 publication of &quot;Meet Your Baker&quot;, is set in Ashland. The heroine of the series owns an artisan bakeshop on the Plaza, and the novels often feature local landmarks and institutions such as Lithia Park, Oregon State University, and the Oregon Shakespeare Festival.
* &quot;Coraline&quot; is set in a fictionalized version of Ashland. The city was chosen due to its status as home of the Oregon Shakespeare Festival, as Miss Fink and Miss Forcible, two supporting characters in the film, are retired Shakespearean actresses.

==Sister cities==
Ashland has two sister cities:

* Guanajuato, Mexico
* Sviatohirsk, Ukraine

==Notable people==
*Harry Anderson (1952–2018), magician and TV actor
*Angelique Ashby (1975−), born in Ashland, California State Senator
*Les AuCoin (1942–), former congressman
*Tai Babilonia (1959–), champion pairs figure skater
*John Backus (1924–2007), computer scientist who created Fortran
*Dallen Bounds (1971–1999), serial killer
*Angus L. Bowmer (1904–1979), founder of the Oregon Shakespeare Festival
*Erskine Caldwell (1903–1987), author, never lived in Ashland, but is buried there
*Craig Chaquico (1954–), guitarist formerly with Jefferson Starship
*Gretchen Corbett (1947–), actress, debuted as Desdemona at the OSF
*Chad Cota (1971–), former National Football League player
*Catherine E. Coulson (1943–2015), stage and screen actress
*Alex Cox (1954–), film director
*Ann Curry (1956–), former anchor on &quot;The Today Show&quot;
*Ana Delfosse (1931–2017), Formula One mechanic and driver in Argentina; gas-station operator in Ashland
*Alice DiMicele (1965–), musician
*Jack Elam (1920–2003), actor
*Gordon Fee (1934–2022), American-Canadian theologian
*David Fincher (1962–), film director

*Gloria Greer (1908–1931), actress
*Johnny Gruelle (1880–1938), creator of Raggedy Ann and Raggedy Andy 
*Jeremy Guthrie (1979–), pitcher for the Kansas City Royals 
*Johnny Harris, journalist and youtuber
*Anthony Heald (1944–), television, film, and stage actor
*Abel Helman (1824–1910), town founder
*Frank C. High (1875–1966), Medal of Honor recipient for actions during the Philippine–American War
*Gary &quot;Chicken&quot; Hirsh (1940–2021), former drummer for Country Joe and the Fish
*Peter Hollens (1982–), independent a capella singer/songwriter
*Jean Houston (1937–), author, lecturer, known for her work in human potentials, Mystery School and Social Artistry
*Lawson Fusao Inada (1938–), Oregon Poet Laureate 2006–10, Professor Emeritus at Southern Oregon University
*Dean Ing (1931–2020), author
*Forrest Kline (1983–), musician
*Otto Klum (1892–1944), football coach
*Tonya Knight (1966–2023), bodybuilder, actress, model
*Hal Koerner (1976–), ultramarathon runner, two-time winner of the Western States Endurance Run
*Winona LaDuke (1959–), Native American activist and vice-presidential candidate for the Ralph Nader presidential campaign, 2000
*Leonard Levy (1923–2006), Pulitzer Prize-winning historian
*Rose Maddox (1925–1998), country-western musician
*Steve Mason (1949–2005), &quot;poet laureate&quot; of the Vietnam Veterans of America
*Vladimir Nabokov (1899–1977), author of &quot;Lolita&quot;

*Mark Parent (1961–), former baseball player and currently bench coach for the Chicago White Sox
*Alfred Peet (1920–2007), founder of Peet&#x27;s Coffee &amp; Tea
*Jim Perry (1933–2015), television personality
*Bill Rauch (1962–), American theater director; directed the Oregon Shakespeare Festival from 2007 to 2019
*Tucker Reed (1989–), blogger, author, journalist and activist
*Jeff Rense, talk-radio host
*Ron Rezek (1946–), industrial designer and inventor
*Sonny Sixkiller (1951–), former National Football League quarterback
*Jon Micah Sumrall (1980–), lead singer of Christian rock band Kutless
*Jerry Turner (1927–2004), stage designer and director
*Larry Wagner (1907–2002), arranger and composer for Paul Whiteman and the Casa Loma Orchestra
*Neale Donald Walsch (1943–), author of the &quot;Conversations with God&quot; series
*Henry Woronicz (1954–), actor and director
==References==
===Works cited===
* 

==External links==
* City of Ashland official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q450100" start="0" end="7" title="Ashland, Oregon" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q450159" start="21" end="43" title="Jackson County, Oregon" label="Jackson County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442449" start="74" end="86" title="Interstate 5 in Oregon" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="131" end="141" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q10825386" start="179" end="191" title="Rogue Valley" label="Rogue Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="238" end="249" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888661" start="276" end="302" title="Southern Oregon University" label="Southern Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101335" start="317" end="344" title="Oregon Shakespeare Festival" label="Oregon Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647883" start="487" end="498" title="Lithia Park" label="Lithia Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708747" start="505" end="518" title="Ashland Creek" label="Ashland Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q403544" start="684" end="704" title="Ashland County, Ohio" label="Ashland County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666573" start="735" end="746" title="Abel Helman" label="Abel Helman"/>
<link wikidata="Q725562" start="768" end="785" title="Ashland, Kentucky" label="Ashland, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="846" end="872" title="council-manager government" label="council-manager government"/>
<link wikidata="Q491693" start="1090" end="1103" title="Shasta people" label="Shasta people"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1200" end="1225" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772442" start="1261" end="1275" title="Siskiyou Trail" label="Siskiyou Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781342" start="1372" end="1387" title="Applegate Trail" label="Applegate Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295421" start="1444" end="1467" title="Donation Land Claim Act" label="Donation Land Claim Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q10825386" start="1488" end="1500" title="Rogue Valley" label="Rogue Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382989" start="1596" end="1612" title="Rogue River Wars" label="Rogue River Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q335307" start="1758" end="1770" title="Jacksonville, Oregon" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888661" start="2729" end="2755" title="Southern Oregon University" label="Southern Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="2766" end="2782" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2788" end="2813" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q846146" start="2927" end="2940" title="Klamath Falls, Oregon" label="Klamath Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q476913" start="2978" end="2996" title="Siskiyou Mountains" label="Siskiyou Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067578" start="3255" end="3267" title="lithia water" label="lithia water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046719" start="3337" end="3348" title="mineral spa" label="mineral spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248050" start="3493" end="3505" title="John McLaren (horticulturist)" label="John McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="3551" end="3567" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="3883" end="3897" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764150" start="3919" end="3934" title="Angus L. Bowmer" label="Angus L. Bowmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101335" start="3992" end="4019" title="Oregon Shakespeare Festival" label="Oregon Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298871" start="4155" end="4167" title="sundown town" label="sundown town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4442" end="4478" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510617" start="4536" end="4550" title="Columbia Hotel" label="Columbia Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="4632" end="4642" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895899" start="4843" end="4862" title="Nils Ahlstrom House" label="Nils Ahlstrom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q476913" start="5106" end="5114" title="Siskiyou Mountains" label="Siskiyou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="5119" end="5126" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442449" start="5175" end="5187" title="Interstate 5 in Oregon" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530874" start="5256" end="5271" title="Siskiyou Summit" label="Siskiyou Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q836663" start="5341" end="5348" title="Medford, Oregon" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5389" end="5416" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950357" start="5523" end="5536" title="Mount Ashland" label="Mount Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079138" start="5679" end="5715" title="Rogue River–Siskiyou National Forest" label="Rogue River–Siskiyou National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876379" start="5758" end="5768" title="Bear Creek (Rogue River)" label="Bear Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q10825386" start="5869" end="5881" title="Rogue Valley" label="Rogue Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848950" start="5921" end="5932" title="Rogue River (Oregon)" label="Rogue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109513" start="5938" end="5947" title="Gold Hill, Oregon" label="Gold Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="6015" end="6028" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494323" start="6031" end="6046" title="Oregon Route 99" label="Oregon Route 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494328" start="6114" end="6129" title="Oregon Route 66" label="Oregon Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q846146" start="6228" end="6241" title="Klamath Falls, Oregon" label="Klamath Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="6380" end="6391" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029517" start="6399" end="6417" title="Oregon Coast Range" label="Oregon Coast Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q143405" start="6507" end="6518" title="Grants Pass, Oregon" label="Grants Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q846170" start="6544" end="6552" title="Roseburg, Oregon" label="Roseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326803" start="6560" end="6579" title="Umpqua River" label="Umpqua River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7294" end="7323" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="7346" end="7379" title="Warm-summer Mediterranean" label="warm-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="8408" end="8414" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="8513" end="8531" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8641" end="8646" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8651" end="8656" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8661" end="8677" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8682" end="8697" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8704" end="8720" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8776" end="8784" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8788" end="8794" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="8959" end="8974" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="9861" end="9878" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="9975" end="9987" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="10437" end="10463" title="council-manager government" label="council-manager government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28363751" start="11051" end="11060" title="Pam Marsh" label="Pam Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043412" start="11117" end="11140" title="Oregon&amp;#x27;s 5th House district" label="Oregon House District 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101257" start="11148" end="11165" title="Oregon Legislative Assembly" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q48810803" start="11178" end="11202" title="Oregon&amp;#x27;s 3rd Senate district" label="Oregon Senate District 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173907" start="11239" end="11250" title="Jeff Golden" label="Jeff Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132536" start="11274" end="11285" title="Cliff Bentz" label="Cliff Bentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11289" end="11299" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002568" start="11331" end="11371" title="Oregon&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Oregon&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11379" end="11417" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q529344" start="11419" end="11428" title="Ron Wyden" label="Ron Wyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368405" start="11433" end="11445" title="Jeff Merkley" label="Jeff Merkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="11452" end="11461" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="11496" end="11516" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="11645" end="11660" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="11769" end="11790" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="11795" end="11806" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882756" start="12981" end="13014" title="Uncle John&amp;#x27;s Bathroom Reader" label="Uncle John&amp;#x27;s Bathroom Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956201" start="13057" end="13063" title="Brammo" label="Brammo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106770" start="13145" end="13151" title="Talent, Oregon" label="Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101335" start="13179" end="13206" title="Oregon Shakespeare Festival" label="Oregon Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="13326" end="13337" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="13427" end="13444" title="repertory theater" label="repertory theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700522" start="13628" end="13643" title="Mission Revival architecture" label="Mission Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805253" start="13655" end="13688" title="Ashland Independent Film Festival" label="Ashland Independent Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="13918" end="13933" title="Coraline (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="13937" end="13948" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q475125" start="13962" end="13970" title="Coraline" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805260" start="14444" end="14470" title="Ashland New Plays Festival" label="Ashland New Plays Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892554" start="14827" end="14874" title="National Fish and Wildlife Forensics Laboratory" label="National Fish and Wildlife Forensics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="14974" end="14990" title="forensic science" label="forensic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="15199" end="15241" title="International Criminal Police Organization" label="International Criminal Police Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="15293" end="15348" title="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species" label="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835" start="15891" end="15906" title="Japanese garden" label="Japanese garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q780777" start="15944" end="15953" title="bandshell" label="bandshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="15983" end="15989" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067578" start="16150" end="16162" title="lithia water" label="lithia water"/>
<link wikidata="Q64015963" start="16163" end="16172" title="Lithia Fountain" label="fountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="16350" end="16365" title="initiation rite" label="initiation rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876393" start="16399" end="16418" title="Bear Creek Greenway" label="Bear Creek Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="16515" end="16525" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q588999" start="16626" end="16639" title="Central Point, Oregon" label="Central Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922043" start="16667" end="16674" title="Phoenix, Oregon" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476595" start="16690" end="16706" title="Calle Guanajuato" label="Calle Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q124031931" start="17452" end="17472" title="The Oregon Extension" label="The Oregon Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q942676" start="17544" end="17578" title="Cascade–Siskiyou National Monument" label="Cascade–Siskiyou National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805271" start="17585" end="17608" title="Ashland School District (Oregon)" label="Ashland School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805251" start="17754" end="17773" title="Ashland High School (Oregon)" label="Ashland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735705" start="17797" end="17809" title="Mail Tribune" label="Mail Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805242" start="17995" end="18016" title="Ashland Daily Tidings" label="Ashland Daily Tidings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175573" start="18266" end="18288" title="Jefferson Public Radio" label="Jefferson Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337838" start="18293" end="18297" title="KSKQ" label="KSKQ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18519" end="18552" title="Rogue Valley Community Television" label="Rogue Valley Community Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q484391" start="18610" end="18619" title="Josephine County, Oregon" label="Josephine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805235" start="18751" end="18784" title="Ashland Community Hospital (Oregon)" label="Asante Ashland Community Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q836663" start="18879" end="18886" title="Medford, Oregon" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043939" start="19005" end="19021" title="Carnegie library" label="Carnegie library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359553" start="19476" end="19512" title="Rogue Valley Transportation District" label="Rogue Valley Transportation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877418" start="19731" end="19746" title="Public Oregon Intercity Transit" label="Southwest POINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630187" start="19792" end="19801" title="Brookings, Oregon" label="Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19810" end="19816" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419635" start="19847" end="19875" title="Klamath Falls (Amtrak station)" label="Klamath Falls Amtrak Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q225313" start="19887" end="19902" title="Coast Starlight" label="Coast Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="19951" end="19973" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900686" start="19975" end="20000" title="Ashland Municipal Airport" label="Ashland Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="20032" end="20048" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359556" start="20059" end="20088" title="Rogue Valley International–Medford Airport" label="Medford International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="20273" end="20284" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="21159" end="21167" title="Coraline (film)" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="21445" end="21458" title="sister cities" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q61306" start="21463" end="21473" title="Guanajuato City" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020087" start="21484" end="21495" title="Sviatohirsk" label="Sviatohirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395573" start="21526" end="21540" title="Harry Anderson" label="Harry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q115789898" start="21577" end="21592" title="Angelique Ashby" label="Angelique Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="21619" end="21643" title="California State Senator" label="California State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798732" start="21645" end="21655" title="Les AuCoin" label="Les AuCoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="21672" end="21683" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q458773" start="21685" end="21698" title="Tai Babilonia" label="Tai Babilonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q92746" start="21738" end="21749" title="John Backus" label="John Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="21794" end="21801" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502292" start="21803" end="21816" title="Dallen Bounds" label="Dallen Bounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764150" start="21845" end="21860" title="Angus L. Bowmer" label="Angus L. Bowmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101335" start="21889" end="21916" title="Oregon Shakespeare Festival" label="Oregon Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q310464" start="21918" end="21934" title="Erskine Caldwell" label="Erskine Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335372" start="22001" end="22015" title="Craig Chaquico" label="Craig Chaquico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265203" start="22049" end="22067" title="Jefferson Starship" label="Jefferson Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607689" start="22069" end="22085" title="Gretchen Corbett" label="Gretchen Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066209" start="22137" end="22146" title="Chad Cota" label="Chad Cota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="22163" end="22187" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440474" start="22196" end="22216" title="Catherine E. Coulson" label="Catherine E. Coulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q778865" start="22256" end="22264" title="Alex Cox" label="Alex Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q966379" start="22289" end="22298" title="Ann Curry" label="Ann Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="22331" end="22345" title="Today (U.S. TV program)" label="The Today Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q30162809" start="22353" end="22365" title="Ana Delfosse" label="Ana Delfosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="22379" end="22390" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="22414" end="22423" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725817" start="22458" end="22472" title="Alice DiMicele" label="Alice DiMicele"/>
<link wikidata="Q500155" start="22492" end="22501" title="Jack Elam" label="Jack Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262113" start="22522" end="22532" title="Gordon Fee" label="Gordon Fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="22576" end="22589" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q62020577" start="22615" end="22627" title="Gloria Greer" label="Gloria Greer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266817" start="22650" end="22664" title="Johnny Gruelle" label="Johnny Gruelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q773111" start="22720" end="22734" title="Jeremy Guthrie" label="Jeremy Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="22760" end="22778" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q64447129" start="22781" end="22794" title="Johnny Harris (journalist)" label="Johnny Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q573332" start="22821" end="22834" title="Anthony Heald" label="Anthony Heald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666573" start="22879" end="22890" title="Abel Helman" label="Abel Helman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485612" start="22918" end="22931" title="Frank C. High" label="Frank C. High"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="22993" end="23016" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524563" start="23018" end="23048" title="Gary &amp;quot;Chicken&amp;quot; Hirsh" label="Gary &amp;quot;Chicken&amp;quot; Hirsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q869427" start="23081" end="23105" title="Country Joe and the Fish" label="Country Joe and the Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174709" start="23107" end="23120" title="Peter Hollens" label="Peter Hollens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170855" start="23171" end="23183" title="Jean Houston" label="Jean Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504973" start="23287" end="23305" title="Lawson Fusao Inada" label="Lawson Fusao Inada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181085" start="23395" end="23403" title="Dean Ing" label="Dean Ing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356702" start="23425" end="23438" title="Forrest Kline" label="Forrest Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109683" start="23458" end="23467" title="Otto Klum" label="Otto Klum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="23481" end="23489" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823750" start="23497" end="23509" title="Tonya Knight" label="Tonya Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="23523" end="23534" title="Bodybuilding" label="bodybuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640822" start="23552" end="23563" title="Hal Koerner" label="Hal Koerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q221853" start="23618" end="23646" title="Western States Endurance Run" label="Western States Endurance Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q118969" start="23648" end="23661" title="Winona LaDuke" label="Winona LaDuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287896" start="23736" end="23775" title="Ralph Nader presidential campaign, 2000" label="Ralph Nader presidential campaign, 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525497" start="23777" end="23789" title="Leonard Levy" label="Leonard Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537189" start="23837" end="23848" title="Rose Maddox" label="Rose Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="23862" end="23877" title="Country music" label="country-western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613291" start="23888" end="23899" title="Steve Mason (poet)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928567" start="23946" end="23973" title="Vietnam Veterans of America" label="Vietnam Veterans of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="23975" end="23991" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q127149" start="24021" end="24027" title="Lolita" label="Lolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769153" start="24036" end="24047" title="Mark Parent (baseball)" label="Mark Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="24114" end="24131" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971109" start="24133" end="24144" title="Alfred Peet" label="Alfred Peet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094101" start="24169" end="24197" title="Peet&amp;#x27;s Coffee &amp;amp; Tea" label="Peet&amp;#x27;s Coffee &amp;amp; Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197470" start="24199" end="24208" title="Jim Perry (television personality)" label="Jim Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910600" start="24246" end="24256" title="Bill Rauch" label="Bill Rauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101335" start="24306" end="24333" title="Oregon Shakespeare Festival" label="Oregon Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851083" start="24353" end="24364" title="Tucker Reed" label="Tucker Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174787" start="24416" end="24426" title="Jeff Rense" label="Jeff Rense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364304" start="24445" end="24454" title="Ron Rezek" label="Ron Rezek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562101" start="24498" end="24513" title="Sonny Sixkiller" label="Sonny Sixkiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728142" start="24568" end="24585" title="Jon Micah Sumrall" label="Jon Micah Sumrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q753520" start="24610" end="24624" title="Christian rock" label="Christian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042468" start="24630" end="24637" title="Kutless" label="Kutless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184564" start="24639" end="24651" title="Jerry Turner (theater director)" label="Jerry Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745075" start="24694" end="24706" title="Larry Wagner" label="Larry Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q470182" start="24746" end="24759" title="Paul Whiteman" label="Paul Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q492653" start="24768" end="24787" title="Casa Loma Orchestra" label="Casa Loma Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q318860" start="24789" end="24808" title="Neale Donald Walsch" label="Neale Donald Walsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q721762" start="24838" end="24860" title="Conversations with God" label="Conversations with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730501" start="24875" end="24889" title="Henry Woronicz" label="Henry Woronicz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74291" wikidata="Q19634" url="?curid=74291" title="Swindon Town F.C.">
<text>Swindon Town Football Club is a professional association football club based in Swindon, Wiltshire, England. The team, known as the &quot;Robins&quot;, currently compete in , the fourth level of the English football league system.

Founded as Swindon AFC in 1879, the club became Spartans the next year, before finally settling on the name Swindon Town in 1883. It became professional in 1894 as a founding member of the Southern League, later also entering the Western League between 1897 and 1902. The club was crowned Western League champion in 1898–99 and Southern League champion in 1910–11 and 1913–14, before being elected into the Football League in 1920. It remained in the third tier for 43 years until finally securing promotion into the Second Division in 1962–63, where it remained for just two seasons. The team lifted the League Cup after beating Arsenal 3–1 in the 1969 final, and went on to secure promotion at the end of the 1968–69 season with the help of talismanic winger Don Rogers. Relegated again in 1973–74, the club dropped into the fourth tier for the first time at the end of the 1981–82 season.

Swindon won the Fourth Division title in 1985–86 and secured a second successive promotion the following season under the stewardship of Lou Macari. They went on to claim victory in the 1990 Second Division play-off final under Osvaldo Ardiles, but were denied promotion into the top-flight after admitting to breaching Football League regulations. Glenn Hoddle coached the team to victory in the 1993 play-off final to finally secure a place in the top-flight for the first time in the club&#x27;s history. However they were relegated out of the Premier League at the end of the 1993–94 season and dropped into the third tier with a second consecutive relegation. Promoted again as champions to avoid an FA expulsion and a hat-trick of relegations in 1995–96, they remained in the second tier for four seasons until relegation in the 1999–2000 season. They dropped into the fourth tier League Two in the 2005–06 for the first time since 1986. Since then, Swindon have spent their time between the third and fourth tiers; earning promotion from League Two on three occasions.

Their home colours are red and white. Since 1896 the club has played home matches at the County Ground, which now has a capacity of 15,547. Hall of Fame inductee John Trollope played 770 league games for the club between 1960 and 1980, a professional record in English football until it was broken in 2023 by Dean Lewington.

==History==
===Early history===
Swindon Town Football Club was founded by Reverend William Pitt of Liddington in 1879. The team turned professional in 1894 and joined the Southern League which was founded in the same year. During this period Septimus Atterbury played for the club.
Swindon reached the FA Cup semi-finals for the first time in the 1909–10 season, losing to eventual winners Newcastle United. Barnsley and Swindon were invited to compete for the Dubonnet Cup in 1910 at the Parc des Princes Stadium in Paris. The result was a 2–1 victory for Swindon with Harold Fleming scoring both of the club&#x27;s goals.

The following season, 1910–11, Swindon Town won the Southern League championship, earning them a Charity Shield match with the Football League champions Manchester United. This, the highest-scoring Charity Shield game to date, was played on 25 September 1911 at Stamford Bridge with Manchester United winning 8–4. Some of the proceeds of this game were later donated to the survivors of the &quot;Titanic&quot;. In 1912 Swindon Town reached the semi-finals of the FA Cup for a second time in 3 years, losing to Barnsley after a replay 1–0.

Swindon&#x27;s exploits at this time owed a lot to the skilful forward H.J. Fleming who was capped by England 11 times between 1909 and 1914 despite playing outside the Football League. Fleming remained with Swindon throughout a playing career spanning 1907 and 1924 and went on to live in the town for his entire life.

Swindon entered the Football League in 1920 as a founding member of Division Three and defeated Luton Town 9–1 in their first game of the season. This result stands as a record for the club in League matches.

After the outbreak of World War II, the War Department took over the County Ground in 1940, where for a while POWs (Prisoners of War) were housed in huts placed on the pitch; for this the club received compensation of £4,570 in 1945. World War II affected Swindon Town more than most other football clubs and the club was almost disbanded; the club needed a large amount of time to recover and for this reason it failed to make any real impression in the league and would not climb into the second division until 1963 when they finished runners up to Northampton Town. The club was relegated back into Division Three in 1965, but it was about to create a sensation.

===1969–2000===
In 1969, Swindon beat Arsenal 3–1 to win the League Cup for the only time in the club&#x27;s history. As winners of the League Cup, Swindon were assured of a place in their first European competition: the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup. However, the Football Association had previously agreed to inclusion criteria with the organizers which mandated that only League Cup winners from Division One would be able to take part. As the team were not eligible, the short-lived Anglo-Italian competitions were created to give teams from lower divisions experience in Europe. The first of these, the 1969 Anglo-Italian League Cup, was contested over two legs against Coppa Italia winners A.S. Roma. Swindon won 5–2, with the scorer of two goals in the League Cup final – Don Rogers – scoring once and new acquisition Arthur Horsfield acquiring his first hat-trick for the club. The team then went on to win the 1970 Anglo-Italian Cup competition in a tournament beset by hooliganism. The final against S.S.C. Napoli was abandoned after 79 minutes following pitch invasions and a missile barrage, with teargas being employed to allow the teams to return to the dressing room.

Following management changes, Swindon had a long unsuccessful period culminating in them being relegated in 1982 to the Fourth Division, the lowest professional Football League at the time. They were eventually promoted as champions in 1986 with the club achieving a Football League record of 102 points, the second club to score over 100 points in a season, York City having totalled 101 two years earlier. A year later they won the Third Division play-offs to achieve a second successive promotion. Promotion campaign Manager Lou Macari left in 1989 to take charge of West Ham United with veteran midfielder, and former Argentine international, Ossie Ardiles replacing him. In his first season, Swindon were Second Division play-off winners, but the club later admitted 36 charges of breaching league rules, 35 due to illegal payments made to players, and were relegated to the Third Division — giving Sunderland promotion to the First Division and Tranmere Rovers to the Second Division. The scandal saw then-chairman Brian Hillier being given a six-month prison sentence and chief accountant Vince Farrar being put on probation. A later appeal saw Swindon Town being allowed to stay in the Second Division.

Ardiles remained in charge until March 1991, when he departed for Newcastle United and was succeeded by new player-manager Glenn Hoddle. Swindon progressed well during the 1991–92 season, Hoddle&#x27;s first full season as manager, and just missed out on the Second Division play-offs, having briefly led the table in the autumn. A year later they beat Leicester City 4–3 in the new Division One play-off final to achieve promotion to the Premier League — bringing top-division football to the club for the first time.

Hoddle moved to Chelsea before the 1993–94 FA Premier League season began, and was replaced by assistant John Gorman, but Swindon never adjusted to the pace of Premier League football. They were relegated after recording only five wins and conceding 100 goals — the latter record stood until Sheffield United broke it in 2024 — and have never returned to the top flight. One of the few successes of the season was a 2–2 draw against champions Manchester United in the league.

The following year, Swindon were relegated for the second consecutive time and slipped into Division Two. Gorman had been sacked as manager in November 1994, and although his successor, player-manager Steve McMahon, was unable to avoid relegation, he did take Swindon to the semi-finals of the League Cup. McMahon then succeeded in getting Swindon back into Division One on his first attempt, winning the Division Two championship in 1995–96. McMahon remained as manager until September 1998, when he left by mutual consent after Swindon lost five of their nine opening games of the 1998–99 season.

===2000–2020===
The club then went through five managers in five years (Andy King was appointed twice), during which time they were again relegated into Division Two. The highlight of the next few seasons was a fifth-place finish in 2003–04 as financial troubles persisted. A first-round playoff loss to Brighton &amp; Hove Albion on penalties meant Swindon extended their stay in the third tier, now renamed League One.

The club has been beset by financial difficulties throughout its recent history, having been placed into administration twice and also twice fought off winding-up orders from Her Majesty&#x27;s Customs and Excise over unpaid tax. The board was paying £100,000 to creditors annually (2% of the annual turnover), and only managed to begin the 2006–07 season after sourcing £500,000 to pay for players&#x27; wages.

In 2006, caretaker manager (and former player) Iffy Onuora was unable to save Swindon from relegation to League Two meaning they became the first ever former Premier League team to be relegated to the lowest Football League division.
Dennis Wise agreed to become the new Swindon manager in May 2006 following the relegation, with Gustavo Poyet joining the coaching staff. After a good start to the season, the pair moved to Leeds United in October. Veteran defender Ady Williams and Barry Hunter took temporary charge until Paul Sturrock was appointed on 7 November. Sturrock guided Swindon to promotion back to Football League One in his first season with the club, earning the third automatic promotion place in a 1–1 draw with Walsall in the last game of the 2006–07 season.

In 2008, Swindon Town was taken over by a consortium, fronted by local businessman Andrew Fitton, with plans to clear all club debts by the end of the 2007–08 season.

Paul Sturrock having departed for Plymouth Argyle, the consortium appointed Sturrock-recommended Maurice Malpas manager, and Swindon finished their first season back in League One in 13th, helped by 15-goal signing Simon Cox. However, the 2008–09 campaign started badly and Malpas was sacked on 14 November 2008, with David Byrne taking over temporarily. Danny Wilson was unveiled as the new manager on 26 December 2008. Wilson helped maintain Swindon&#x27;s League One status and finished in 15th position, though only four points from the relegation zone, in his first season in charge.

The 2009–10 season would prove a vast improvement, despite the sale of League One top-scorer Simon Cox. The club maintained a play-off position going into the new year, and were at one point in second place with automatic promotion in their own hands. However, a slight slip in form towards the end of the season saw Swindon finish fifth, entering the play-offs against Charlton Athletic. Swindon won the tie on penalties and went on to play in the Football League One play-offs final against Millwall at Wembley Stadium for a place in the Football League Championship. However, they lost 1–0 in what was their first defeat in four appearances at Wembley.

After losing the final Swindon lost their top scorer Billy Paynter who joined Leeds United on a free transfer, and sold club captain Gordon Greer. Still, many bookmakers had Swindon as one of the favourites for promotion to the Championship going into the 2010–11 season. Inconsistent form left Swindon in mid-table for much of the season; however, a 4–2 win at Charlton Athletic in January left fans hoping for a late-season surge. Instead, top-scorer Charlie Austin was sold to Burnley and the team did not win again for 19 matches. When Danny Wilson resigned on 2 March, Paul Hart was brought in but failed to save the Robins, and on 25 April 2011 Swindon were relegated to League Two yet again after losing 3–1 to Sheffield Wednesday. Paul Hart was replaced for the last two games of the season by former player and current reserve and youth team coach Paul Bodin.
Soon after the season ended, the board revealed that high-profile former player Paolo Di Canio would take his first management position at the club. After losing seven of his first 13 games in charge, Swindon went on a 15-match unbeaten run which put them into promotion contention by the midpoint of the 2011–12 season. After a defeat on Boxing Day 2011 to Torquay United, Swindon broke a club record by winning 10 consecutive league games, and by March they were well clear of the chasing pack at the top of League Two. They also enjoyed success in both the FA Cup, beating Premiership side Wigan Athletic in the third round before losing to Championship side Leicester City in the fourth round, and the Football League Trophy, reaching the final at Wembley, where they were runners-up to League One side Chesterfield. On 28 April 2012, Swindon, already promoted, guaranteed their championship of League Two on 28 April after a 5–0 drubbing of Port Vale at the County Ground.

On 18 February 2013, with Swindon riding high in League One and in contention for a second consecutive promotion, Di Canio announced his resignation, alleging mistreatment by the board of directors, including the sale of Matt Ritchie behind his back, and the financial instability of the club at the time. In his place came Kevin MacDonald who had previously held caretaker roles at Leicester City and Aston Villa. MacDonald guided Swindon to the League One play-offs; however, they were knocked out after a penalty shoot-out defeat to Brentford. On 13 July 2013, MacDonald left Swindon Town by mutual consent, only three weeks before the start of the 2013–14 season and only five months after taking the Swindon job.

In the 2014–15 season, Swindon reached the League One Play-off final again where they lost 4–0 to Preston after a season in which they were competing for automatic promotion. They went top of the league after a 3–0 win away to Coventry; however, a 2–0 defeat to Sheffield United was the first of a series of results that saw Swindon&#x27;s form dip, and a 1–0 defeat to bottom club Yeovil Town meant that Swindon were consigned to finish in the play-offs. They reached Wembley after a record-breaking 5–5 draw (winning 7–6 on aggregate) against Sheffield United, the highest-scoring EFL play-off match in history.

In the 2016–17 season, Swindon were relegated to League Two for a third time; they finished third from bottom on 22 April 2017 after losing 2–1 to Scunthorpe United with only one more fixture on the road in hand. Following this relegation, manager Luke Williams was sacked after Swindon lost 3–0 at Charlton Athletic.

===2020–present===
On 9 June 2020, Swindon were crowned League Two champions on the basis of average points per game, matches in the 2019–20 season having been suspended from March due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom. However, in the following season, the pandemic created financial difficulties for the club, with the chairman, Lee Power, warning in February 2021 of potential bankruptcy, and then, in April 2021, being charged with breaching FA regulations concerning the club&#x27;s ownership and/or funding. On 18 April, manager John Sheridan resigned after winning just eight of 33 matches, with the club seven points from safety with four matches to play. The club&#x27;s relegation to League Two was confirmed following a 5–0 defeat by Milton Keynes Dons on 24 April 2021.

On 26 May 2021, John McGreal was appointed Swindon manager but, on 25 June 2021, after less than a month in the job, he left Swindon by mutual consent, citing ownership uncertainty which was preventing him signing new players. Chief executive Steve Anderson also left the club on the same day, followed by director of football Paul Jewell. Swindon supporter groups urged fans to boycott games until the ownership problems were resolved, with High Court hearings due to start on 6 September 2021. On 30 June 2021, the Official Supporters Club was told that a deal to transfer ownership to Australian businessman Clem Morfuni&#x27;s Axis group would be completed &quot;in the next couple of weeks&quot;, though the club later complained that the Axis group was delaying payment.

In early July 2021, it emerged that players and staff had not received their June wages, and that the County Ground&#x27;s owner, Swindon Borough Council, was taking legal action after receiving no rent since April 2020. The EFL described the ownership wrangle as &quot;concerning&quot; and imposed a transfer embargo on the club. In pre-season friendlies at Melksham Town and Hungerford Town, Swindon fielded sides featuring just a few experienced first-team players, with the rest of the squads being composed of youngsters and trialists. The club then cancelled its planned pre-season friendly with Swansea City at the County Ground on 17 July 2021, citing &quot;ongoing logistical and operational issues&quot;. On 15 July 2021, it was reported that the club had paid 60% of the outstanding wages due in June. On 21 July 2021, it was reported that Power had transferred ownership of his shares in the club, and that the EFL had granted Morfuni consent to acquire additional shares, having passed its owners&#x27; and directors&#x27; test. Morfuni appointed Ben Garner as head coach and Ben Chorley as director of football plus Rob Angus (a former Nationwide director) appointed as CEO and, on 26 July 2021, the new management announced their first signing, with midfielder Ben Gladwin returning for a fourth spell at Swindon. On 16 September 2021, Swindon Town was given a suspended three-point deduction by the EFL, relating to the non-payment of player wages in June.

Garner led Swindon to a sixth-place finish in the 2021–22 season with the club beaten on penalties by Port Vale in the play-off semi-finals. The manager then left Swindon to join Charlton Athletic in June 2022, being replaced by his former assistant Scott Lindsey, who spent half a season in the role before moving to Crawley Town. On 31 January 2023, Jody Morris was appointed manager; he was sacked on 1 May 2023 after just four wins from 18 games. The side finished the season in 10th place.
On 8 May 2023, Michael Flynn was appointed team manager on a two-year contract, officially taking charge following the last match of the season that same day. Rob Angus stood down as CEO in September 2023. In January 2024, a 2–1 defeat at Crewe meant Swindon had lost ten of their last 15 matches, 
and Flynn was sacked as manager after just over eight months in charge. Appointed caretaker manager to the end of the season, Gavin Gunning questioned his players&#x27; &quot;heart&quot; after they won only two from ten games and dropped to 18th place in mid-March. Ultimately, the club finished the 2023–2024 season in 19th place and Swindon supporters called for a change in the club&#x27;s ownership. Morfuni did not &quot;fully agree&quot; with the fans but acknowledged the last season had not been &quot;up to our club&#x27;s standards&quot;.
==Kit and badge==
===Crest===

Swindon Town have used at least five different kit badges since their inception. The original badge depicted a robin inside a shield with the letters STFC in the four corners, this changed to the &quot;steam train&quot; badge which was a coat of arms for the club based heavily on the coat of arms used by the local council. The &quot;steam train&quot; badge was in the form of a traditional shield, bisected with the club&#x27;s name, a GWR steam locomotive (as Swindon is a railway town), a football and with a robin sitting on top. Beneath the shield was a motto on a scroll – &quot;Salubritas et Industria&quot; – meaning &quot;health and industry&quot;. This motto is also that of the town of Swindon itself.

During the 1970s the club changed the badge to one referred to as the &quot;ST arrow&quot; or &quot;traffic sign&quot; badge. This was circular and had the letters &quot;S&quot; and &quot;T&quot; interlocked, which both ends of the letter &quot;S&quot; being made into an arrow. Also shown was a simple football and the club name.

Following the 1985–86 season, the &quot;steam train&quot; badge was re-introduced onto the kits. The crest was re-styled and the text &quot;Division Four Champions 1985/1986&quot; replaced the motto.

A diamond shaped crest for Swindon Town was introduced at the beginning of the 1991–92 season following a series of financial problems for the club. The idea behind the new crest was to give the club a new fresh image.
:&quot;The &#x27;travelling&#x27; football represents the club that is looking to the future with successful progress. The diamond shape clearly has the letter &quot;S&quot; (for Swindon) running through it, while a green section was also introduced to match a new &#x27;green trim&#x27; on the team&#x27;s home (red and white) shirts.&quot;

On 5 April 2007, the club unveiled plans to change the badge, claiming the diamond badge was correct for the time, but did not represent or show any of the club&#x27;s heritage or history. Swindon offered fans the chance to vote on-line for the three new choices, which were all similar to the original steam train design, and a fourth option of keeping the 1991 design.

On 23 April 2007, it was announced that option three of the logo vote was the winner of the poll (it can be seen on the far right of the picture). Winning the vote with 68% in favour, the new badge includes the club name, a robin, a GWR steam locomotive – the rail industry being an important part of the Town&#x27;s heritage – a football, and re-introduces the town&#x27;s motto – &#x27;Salubritas et Industria&#x27;. It has been in use since the beginning of the 2007–08 season.



===Home kit===

Originally playing in black and white with the addition of blue sash for away games, the club changed to black and red quarters on entry to the Southern League in 1894. The club changed again in 1897 with the &quot;Swindon Advertiser&quot; reporting:

:&quot;The new colours of the Swindon Town F.C. are to be green shirts, with white sleeves. Good-bye to the old well known red and black.&quot;

With problems obtaining green dyes, the kit was short-lived and Swindon Town changed their shirts to the more familiar red in 1901. Initially a dark maroon, a lighter shade was chosen for the start of the 1902–03 season and also resulted in the club&#x27;s nickname &quot;the Robins&quot; appearing in print for the first time in programme notes for the first game. The nickname is a reference to the former name of the European robin – &quot;redbreast&quot;.

Swindon Town have played their home games in variations on the red and white theme since then, wearing a red shirt with white collars and white or red shorts for much of their history which has led to the team being known as the &quot;Red and White Army&quot;. For example; the kit worn during the 1985–86 Division Four Champions season consisted of a red shirt with white pinstripes, white shorts and red socks and chants of &quot;Lou Macari&#x27;s Red and White Army&quot; were heard from the supporters at the final stages of the season.

Following the rebranding of the club in 1991, green elements were re-introduced onto the home strip and badge to represent the team&#x27;s short-lived kit from the turn of the century. These were removed in 2007.

===Away kit===

The club&#x27;s away kits have only begun to change since the 1990s and the advent of the lucrative replica kit market. Swindon&#x27;s first away kit (that was entirely separate to the home kit) consisted of an all-blue strip; this was not used for the club&#x27;s 1969 League Cup Final victory where they elected to wear an all-white strip.

For a period in the 1980s the club changed their away kit to white shirts and black shorts and introduced a new third kit of yellow shirts and blue shorts. The club alternated between these two schemes as its away kit for the 1980s.

When the club re-branded in the 1991 close season, it introduced a new away strip: the white and green &quot;potato print&quot; shirt with dark blue shorts. This remained in use until its replacement in 1993 with another yellow and blue strip, integrating the new colour scheme by adding a green collar.

A special third kit was added for the 1996–97 season and was coloured &quot;petrol green&quot; in honour of sponsors Castrol.

Swindon wore black and gold striped away shirts for the 2003–04 season with an all-white third kit, following this with variants on the blue theme until returning to all-white in 2007.

In 2008–09 they returned to the dark blue away kit that was used previously for the 2006–07 season but this time they had white shorts instead of a whole dark blue strip. In 2009–10 they returned once again to the all-white kit, but unlike the home kit, which showed &quot;FourFourTwo&quot; on the front, this showed &quot;FIFA10&quot; on the front as a part of sponsorship with EA. They also this year had an all-blue third kit which was featured for the FA Cup and also the play-off away game to Charlton.

In 2010–11 they had an all-black third kit. The all-black kit became the club&#x27;s away kit for the 2011–12 season with an all-white kit as a third kit used for the FA Cup run. This kit caused controversy among some fans, because it had the sponsors &quot;The People&quot; printed on the shirts.

For 2012–13 they had a blue and yellow away kit, again controversial as these are the colours of Swindon&#x27;s close rivals Oxford United.

For the 2021–22 season, they released a checkered gold and green kit. The colours of the Australia national team, paying homage to the new Australian owner Clem Morfuni. Later in the season they also released a special all black third kit. This included a darkened club badge, intended to signify the club coming &quot;out of the darkness&quot; following the take over of the new owner.

===Shirt sponsors===
The current manufacturer is Adidas, restarting in 2024. From 2015 - 2024 Swindon&#x27;s kit had been manufactured by Puma. Previous manufacturers include Umbro, Admiral, Adidas, Coffer Sports, Spall, Diamond Leisure, Loki, Mizuno, Lotto, Xara, DGI, Strikeforce, and Lonsdale. The club&#x27;s shirt sponsors have included ISIS, Lowndes Lambert Group, GWR FM, Burmah, Castrol, Nationwide, Kingswood Group, FourFourTwo, Samsung, EA Sports FIFA, C&amp;D, Imagine Cruising, Bartercard, First City Nursing &amp; Care and MiPermit.

==Stadium==
Swindon Town&#x27;s original pitch was located south of Bath Road, in the region of Bradford Road, adjacent to the Okus Quarry. After a young spectator fell into the quarry the team decided to move first to Lansdown Road and then to a pitch near The Croft where they were to remain for the next 11 years.

Swindon Town have been playing at the County Ground since 1896. They played their games on the site of the adjacent cricket pitch also called the County Ground from 1893 until the ground opened.

Thomas Arkell of Arkell&#x27;s Brewery donated £300 to finance the construction of a stand on what was then known as the &#x27;Wiltshire County Ground&#x27;, this investment was enough to begin development of a purpose-built football ground. Since its original construction, the ground has been periodically updated with new features or fittings. A cover on the Shrivenham Road side was erected in 1932, followed by the current roof at the Town End. This cost £4,300, which was raised by the Supporters&#x27; Club, and was opened on 27 August 1938 by local MP, W.W. Wakefield.

The War Department took over the ground in 1940, where for a while POWs were housed in huts placed on the pitch. For this the club received compensation of £4,570 in 1945.

The addition of floodlights in 1951 at a cost of £350, gave Swindon the honour of being the first League club to do so. These were first tried out &quot;v.&quot; Bristol City on 2 April 1951 beating Arsenal by six months.
These original set of lights were supplemented by lights on both side stand roofs, which were sufficient for the County Ground to stage its first floodlit league match on 29 February 1956 &quot;v.&quot; Millwall. (seven days after Fratton Park became the first ground to stage a floodlit league fixture). The present pylons date from 1960.

The ground currently contains elements constructed between 1950 and 1995, with the latest addition being the large sponsored stand on the south side. The County Ground is also the only football stadium in the world with a Rolex watch acting as its timekeeper, the clock on the Stratton Bank stand featuring its name was erected to celebrate promotion in 1963.

The ground itself was on land owned by Swindon Borough Council to which the club pays rent. Swindon had in the past considered a move to a club owned stadium to generate more revenue, but did not have the financial backing to do so. In 2006 a redevelopment campaign for the County Ground began, with the club and TrustSTFC (the supporters&#x27; trust) raising a petition to &#x27;Save Our Home&#x27; urging the Borough Council to &quot;facilitate the redevelopment of the stadium and do everything they can to keep the club within the Borough&quot; including the proposed upgrading of the adjacent Cricket Club to County standard and Athletic Club to Olympic standard.

On 24 March 2023, Swindon Town bought the County Ground for £2.3 million, as part of a joint venture with TrustSTFC, giving fans the opportunity to own a percentage of the Ground.

==Supporters==

As an expanding railway town, the club had attendances of up to 32,000 on match days until the early 1970s. Due to Swindon&#x27;s low unemployment rate (one of the lowest in the United Kingdom), more people work in the town than live there and so are unlikely to support the team. In addition; poor team performances, the financial instability in the club and the change to an all-seated stadium following the Taylor Report have led to attendances at the County Ground dropping.

With an all-seated capacity of 15,728 at the County Ground, Swindon averaged a home attendance of 5,839 for the 2004–05 season. Only 37% of the grounds seats were occupied at a game on average.
This rose to 5,950 (37.8%) in 2005–06 and was reported as 7,109 (45.2%) for the 2006–07 season.

A core group of fans has inhabited the Town End of the stadium since the 1980s, producing past fanzines such as &quot;The 69&#x27;er&quot;, &quot;Bring the Noise&quot;, &quot;Randy Robin&quot; and &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; amongst others. Supporters call the team The Town, The Reds, STFC and also the Red and White Army, the latter being a term the supporters use to identify themselves as well. The Junior Robins is the children&#x27;s supporters club which operates to provide lower ticket prices, away game activities and transport to young fans. Membership of the club also allows them to be nominated as game mascot and gives them the opportunity to train in one of the many Football Schools run by the club.
The supporters&#x27; trust, TrustSTFC, was established in 2000. This organisation is a democratically elected group of fans who raise funds for the club and aim to give supporters access and input into decisions made by the club&#x27;s board. The group run a number of schemes including the Loan Note Scheme, the aim of which is to buy shares in the club and assist with investment. Another scheme is the Red Army Fund; the money raised by this fund is given to the club to contribute towards the purchase and wages of new players. TrustSTFC also take part in the Fans&#x27; Consortium, which aims to place a supporter with a large stake-holding in the club onto the board of directors. The trust is also currently campaigning with the club for the re-development of the County Ground.

The &quot;Football Fever Report&quot; published by statisticians of the Littlewoods Football Pools was released in January 2007. It researched those teams that were the most stressful to support. Swindon Town was placed fifth out of all 92 League clubs, with the report stating –

&quot;It&#x27;s only just over a decade ago that Swindon were a Premier League side, but the past 10 years have been tough going for fans at the County Ground. Relegation from the top flight in 1994 was followed by a second successive drop, and although promotion from Division Two was secured a year later, the team struggled in Division One in the next three seasons, finishing 19th, 18th and 17th. In 2000 came relegation, and a year later Swindon avoided another &#x27;double relegation&#x27; by just one point. A glimmer of hope came when the play-offs were reached in 2004 – ending in a semi-final loss to Brighton – but last term Town became the first club to drop into the bottom tier of the Football League having once been in the Premier League. We bet Robins&#x27; fans can hardly believe it.&quot;

With the dwindling support during matches in the 2004–05 season, another fans&#x27; group, Red Army Loud and Proud was formed. It is a small group of fans attempting to bring back the atmosphere and fun to match days. With the stated aim of being &quot;the 12th man on the pitch&quot;, the group sponsors players and also provides large colourful flags to the matches.

However, in more recent years 2010–11 Swindon has rapidly increasing attendances with an 8,400 average attendance for the 2010–11 season despite relegation.

===Hooliganism===
Swindon Town has had problems with hooliganism since the 1970s, with the first known group being called the Swindon Town Aggro Boys (STAB). In a home game against Wrexham in March 1978, STAB were responsible for pelting the opposing goalkeeper with darts, stones and a golf ball. Club chairman Cecil Green later said: &quot;We intend to stamp out this thuggery. The incidents were diabolical.&quot; A new hooligan gang emerged in the 1980s, the Swindon Southside Firm (SSF), who were named after the area of terracing they occupied. In a match at Northampton Town, then manager Lou Macari walked straight into a group of more than 100 SSF members chasing Northampton fans up the street. Macari said the incident was &quot;worse than a Celtic–Rangers game&quot;.

In the 1990s, the Swindon Active Service (SAS) came to prominence and it is believed they were at the centre of several hostilities with fans of local rivals Oxford United and Reading . In September 1998, 19 SAS members were arrested at the home match with Oxford. A fracas at an away game versus AFC Bournemouth on 18 December 2004 resulted in the arrest of seventeen and the imposition of banning orders on those found to be guilty. The fighting, involving more than forty supporters, occurred in a busy shopping centre before the game. &quot;District Judge Roger House said it had been a &#x27;frightening and terrifying&#x27; experience for scores of Christmas shoppers who witnessed the scenes.&quot;
The &quot;Swindon Advertiser&quot; reported that &quot;The area was packed with Christmas shoppers, who watched in horror as pub windows were smashed and fans traded insults.&quot;

On 16 December 2006, Swindon recorded one of their highest attendances of the season: 10,010 at a home win against rivals Bristol Rovers. The game was marred by supporter trouble which resulted in 11 arrests and saw an area of seating in the Arkell&#x27;s Stand damaged, with the &quot;Western Daily Press&quot; reporting that &quot;the incident [...] ended with damage to 60 seats after they were used as missiles between opposing fans&quot;. On the day of the return game in Bristol, 20 Rovers fans attacked a number of Swindon supporters with baseball bats at a local pub.

Nick Lowles, author of &quot;Hooligans 2: The M–Z of Britain&#x27;s Football Hooligan Gangs&quot;, said: &quot;If you look at Swindon, the police have been very proactive in the last five years in terms of stopping hooliganism&quot;.

Swindon Town has imposed banning orders on those supporters who cause disruption, criminal damage or are violent when attending games. There were 29 banning orders in place in 2006, which was an increase from a total of 11 in 2005. The increase in banning orders has resulted in a reduction of arrests at games, with only 22 people being arrested attending games in 2005–06 compared to 39 arrests in 2004–05. Of the 22 arrests in 2005–06; 11 were for Public Disorder, five for violent disorder and the rest were made up of offences relating to missile throwing, racist chanting, pitch invasion, alcohol-related offences and one incident of being in possession of an offensive weapon. 33 Swindon fans were also banned from travelling to the 2006 FIFA World Cup. In 2013, 10 Swindon fans were charged with violent disorder following an incident outside the Royal Oak pub in Brentford before the club&#x27;s League 1 play-off semi-final defeat.

On 23 November 2013 a Swindon fan was arrested after running onto the pitch and punching Leyton Orient&#x27;s goalkeeper, Jamie Jones.

On 10 October 2023, Swindon Town met rivals Reading in an EFL Trophy game for their first competitive fixture in over 21 years. After the game, fighting broke out between the two sets of fans, leading to four arrests by the Thames Valley Police.

===Rivalries===
In 2003, a poll of supporters of all Football League clubs to find out which teams they see as their main rivals was conducted by the Football Fans Census, the results of which put Swindon in joint 13th place on the list of teams with most rivals. This was calculated from the number of other clubs that consider Swindon to be their first, second or third biggest rivals. Swindon fans considered Oxford United to be their main rivals, something that was reciprocated by Oxford fans. Other fierce historic rivalries exist with Reading, Bristol City and Bristol Rovers, lesser rivalries also exist with Cheltenham Town, Forest Green Rovers, Newport County and Gillingham.

==Swindon Town Women F.C.==

Swindon Town Ladies FC were established on 28 September 1993, after breaking away from the established Swindon Spitfires Women&#x27;s and Girls&#x27; Football Club, while they rebranded to Swindon Town Women in July 2019. The current Swindon Town Women Football Club (STWFC) first team play in the FA Women&#x27;s National League South West Division 1. Swindon Town Women currently play their home games at Foundation Park and the County Ground. In April 2023 the club officially came under the main Club umbrella with their first actions to replace the management team of the First and Development sides, while folding their U18s.

==Players==

===First team squad===











&quot;For recent transfers, see 2024–25 Swindon Town F.C. season.&quot;

===Out on loan===




===Reserves and Academy===
&quot;For further information: Swindon Town F.C. Reserves and Academy&quot;






===Out on loan===
 

==Club management==

===Club officials===

=== Managerial history ===

As of May 2023, 44 men have been appointed as a manager of Swindon Town Football Club, excluding caretaker managers. Danny Williams and Andy King are the only men to have been given the job on a permanent basis twice.
* Sam Allen 1902–1933
* Ted Vizard 1933–1939
* Neil Harris 1939–1940
* Louis Page 1945–1953
* Maurice Lindley 1953–1955
* Bert Head 1956–1965
* Danny Williams 1965–1969
* Fred Ford 1969–1971
* Dave Mackay 1971–1972 (Player-Manager) 
* Les Allen 1972–1974
* Danny Williams 1974–1978
* Bobby Smith 1978–1980
* John Trollope 1980–1983
* Ken Beamish 1983–1984
* Lou Macari 1984–1989 (Player-Manager)
* Osvaldo Ardiles 1989–1991 (Player-Manager) 
* Tony Galvin 1991 (Caretaker)
* Glenn Hoddle 1991–1993 (Player-Manager) 
* John Gorman 1993–1994 
* Andy Rowland 1994 (Caretaker)
* Steve McMahon 1994–1998 (Player-Manager) 
* Mike Walsh 1998 (Caretaker)
* Jimmy Quinn 1998–2000 (Player-Manager) 
* Colin Todd 2000
* Andy King 2000–2001
* Roy Evans 2001
* Andy King 2001–2005
* Iffy Onuora 2005–2006
* Dennis Wise 2006
* David Tuttle 2006 (Caretaker)
* Ady Williams 2006 (Caretaker)
* Paul Sturrock 2006–2007
* David Byrne 2007–2008 (Caretaker)
* Maurice Malpas 2008
* David Byrne 2008 (Caretaker)
* Danny Wilson 2008–2011
* Paul Hart 2011
* Paul Bodin 2011 (Caretaker)
* Paolo Di Canio 2011–2013
* Fabrizio Piccareta 2013 (Caretaker)
* Tommy Miller &amp; Darren Ward 2013 (Joint Player-Caretakers)
* Kevin MacDonald 2013
* Mark Cooper 2013–2015
* Lee Power 2015 (Caretaker)
* Martin Ling 2015
* Luke Williams 2015–2017
* David Flitcroft 2017–2018
* Matt Taylor 2018 (Player-Caretaker)
* Phil Brown 2018
* Richie Wellens 2018–2020
* Noel Hunt 2020 (Caretaker)
* John Sheridan 2020–2021
* Tommy Wright 2021 (Caretaker)
* John McGreal 2021
* Ben Garner 2021–2022
* Scott Lindsey 2022–2023
* Gavin Gunning &amp; Steve Mildenhall 2023 (Joint-Caretaker)
* Jody Morris 2023
* Gavin Gunning &amp; Steve Mildenhall 2023 (Joint-Caretaker)
* Michael Flynn 2023–2024
* Gavin Gunning 2024 (Caretaker)
* Mark Kennedy 2024
* Ian Holloway 2024–
==Player awards and recognition==

===Swindon Town Hall of Fame ()===

On 15 December 2011, local newspaper the &quot;Swindon Advertiser&quot; announced that the club were to launch the Swindon Town Hall of Fame. Former players Don Rogers, John Trollope and Paul Bodin were the first three confirmed inductees with the others announced during a BBC Wiltshire radio broadcast on 30 December 2011.

===Hall of Fame (in alphabetical order)===

* Paul Bodin &quot;(inducted 2011)&quot;
* Don Rogers &quot;(inducted 2011)&quot;
* John Trollope &quot;(inducted 2011)&quot;

===English Football Hall of Fame===
&quot;The following have either played for or managed Swindon Town and have been inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame&quot;
==Statistics and records==

John Trollope holds the record for Swindon Town appearances, having played 889 first-team matches between 1960 and 1980. Trollope also holds the English Football League Record of most appearances by a player at one club, having played in 770 League games. Central defender Maurice Owen comes second, having played 601 times. The record for a goalkeeper is held by Sam Burton, who is third with 509 appearances.

Harry Morris holds all of Swindon&#x27;s goal records, having scored 229 goals for the club between 1926 and 1933. Harold Fleming is second with 203, with Don Rogers third with 178. Morris scored the most goals in a season with 48 during 1926–27, 47 of which were in League games which is another club record. The most goals scored by an individual is also held by Morris and Keith East, who have both scored 5 against League opposition (Morris having achieved this in 1926 and 1930).

The highest attendance at the County Ground of 32,000 was recorded on 15 January 1972 in a FA Cup third round match against Arsenal. The capacity of the ground is now 15,728 so it is unlikely that this record will be broken in the foreseeable future.

Swindon Town have also set records in English football, being the second team (after York City in 1983–84) to score over 100 points in the League when they became Fourth Division champions in 1985–86. The total of 102 that the club scored has since been beaten. They also hold the Premier League record for most goals conceded in a season, 100 in 1993–94, though several teams have finished with a lower points tally.

On 20 February 2007 the club played in a landmark League game away to Barnet, a 1–0 loss. The completion of this match meant that Swindon had, during their history, played a League game at home and away against every team who, in the 2006–07 season, 2011–12 season and 2019–20 season, were in the Premier League, Championship, League One and League Two but not the National League.

==Honours==

League
*Second Division / First Division (level 2)
**Play-off winners: 1990, 1993
*Third Division / Second Division (level 3)
**Champions: 1995–96
**Runners-up: 1962–63, 1968–69
**Play-off winners: 1987
*Fourth Division / League Two (level 4)
**Champions: 1985–86, 2011–12, 2019–20
**Promoted: 2006–07
*Southern League
**Champions: 1910–11, 1913–14
*Western League
**Champions: 1898–99

Cup
*League Cup
**Winners: 1968–69
*Football League Trophy
**Runners-up: 2011–12
*FA Charity Shield
**Runners-up: 1911
*Anglo-Italian Cup
**Winners: 1970
*Anglo-Italian League Cup
**Winners: 1969
*Wiltshire County FA Senior Cup
**Winners: 1886–87, 1887–88, 1888–89, 1889–90, 1890–91, 1891–92, 1892–93, 1896–97, 1903–04, 1919–20

==References==
General
*
*

Specific
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="0" end="26" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon Town Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="45" end="65" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q200942" start="80" end="87" title="Swindon" label="Swindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="89" end="98" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="199" end="229" title="English football league system" label="English football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="243" end="254" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon AFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="280" end="288" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Spartans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="340" end="352" title="Swindon Town F.C." label="Swindon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="421" end="436" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422930" start="462" end="476" title="Western Football League" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="639" end="654" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="749" end="764" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="837" end="847" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="862" end="869" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816944" start="881" end="891" title="1969 Football League Cup Final" label="1969 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293431" start="993" end="1003" title="Don Rogers (footballer)" label="Don Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="1141" end="1156" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q964290" start="1262" end="1272" title="Lou Macari" label="Lou Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986297" start="1311" end="1346" title="1990 Football League Second Division play-off final" label="1990 Second Division play-off final"/>
<link wikidata="Q310373" start="1353" end="1368" title="Osvaldo Ardiles" label="Osvaldo Ardiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="1474" end="1486" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839602" start="1522" end="1541" title="1993 Football League First Division play-off final" label="1993 play-off final"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958007" start="1608" end="1631" title="History of Swindon Town F.C." label="the club&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1672" end="1686" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="2012" end="2022" title="EFL League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137293" start="2291" end="2304" title="County Ground, Swindon" label="County Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261295" start="2364" end="2377" title="John Trollope (footballer)" label="John Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479537" start="2440" end="2479" title="Football records and statistics in England" label="professional record in English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246307" start="2511" end="2525" title="Dean Lewington" label="Dean Lewington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790285" start="2627" end="2637" title="Liddington" label="Liddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="2699" end="2714" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452297" start="2770" end="2788" title="Septimus Atterbury" label="Septimus Atterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="2830" end="2836" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242807" start="2875" end="2882" title="1909–10 in English football" label="1909–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="2918" end="2934" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="2936" end="2944" title="Barnsley F.C." label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311077" start="2989" end="3001" title="Dubonnet Cup" label="Dubonnet Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193431" start="3017" end="3033" title="Parc des Princes" label="Parc des Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3045" end="3050" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179681" start="3098" end="3112" title="Harold John Fleming" label="Harold Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195100" start="3175" end="3182" title="1910–11 in English football" label="1910–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="3250" end="3264" title="FA Community Shield" label="Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="3280" end="3295" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3306" end="3323" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="3415" end="3430" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="3544" end="3563" title="RMS Titanic" label="&amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179681" start="3765" end="3777" title="Harold Fleming (footballer)" label="H.J. Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="3796" end="3803" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="4031" end="4050" title="the Football League" label="the Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="4083" end="4097" title="Football League Third Division" label="Division Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="4111" end="4121" title="Luton Town F.C." label="Luton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4247" end="4259" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137293" start="4294" end="4307" title="County Ground (Swindon)" label="County Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="4341" end="4357" title="Prisoners of War" label="Prisoners of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="4776" end="4792" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="4930" end="4937" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816944" start="4938" end="4941" title="1969 Football League Cup Final" label="3–1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="4953" end="4963" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q245375" start="5113" end="5135" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup" label="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="5146" end="5170" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="5284" end="5296" title="Football League First Division" label="Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573467" start="5493" end="5522" title="1969 Anglo-Italian League Cup" label="1969 Anglo-Italian League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q169918" start="5560" end="5572" title="Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="5581" end="5590" title="A.S. Roma" label="A.S. Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293431" start="5664" end="5674" title="Don Rogers (footballer)" label="Don Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799129" start="5710" end="5726" title="Arthur Horsfield" label="Arthur Horsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="5747" end="5756" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3691047" start="5804" end="5826" title="1970 Anglo-Italian Cup" label="1970 Anglo-Italian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="5864" end="5875" title="Football (soccer) hooliganism" label="hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="5895" end="5908" title="S.S.C. Napoli" label="S.S.C. Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="5994" end="6001" title="teargas" label="teargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="6189" end="6204" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48954" start="6428" end="6437" title="York City F.C." label="York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q964290" start="6597" end="6607" title="Lou Macari" label="Lou Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="6639" end="6654" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="6691" end="6714" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentine international"/>
<link wikidata="Q310373" start="6716" end="6729" title="Osvaldo Ardiles" label="Ossie Ardiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986297" start="6779" end="6803" title="1990 Football League Second Division play-off Final" label="Second Division play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="6973" end="6983" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="7020" end="7035" title="Tranmere Rovers F.C." label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018147" start="7090" end="7103" title="Brian Hillier" label="Brian Hillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="7347" end="7363" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="7404" end="7416" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065317" start="7453" end="7467" title="1991–92 Football League Second Division" label="1991–92 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7664" end="7685" title="Football League Championship play-offs#1993" label="Division One play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="7720" end="7734" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="7817" end="7824" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q841303" start="7836" end="7861" title="1993–94 FA Premier League" label="1993–94 FA Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235813" start="7906" end="7917" title="John Gorman (footballer)" label="John Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q609357" start="8282" end="8296" title="1994–95 Football League First Division" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q706593" start="8479" end="8492" title="Steve McMahon (footballer)" label="Steve McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q650230" start="8712" end="8719" title="1995–96 Football League Second Division" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588860" start="8861" end="8875" title="1998–99 Football League First Division" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760900" start="8950" end="8959" title="Andy King (footballer born 1956)" label="Andy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451365" start="9111" end="9118" title="2003–04 Football League Second Division" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9166" end="9173" title="Football League One play-offs#2004" label="playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="9182" end="9208" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="9287" end="9297" title="Football League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635110" start="9475" end="9512" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Customs and Excise" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Customs and Excise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436029" start="9641" end="9655" title="2006–07 Football League Two" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148089" start="9760" end="9771" title="Iffy Onuora" label="Iffy Onuora"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="9818" end="9828" title="Football League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="9871" end="9885" title="FA Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="9921" end="9936" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q326438" start="9947" end="9958" title="Dennis Wise" label="Dennis Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q338595" start="10043" end="10056" title="Gustavo Poyet" label="Gustavo Poyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="10137" end="10149" title="Leeds United A.F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605642" start="10179" end="10191" title="Ady Williams" label="Ady Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635229" start="10196" end="10208" title="Barry Hunter (footballer)" label="Barry Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533562" start="10237" end="10250" title="Paul Sturrock" label="Paul Sturrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="10325" end="10344" title="Football League One" label="Football League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19644" start="10443" end="10450" title="Walsall F.C." label="Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756961" start="10575" end="10588" title="Andrew Fitton" label="Andrew Fitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610009" start="10643" end="10657" title="2007–08 Football League Two" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q48947" start="10694" end="10709" title="Plymouth Argyle F.C." label="Plymouth Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q718817" start="10757" end="10771" title="Maurice Malpas" label="Maurice Malpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q357641" start="10875" end="10884" title="Simon Cox (footballer born 1987)" label="Simon Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q942283" start="10899" end="10915" title="2008–09 Football League One" label="2008–09 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231985" start="10978" end="10989" title="David Byrne (footballer born 1961)" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180319" start="11015" end="11027" title="Danny Wilson (footballer, born 1960)" label="Danny Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661143" start="11254" end="11268" title="2009–10 Football League One" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="11620" end="11637" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465871" start="11699" end="11728" title="Football League One play-offs" label="Football League One play-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="11743" end="11751" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="11755" end="11770" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="11790" end="11818" title="Football League Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903702" start="11960" end="11973" title="Billy Paynter" label="Billy Paynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474372" start="12040" end="12052" title="Gordon Greer" label="Gordon Greer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436309" start="12163" end="12177" title="2010–11 Football League One" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="12269" end="12286" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211581" start="12360" end="12374" title="Charlie Austin" label="Charlie Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="12387" end="12394" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853913" start="12481" end="12490" title="Paul Hart" label="Paul Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="12625" end="12644" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867035" start="12764" end="12774" title="Paul Bodin" label="Paul Bodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44655" start="12856" end="12870" title="Paolo Di Canio" label="Paolo Di Canio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468080" start="13081" end="13095" title="2011–12 Football League Two" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q47965" start="13134" end="13148" title="Torquay United F.C." label="Torquay United"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="13336" end="13342" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="13369" end="13383" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="13438" end="13452" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625605" start="13519" end="13524" title="2012 Football League Trophy Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="13583" end="13595" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q48948" start="13722" end="13731" title="Port Vale F.C." label="Port Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q614111" start="14079" end="14094" title="Kevin MacDonald (footballer)" label="Kevin MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="14138" end="14152" title="Leicester City" label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="14291" end="14300" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241767" start="14407" end="14414" title="2013–14 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851435" start="14481" end="14488" title="2014–15 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="14572" end="14579" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="14701" end="14709" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="14736" end="14752" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19651" start="14856" end="14867" title="Yeovil Town F.C." label="Yeovil Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="14943" end="14950" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039396" start="15096" end="15103" title="2016–17 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q19615" start="15236" end="15253" title="Scunthorpe United F.C." label="Scunthorpe United"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007424" start="15337" end="15350" title="Luke Williams (footballer, born 1981)" label="Luke Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="15388" end="15405" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068355" start="15541" end="15548" title="2019–20 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="15600" end="15639" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370884" start="15657" end="15673" title="2020–21 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829381" start="15752" end="15761" title="Lee Power" label="Lee Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q552767" start="15956" end="15969" title="John Sheridan (footballer)" label="John Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="16166" end="16184" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247850" start="16220" end="16232" title="John McGreal" label="John McGreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q954458" start="16531" end="16542" title="Paul Jewell" label="Paul Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040033" start="17112" end="17135" title="Swindon Borough Council" label="Swindon Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417115" start="17341" end="17354" title="Melksham Town F.C." label="Melksham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943367" start="17359" end="17374" title="Hungerford Town F.C." label="Hungerford Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="17584" end="17596" title="Swansea City F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q41787482" start="18042" end="18052" title="Ben Garner" label="Ben Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885427" start="18071" end="18082" title="Ben Chorley" label="Ben Chorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q846735" start="18132" end="18142" title="Nationwide Building Society" label="Nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233622" start="18258" end="18269" title="Ben Gladwin" label="Ben Gladwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106856442" start="18506" end="18520" title="2021–22 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q48948" start="18558" end="18567" title="Port Vale F.C." label="Port Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="18635" end="18652" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436701" start="18706" end="18719" title="Scott Lindsey" label="Scott Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19584" start="18774" end="18786" title="Crawley Town F.C." label="Crawley Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q741092" start="18808" end="18819" title="Jody Morris" label="Jody Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830352" start="18966" end="18979" title="Michael Flynn (footballer)" label="Michael Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587" start="19190" end="19195" title="Crewe Alexandra F.C." label="Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008587" start="19376" end="19389" title="Gavin Gunning" label="Gavin Gunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905706" start="19550" end="19559" title="2023–24 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2023–2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782540" start="20306" end="20318" title="railway town" label="railway town"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="20343" end="20348" title="European robin" label="robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200942" start="20528" end="20535" title="Swindon" label="Swindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370565" start="22576" end="22580" title="sash" label="sash"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="22656" end="22671" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658416" start="22727" end="22745" title="Swindon Advertiser" label="Swindon Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="23329" end="23343" title="European robin" label="European robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q964290" start="23802" end="23812" title="Lou Macari" label="Lou Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829957" start="24158" end="24166" title="away kit" label="away kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816944" start="24407" end="24428" title="Football League Cup Final 1969" label="1969 League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049970" start="25141" end="25148" title="Castrol" label="Castrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372529" start="25610" end="25621" title="FourFourTwo" label="FourFourTwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q583301" start="25660" end="25666" title="FIFA 10" label="FIFA10"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="25716" end="25718" title="Electronic Arts" label="EA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253247" start="26104" end="26114" title="The People (newspaper)" label="The People"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="26270" end="26283" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q268208" start="26375" end="26384" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="26812" end="26816" title="Puma AG" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082773" start="27348" end="27359" title="Okus Quarry" label="Okus Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137293" start="27577" end="27590" title="County Ground (Swindon)" label="County Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791958" start="27752" end="27773" title="Arkell&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Arkell&amp;#x27;s Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28292" end="28294" title="Member of Parliament#United Kingdom" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q387525" start="28296" end="28310" title="Wavell Wakefield, 1st Baron Wakefield of Kendal" label="W.W. Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="28380" end="28383" title="Prisoner of war" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q381704" start="28502" end="28513" title="floodlights (sport)" label="floodlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="28685" end="28692" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137293" start="28821" end="28834" title="County Ground, Swindon" label="County Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="28911" end="28919" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q619531" start="28939" end="28951" title="Fratton Park" label="Fratton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q62288" start="29271" end="29276" title="Rolex" label="Rolex"/>
<link wikidata="Q894093" start="29449" end="29472" title="Borough of Swindon" label="Swindon Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897382" start="29738" end="29760" title="supporters&amp;#x27; trust" label="supporters&amp;#x27; trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="30687" end="30700" title="Taylor Report" label="Taylor Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897382" start="31774" end="31796" title="supporters&amp;#x27; trust" label="supporters&amp;#x27; trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653170" start="32629" end="32655" title="Littlewoods Pools" label="Littlewoods Football Pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="34230" end="34241" title="Football hooliganism" label="hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="34358" end="34365" title="Wrexham F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="34742" end="34758" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q964290" start="34773" end="34783" title="Lou Macari" label="Lou Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q643817" start="34930" end="34949" title="Old Firm" label="Celtic–Rangers game"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="35116" end="35129" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="35134" end="35141" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568" start="35255" end="35270" title="AFC Bournemouth" label="AFC Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658416" start="35674" end="35692" title="Swindon Advertiser" label="Swindon Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q48925" start="35968" end="35982" title="Bristol Rovers F.C." label="Bristol Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353662" start="36132" end="36151" title="Western Daily Press" label="Western Daily Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933189" start="37135" end="37151" title="violent disorder" label="violent disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="37398" end="37417" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="37690" end="37703" title="Leyton Orient F.C." label="Leyton Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147045" start="37723" end="37734" title="Jamie Jones (footballer)" label="Jamie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="37781" end="37788" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q843159" start="37795" end="37805" title="EFL Trophy" label="EFL Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8578453" start="37961" end="37981" title="Thames Valley Police" label="Thames Valley Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465819" start="38134" end="38154" title="Football Fans Census" label="Football Fans Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="38396" end="38409" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="38526" end="38533" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="38535" end="38547" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48925" start="38552" end="38566" title="Bristol Rovers F.C." label="Bristol Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48932" start="38601" end="38616" title="Cheltenham Town F.C." label="Cheltenham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18512" start="38618" end="38637" title="Forest Green Rovers F.C." label="Forest Green Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="38639" end="38653" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="38658" end="38668" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320248" start="38998" end="39029" title="FA Women&amp;#x27;s National League" label="FA Women&amp;#x27;s National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q125701210" start="39412" end="39444" title="2024–25 Swindon Town F.C. season" label="2024–25 Swindon Town F.C. season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658449" start="39533" end="39571" title="Swindon Town F.C. Reserves and Academy" label="Swindon Town F.C. Reserves and Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220936" start="39793" end="39807" title="Danny Williams (footballer, born 1924)" label="Danny Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760900" start="39812" end="39821" title="Andy King (footballer, born 1956)" label="Andy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407090" start="39896" end="39905" title="Sam Allen (football manager)" label="Sam Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q869503" start="39918" end="39928" title="Ted Vizard" label="Ted Vizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988709" start="39941" end="39952" title="Neil Harris (footballer, born 1894)" label="Neil Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215072" start="39965" end="39975" title="Louis Page" label="Louis Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013248" start="39988" end="40003" title="Maurice Lindley" label="Maurice Lindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895117" start="40016" end="40025" title="Bert Head" label="Bert Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220936" start="40038" end="40052" title="Danny Williams (footballer, born 1924)" label="Danny Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q373164" start="40065" end="40074" title="Fred Ford (footballer)" label="Fred Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q500417" start="40087" end="40098" title="Dave Mackay" label="Dave Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830807" start="40129" end="40138" title="Les Allen" label="Les Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220936" start="40151" end="40165" title="Danny Williams (footballer, born 1924)" label="Danny Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935589" start="40178" end="40189" title="Bobby Smith (footballer, born 1944)" label="Bobby Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261295" start="40202" end="40215" title="John Trollope (footballer)" label="John Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387301" start="40228" end="40239" title="Ken Beamish" label="Ken Beamish"/>
<link wikidata="Q964290" start="40252" end="40262" title="Lou Macari" label="Lou Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q310373" start="40292" end="40307" title="Osvaldo Ardiles" label="Osvaldo Ardiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654250" start="40338" end="40349" title="Tony Galvin" label="Tony Galvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="40369" end="40381" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235813" start="40412" end="40423" title="John Gorman (footballer)" label="John Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761259" start="40437" end="40449" title="Andy Rowland" label="Andy Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q706593" start="40469" end="40482" title="Steve McMahon" label="Steve McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849205" start="40513" end="40523" title="Mike Walsh (footballer)" label="Mike Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627756" start="40543" end="40554" title="Jimmy Quinn (footballer, born 1959)" label="Jimmy Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q742783" start="40585" end="40595" title="Colin Todd" label="Colin Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760900" start="40603" end="40612" title="Andy King (footballer, born 1956)" label="Andy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q927681" start="40625" end="40634" title="Roy Evans" label="Roy Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760900" start="40642" end="40651" title="Andy King (footballer, born 1956)" label="Andy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148089" start="40664" end="40675" title="Iffy Onuora" label="Iffy Onuora"/>
<link wikidata="Q326438" start="40688" end="40699" title="Dennis Wise" label="Dennis Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230016" start="40707" end="40719" title="David Tuttle" label="David Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605642" start="40739" end="40751" title="Ady Williams" label="Ady Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533562" start="40771" end="40784" title="Paul Sturrock" label="Paul Sturrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231985" start="40797" end="40808" title="David Byrne (footballer, born 1961)" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q718817" start="40833" end="40847" title="Maurice Malpas" label="Maurice Malpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231985" start="40855" end="40866" title="David Byrne (footballer, born 1961)" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180319" start="40886" end="40898" title="Danny Wilson (footballer, born 1960)" label="Danny Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853913" start="40911" end="40920" title="Paul Hart" label="Paul Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867035" start="40928" end="40938" title="Paul Bodin" label="Paul Bodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44655" start="40958" end="40972" title="Paolo Di Canio" label="Paolo Di Canio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428226" start="40985" end="41003" title="Fabrizio Piccareta" label="Fabrizio Piccareta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819704" start="41023" end="41035" title="Tommy Miller" label="Tommy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166685" start="41042" end="41053" title="Darren Ward (footballer, born 1978)" label="Darren Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q614111" start="41087" end="41102" title="Kevin MacDonald (footballer)" label="Kevin MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767149" start="41110" end="41121" title="Mark Cooper (footballer, born 1968)" label="Mark Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829381" start="41134" end="41143" title="Lee Power" label="Lee Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776012" start="41163" end="41174" title="Martin Ling" label="Martin Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007424" start="41182" end="41195" title="Luke Williams (football manager)" label="Luke Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079092" start="41208" end="41223" title="David Flitcroft" label="David Flitcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q158945" start="41236" end="41247" title="Matthew Taylor (footballer)" label="Matt Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q258929" start="41274" end="41284" title="Phil Brown (footballer, born 1959)" label="Phil Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q81356" start="41292" end="41306" title="Richie Wellens" label="Richie Wellens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624547" start="41319" end="41328" title="Noel Hunt" label="Noel Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q552767" start="41348" end="41361" title="John Sheridan (footballer)" label="John Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820027" start="41374" end="41386" title="Tommy Wright (footballer, born 1966)" label="Tommy Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247850" start="41406" end="41418" title="John McGreal" label="John McGreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41787482" start="41426" end="41436" title="Ben Garner" label="Ben Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436701" start="41449" end="41462" title="Scott Lindsey" label="Scott Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008587" start="41475" end="41488" title="Gavin Gunning" label="Gavin Gunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613368" start="41495" end="41511" title="Steve Mildenhall" label="Steve Mildenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q741092" start="41537" end="41548" title="Jody Morris" label="Jody Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008587" start="41556" end="41569" title="Gavin Gunning" label="Gavin Gunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613368" start="41576" end="41592" title="Steve Mildenhall" label="Steve Mildenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830352" start="41618" end="41631" title="Michael Flynn (footballer)" label="Michael Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008587" start="41644" end="41657" title="Gavin Gunning" label="Gavin Gunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400231" start="41677" end="41689" title="Mark Kennedy (footballer, born 1976)" label="Mark Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126137" start="41697" end="41709" title="Ian Holloway" label="Ian Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658416" start="41834" end="41852" title="Swindon Advertiser" label="Swindon Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293431" start="41944" end="41954" title="Don Rogers (footballer)" label="Don Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261295" start="41956" end="41969" title="John Trollope (footballer)" label="John Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867035" start="41974" end="41984" title="Paul Bodin" label="Paul Bodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835017" start="42061" end="42074" title="BBC Radio Wiltshire" label="BBC Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867035" start="42159" end="42169" title="Paul Bodin" label="Paul Bodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293431" start="42200" end="42210" title="Don Rogers (footballer)" label="Don Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261295" start="42241" end="42254" title="John Trollope (footballer)" label="John Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="42419" end="42448" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261295" start="42483" end="42496" title="John Trollope (footballer)" label="John Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479537" start="42628" end="42658" title="Football records in England" label="English Football League Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852437" start="42756" end="42768" title="Maurice Owen" label="Maurice Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946614" start="42847" end="42857" title="Sam Burton" label="Sam Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671175" start="42895" end="42907" title="Harry Morris (footballer, born 1897)" label="Harry Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179681" start="43010" end="43024" title="Harold John Fleming" label="Harold Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293431" start="43050" end="43060" title="Don Rogers (footballer)" label="Don Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="43472" end="43490" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup third round"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="43505" end="43512" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="43796" end="43811" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436256" start="43825" end="43832" title="1985–86 in English football" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43914" end="43935" title="Football records in England#Team 2" label="Premier League record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365269" start="43980" end="43987" title="1993–94 in English football" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q9408" start="44122" end="44128" title="Barnet F.C." label="Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028129" start="44286" end="44300" title="2006–07 in English football" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624457" start="44302" end="44316" title="2011–12 in English football" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121220" start="44321" end="44335" title="2019–20 in English football" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="44349" end="44363" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="44365" end="44377" title="Football League Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="44379" end="44389" title="Football League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="44394" end="44404" title="Football League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="44417" end="44432" title="National League (English football)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="44456" end="44471" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="44474" end="44488" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986297" start="44519" end="44523" title="1990 Football League Second Division play-off final" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839602" start="44525" end="44529" title="1993 Football League First Division play-off final" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="44531" end="44545" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="44548" end="44563" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q650230" start="44587" end="44594" title="1995–96 Football League" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815466" start="44609" end="44616" title="1962–63 Football League" label="1962–63"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446317" start="44618" end="44625" title="1968–69 Football League" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052608" start="44646" end="44650" title="1987 Football League Third Division play-off final" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="44652" end="44667" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="44670" end="44680" title="EFL League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q134173" start="44704" end="44711" title="1985–86 Football League" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468080" start="44713" end="44720" title="2011–12 Football League Two" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q64085389" start="44722" end="44729" title="2019–20 EFL League Two" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436029" start="44742" end="44749" title="2006–07 Football League Two" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="44751" end="44766" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559270" start="44780" end="44787" title="1910–11 Southern Football League" label="1910–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559775" start="44789" end="44796" title="1913–14 Southern Football League" label="1913–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422930" start="44798" end="44812" title="Western Football League" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557374" start="44826" end="44833" title="1898–99 Western Football League" label="1898–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="44840" end="44850" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573367" start="44862" end="44869" title="1968–69 Football League Cup" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q843159" start="44871" end="44893" title="Football League Trophy" label="Football League Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972583" start="44908" end="44915" title="2011–12 Football League Trophy" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="44917" end="44934" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044370" start="44949" end="44953" title="1911 FA Charity Shield" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342576" start="44955" end="44972" title="Anglo-Italian Cup" label="Anglo-Italian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3691047" start="44984" end="44988" title="1970 Anglo-Italian Cup" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353450" start="44990" end="45014" title="Anglo-Italian League Cup" label="Anglo-Italian League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573467" start="45026" end="45030" title="1969 Anglo-Italian League Cup" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967662" start="45032" end="45062" title="Wiltshire County FA Senior Cup" label="Wiltshire County FA Senior Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74293" wikidata="Q469839" url="?curid=74293" title="The Mexican">
<text>The Mexican is a 2001 American romantic crime comedy film directed by Gore Verbinski. The film stars Julia Roberts and Brad Pitt, with James Gandolfini, Bob Balaban, J. K. Simmons, and Gene Hackman in supporting roles.

It tells the story of a small-time criminal (Pitt) who is sent on a mission to retrieve an antique pistol in Mexico, while his girlfriend (Roberts), frustrated with their troubled relationship, finds herself entangled in a series of unexpected events.

&quot;The Mexican&quot; was released in the United States on March 2, 2001, to mixed reviews from critics, and grossed $147.8 million.

==Plot==
In Los Angeles, a traffic light changes to red, and off-screen sounds of an automobile collision are heard.

Five years later, Jerry Welbach has been working off a debt to imprisoned mob boss Arnold Margolese. After Jerry fouls up what was supposed to be his final errand, Margolese&#x27;s second-in-command, Bernie Nayman, sends Jerry on a new, final errand: retrieving an antique pistol in Mexico for Margolese from a man named Beck. This additional job proves to be the last straw for Jerry&#x27;s girlfriend, Sam, who leaves him to move to Las Vegas.

In Mexico, Jerry finds the pistol with Beck, who explains the history of the legendary gun, known as &quot;the Mexican&quot;. When Beck is killed by a stray bullet from celebratory gunfire, Jerry calls his colleague Ted and learns that Beck was Margolese&#x27;s grandson. Just then, Jerry&#x27;s car is stolen, with Beck&#x27;s body and the pistol inside. Jerry recovers the car and the gun, shooting one of the thieves in the foot and burying the body.

While Sam is traveling to Las Vegas, a well-dressed hitman attempts to abduct her but is shot by another hitman who captures her instead. The second hitman introduces himself as Leroy and explains that he was hired to hold Sam hostage to ensure Jerry delivers the pistol.

Sam explains to Leroy that Jerry became indebted to Margolese five years earlier after crashing into Margolese&#x27;s car while running a red light. At the accident site, the police discovered someone tied up in Margolese&#x27;s trunk whom he intended to kill. Margolese was sent to prison for five years, and Jerry was forced to run errands for Margolese during that time. Bonding with Leroy, Sam correctly deduces that he is gay and encourages him to pick up Frank, a traveling postal worker. The three of them reach Las Vegas, and Leroy and Frank spend the night together.

In Mexico, Jerry is briefly arrested after a police officer notices Beck&#x27;s blood in his car. Confiscating the pistol, the officer elaborates on its cursed history and takes it to a pawn shop. Ted arrives and reveals that the infamous Leroy has been sent after Sam. Jerry overhears a call with Nayman ordering Ted to kill him. They recover the pistol from the pawn shop, but Jerry confronts Ted and leaves with the gun. Realizing he grabbed Ted&#x27;s passport instead of his own, he returns to find Ted has already fled.

In Las Vegas, the well-dressed hitman murders the innocent Frank and returns for Sam but is killed by a vengeful Leroy. Sam and Leroy fly to Mexico to meet Jerry, who crashes the car in an argument with Sam. Leroy finds the pistol and prepares to kill Jerry, but Jerry kills him first. He explains to a distraught Sam that Leroy was an imposter—his driver&#x27;s license reveals he is actually Winston Baldry—and that Jerry once met the real Leroy, the well-dressed black hitman. Jerry realizes that Margolese hired the real Leroy, but Nayman sent Baldry to intercept Sam and the pistol, allowing him to sell it himself and frame Jerry.

Sam and Jerry prepare to go their separate ways, but Sam remembers Baldry&#x27;s advice to never give up when you truly love someone and reconciles with Jerry. Soon afterward, Jerry is kidnapped by the thieves who stole his car. He is brought to Margolese, newly released from prison, who explains the true story of the pistol: it was crafted by a gunsmith for his daughter&#x27;s marriage to a nobleman&#x27;s cruel son, but the daughter and the gunsmith&#x27;s assistant were truly in love. When the gun refused to fire for the nobleman&#x27;s son, he killed the assistant, leading the daughter to take her own life with the pistol.

It is revealed that Margolese&#x27;s cellmate was the gunsmith&#x27;s great-grandson; he was killed protecting Margolese, who swore to return the pistol to his cellmate&#x27;s father. Jerry agrees to give him the pistol, but Nayman kidnaps Sam. A Mexican standoff ensues until Sam kills Nayman with the pistol. The shot dislodges a ring from the gun barrel, which Jerry uses to propose to Sam. The Mexican pistol is restored to the gunsmith&#x27;s family, as Jerry and Sam drive off together.

==Cast==
==Production==
===Pre-production===
The script was originally meant for an independent film without major movie stars. However, Julia Roberts and Brad Pitt had for some time been looking for a project to do together, and after Roberts introduced the script to Pitt, they both agreed to star in it. Roberts also suggested casting James Gandolfini, in what went on to be regarded as one of his greatest roles.

Kevin Reynolds and David Fincher were both considered to direct the film. However, Reynolds turned it down because the cast was not confirmed, while Fincher was unavailable due to his prior commitments with the release of &quot;Fight Club&quot; (1999). Additionally, Ben Stiller and Meg Ryan had also expressed interest in playing the lead roles in the film.

===Filming===

&quot;The Mexican&quot; was filmed in Real de Catorce, San Luis Potosí, and Toluca International Airport in Toluca, State of Mexico, as well as various locations in Las Vegas, Nevada, and Los Angeles, California.

==Reception==
===Box office===
&quot;The Mexican&quot; debuted at #1 at the North American box office, earning $20.1 million in its opening weekend. Despite a 39% decline in the following week, the film retained the top spot for a second consecutive week. By the end of its theatrical run, &quot;The Mexican&quot; had grossed $147.8 million worldwide.

===Critical reception===
&quot;The Mexican&quot; holds a 54% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 133 reviews, with an average rating of 5.6/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Though &quot;The Mexican&quot; makes a good attempt at originality, its ponderous length makes it wear out its welcome. Also, those looking forward to seeing Roberts and Pitt paired up may end up disappointed, as they are kept apart for most of the movie.&quot; On Metacritic, the film has a score of 43 out of 100, based on 35 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews.&quot; Additionally, audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;C&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

The &quot;Cedar Rapids Gazette&quot; praised the film, stating, &quot;The scenes between Roberts and Gandolfini make the film special. ... Their dialogue scenes are the best reason to see the film.&quot;

The &quot;Doylestown Intelligencer&quot; remarked, &quot;Pitt and Roberts are good too – maybe better like this than if they were together. ... If it had been a Pitt/Roberts two-hander, there wouldn&#x27;t have been room for Gandolfini&#x27;s wonderful character, and that would have been a shame.&quot;

The &quot;Titusville Herald&quot; commented, &quot;&quot;The Mexican&quot; is sporadically entertaining. It works when Gandolfini is on screen; when he leaves, he takes the movie with him. ... From here, director Gore Verbinski intercuts between two road movies, one of which (the one with Pitt) is downright boring.&quot;

The &quot;Edmonton Journal&quot; observed, &quot;Moviegoers who have seen &quot;The Mexican&quot; aren&#x27;t coming out of cinemas talking about the romantic chemistry between Julia Roberts and Brad Pitt. They&#x27;re talking about the presence of tough guy James Gandolfini in the unlikely role of a gay hitman named Leroy.&quot;

The &quot;Walla Walla Union-Bulletin&quot; stated, &quot;Roberts and Pitt are generally terrific. In &quot;The Mexican&quot; they are horrid. ... Gandolfini is a star on the rise. His work in &quot;The Mexican&quot; is solid. Frankly, he&#x27;s the only bright spot in this dark and pointless movie.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1054574" start="31" end="39" title="Romance film" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="40" end="57" title="crime comedy film" label="crime comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q295463" start="70" end="84" title="Gore Verbinski" label="Gore Verbinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="101" end="114" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="119" end="128" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="135" end="151" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q621490" start="153" end="164" title="Bob Balaban" label="Bob Balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q150482" start="166" end="179" title="J. K. Simmons" label="J. K. Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="185" end="197" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="801" end="809" title="mob boss" label="mob boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622578" start="1325" end="1337" title="stray bullet" label="stray bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371796" start="4091" end="4099" title="gunsmith" label="gunsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q41086" start="4527" end="4543" title="Mexican standoff" label="Mexican standoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="4911" end="4924" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="4929" end="4938" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="5112" end="5128" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q464903" start="5192" end="5206" title="Kevin Reynolds (director)" label="Kevin Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="5211" end="5224" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="5420" end="5430" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="5459" end="5470" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="5475" end="5483" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027749" start="5605" end="5620" title="Real de Catorce" label="Real de Catorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q78980" start="5622" end="5637" title="San Luis Potosí" label="San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593750" start="5643" end="5671" title="Toluca International Airport" label="Toluca International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q209034" start="5675" end="5681" title="Toluca" label="Toluca"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="5683" end="5698" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="5732" end="5741" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="5743" end="5749" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5755" end="5766" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5768" end="5778" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="6205" end="6220" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="6590" end="6600" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="6745" end="6756" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="6928" end="6938" title="James Gandolfini" label="Gandolfini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74296" wikidata="Q1323860" url="?curid=74296" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (novel)">
<text>The Last Temptation of Christ or The Last Temptation (Greek: , &quot;O Teleftéos Pirasmós&quot;) is a historical novel written by Nikos Kazantzakis, first published in its original Greek in 1955 before being translated into English in 1960. The novel depicts the life of Jesus and his struggles with various forms of temptation, including fear, doubt, depression, reluctance, and lust.

Upon its publication, the book was condemned by the Catholic Church and the Greek Orthodox Church; it has since been challenged by numerous Christian groups and conservative organizations. The 1988 film adaptation directed by Martin Scorsese was similarly controversial.

==Plot==
The novel opens with Jesus in the desert, wrestling with his divine calling and the knowledge of his imminent death. Throughout the book, Jesus grapples with his human desires and the temptation to lead a normal life, away from the suffering and sacrifice that he knows awaits him. Despite his reservations, Jesus decides to follow through with his mission, ultimately leading to his arrest, trial, and crucifixion.

However, the climax of the novel takes a different turn as Jesus is shown dying on the cross, only to awaken in a vision of a world where he did not die and instead lived a long, normal life with Mary Magdalene as his wife after choosing to abandon his calling. In this world, Jesus experiences love, pain, and suffering just as any other human being would.

As he lives out his life in this alternate world, Jesus begins to question whether or not his divine mission was worth all of the suffering that he went through. Eventually, he realizes that though he would have been content with living as a normal man, his death is rendered meaningless, and his teachings forgotten. Accepting that his destiny is to sacrifice himself for the sake of humanity, Jesus willingly returns to his fate as the son of God.

The novel concludes with Jesus ascending to heaven, leaving behind a legacy of love, sacrifice, and redemption.

==Themes==
Kazantzakis argues in the novel&#x27;s preface that by facing and conquering all of man&#x27;s weaknesses, Jesus struggled to do God&#x27;s will without ever giving in to the temptations of the flesh. The novel advances the argument that, had Jesus succumbed to any such temptation, especially the opportunity to save himself from the cross, his life would have held no more significance than that of any other philosopher.

The critic I. A. Richards has stated that Kazantzakis&#x27; novel tries to reclaim the values of early Christianity, such as love, brotherhood, humility, and self-renunciation. According to the book&#x27;s English translator, Peter A. Bien, the psychology in &quot;The Last Temptation&quot; is based on the idea that every person, Jesus included, is evil by nature as well as good, violent and hateful as well as loving. A psychologically sound individual does not ignore or bury the evil within him. Instead, he channels it into the service of good.

Martin Scorsese, director of the 1988 film adaptation, formulated that Kazantzakis didn&#x27;t doubt the divine nature of Jesus, noting, &quot;The beauty of Kazantzakis&#x27; concept is that Jesus has to put up with everything we go through, all the doubts and fears and anger. He made me feel like he&#x27;s sinning—but he&#x27;s not sinning, he’s just human. As well as divine. And he has to deal with all this double, triple guilt on the cross.&quot;

==Controversy==
In February 1955, the Holy Synod of the Greek Orthodox Church in Athens attempted to have all of Kazantzakis&#x27; books banned in Greece, arguing that &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot; &quot;contains evil slanders against the Godlike person of Jesus Christ. … derived from the inspiration of the theories of Freud and historical materialism, [this book] perverts and hurts the Gospel discernment and the God-man figure of our Lord Jesus Christ in a way coarse, vulgar, and blasphemous.&quot; A campaign was also started in the Greek Orthodox Church to excommunicate Kazantzakis, which ultimately failed, but he was denied normal funeral rites upon his death.

In 1963, a Roman Catholic priest in Ashland, Wisconsin, forbade one of his parishioners from returning a library copy of &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;, arguing &quot;that it would be a mortal sin to make it available to others.&quot; In 1964, a conservative group called the Citizens Group for Clean Books demanded that the novel be removed from public libraries in Arcadia, California, on the basis that it was &quot;blasphemous, obscene and defamatory&quot;; as a result, the book was made &quot;available on a limited basis to persons over the age of 18.&quot;

The book was banned in Singapore in 1988.

==Film version==

The director Sidney Lumet acquired the film rights to Kazantzakis&#x27; novel, describing it as the story &quot;of how a man pushes himself to extremes he never knew he was capable of,&quot; with Judas emerging &quot;as a strong man, a sort of hero&quot;. Lumet commissioned a screenplay written by Lazarre Seymour Simckes and announced his plans to shoot the film in the fall of 1971, though the project did not come to fruition. After many delays, a film version directed by Martin Scorsese was released in 1988, starring Willem Dafoe as Jesus, Barbara Hershey as Mary Magdalene, and Harvey Keitel as Judas Iscariot.

== Play version ==
A drama based on &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;, named &quot;Christuvinte Aaram Thirumurivu&quot; (&#x27;The Sixth Holy Wound of Christ&#x27;), written by P. M. Antony and depicting Jesus as a mere good-hearted man instead of the Son of God, was staged in India&#x27;s state of Kerala. On 10 August 1986, the play debuted in Alappuzha. It was performed about 42 times, but the Church had taken offence, and at every performance, demonstrations including premeditated violence against the play and the playwright were instigated. The police even confiscated the script; the state went on to ban the play, and courts did not overturn the ban. Antony went on to publish the play in print in the Malayalam language; eventually he was arrested and punished on unrelated charges.

==In popular culture==
The American singer-songwriter Judee Sill referred to Kazantzakis as her favorite writer; her 1971 song &quot;Jesus Was a Cross Maker&quot; was inspired by the depiction of Jesus in &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;.

In a 1988 private concert filmed at a Holiday Inn in Houston, American country singer-songwriter Townes Van Zandt cited &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot; as the inspiration behind his 1970 song &quot;Nothin&quot;; Van Zandt claimed to have written the lyrics the same night he finished reading the book, acknowledging &quot;the big controversy goin&#x27; on&quot; surrounding Kazantzakis&#x27; work at the time.

&quot;The Simpsons&quot; titled a season 9 episode &quot;The Last Temptation of Krust&quot; as a play on the book title.

&quot;The Flash&quot; Season 6 Episodes 7 and 8 find Barry Allen tempted to give in to the villain, Ramsey Rosso, with the promise that Barry won&#x27;t die from the coming &quot;Crisis&quot; that would destroy Earth. Barry faces a series of temptations and scenarios similar to the book &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="54" end="59" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="102" end="118" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214622" start="130" end="147" title="Nikos Kazantzakis" label="Nikos Kazantzakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="271" end="276" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158299" start="317" end="327" title="Temptation of Christ" label="temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="439" end="454" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="463" end="484" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22759" start="504" end="514" title="Book censorship" label="challenged"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="585" end="600" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="613" end="628" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="2455" end="2469" title="I. A. Richards" label="I. A. Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="2996" end="3011" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="3029" end="3049" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="1988 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="3507" end="3528" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3532" end="3538" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q725594" start="4172" end="4190" title="Ashland, Wisconsin" label="Ashland, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q534536" start="4514" end="4533" title="Arcadia, California" label="Arcadia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="4736" end="4745" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="4787" end="4799" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505883" start="5073" end="5096" title="Lazarre Seymour Simckes" label="Lazarre Seymour Simckes"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="5224" end="5238" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="a film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="5251" end="5266" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188772" start="5298" end="5310" title="Willem Dafoe" label="Willem Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q229042" start="5321" end="5336" title="Barbara Hershey" label="Barbara Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="5360" end="5373" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="5377" end="5391" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="5749" end="5758" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q271443" start="6253" end="6263" title="Judee Sill" label="Judee Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866281" start="6332" end="6355" title="Jesus Was a Cross Maker" label="Jesus Was a Cross Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q740729" start="6545" end="6561" title="Townes Van Zandt" label="Townes Van Zandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="6875" end="6887" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616136" start="6926" end="6954" title="The Last Temptation of Krust" label="The Last Temptation of Krust"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711398" start="6997" end="7006" title="The Flash (2014 TV series)" label="The Flash"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74297" wikidata="Q188836" url="?curid=74297" title="Xiongnu">
<text>The Xiongnu (, ) were a tribal confederation of nomadic peoples who, according to ancient Chinese sources, inhabited the eastern Eurasian Steppe from the 3rd century BC to the late 1st century AD. Modu Chanyu, the supreme leader after 209 BC, founded the Xiongnu Empire.

After overthrowing their previous overlords, the Yuezhi, the Xiongnu became the dominant power on the steppes of East Asia, centred on the Mongolian Plateau. The Xiongnu were also active in areas now part of Siberia, Inner Mongolia, Gansu and Xinjiang. Their relations with adjacent Chinese dynasties to the south-east were complex—alternating between various periods of peace, war, and subjugation. Ultimately, the Xiongnu were defeated by the Han dynasty in a centuries-long conflict, which led to the confederation splitting in two, and forcible resettlement of large numbers of Xiongnu within Han borders. During the Sixteen Kingdoms era, listed as one of the &quot;Five Barbarians&quot;, their descendants founded the dynastic states of Han-Zhao, Northern Liang and Helian Xia in northern China.

Attempts to associate the Xiongnu with the nearby Sakas and Sarmatians were once controversial. However, archaeogenetics has confirmed their interaction with the Xiongnu, and also possibly their relation to the Huns. The identity of the ethnic core of Xiongnu has been a subject of varied hypotheses, because only a few words, mainly titles and personal names, were preserved in the Chinese sources. The name &quot;Xiongnu&quot; may be cognate with that of the Huns or the Huna, although this is disputed. Other linguistic links—all of them also controversial—proposed by scholars include Turkic, Iranian, Mongolic, Uralic, Yeniseian, or multi-ethnic.

== Name ==
The word &quot;Xiōngnú&quot; means &quot;fierce slave.&quot; They were identified by the Han Chinese as invaders from the North who rode on horseback. The pronunciation of 匈奴 as Xiōngnú is the modern Mandarin Chinese pronunciation, from the Mandarin dialect spoken now in Beijing, which came into existence less than 1,000 years ago. &quot;The Old Chinese pronunciation has been reconstructed as *&quot;xiuoŋ-na&quot; or *&quot;qhoŋna&quot;. Sinologist Axel Schuessler (2014) reconstructs the pronunciations of 匈奴 as *&quot;hoŋ-nâ&quot; in Late Old Chinese (c. 318 BCE) and as *&quot;hɨoŋ-nɑ&quot; in Eastern Han Chinese; citing other Chinese transcriptions wherein the velar nasal medial &quot;-ŋ-&quot;, after a short vowel, seemingly played the role of a general nasal – sometimes equivalent to &quot;n&quot; or &quot;m&quot; –, Schuessler proposes that 匈奴 Xiongnu &lt; *&quot;hɨoŋ-nɑ&quot; &lt; *&quot;hoŋ-nâ&quot; might be a Chinese rendition, Han or even pre-Han, of foreign *&quot;Hŏna&quot; or *&quot;Hŭna&quot;, which Schuessler compares to Huns and Sanskrit &quot;Hūṇā&quot;. However, the same medial &quot;-ŋ-&quot; prompts Christopher P. Atwood (2015) to reconstruct *&quot;Xoŋai&quot;, which he derives from the Ongi River () in Mongolia and suggests that it was originally a dynastic name rather than an ethnic name.

== History ==
=== Predecessors===

The territories associated with the Xiongnu in central/east Mongolia were previously inhabited by the Slab Grave Culture (Ancient Northeast Asian origin), which persisted until the 3rd century BC. Genetic research indicates that the Slab Grave people were the primary ancestors of the Xiongnu, and that the Xiongnu formed through substantial and complex admixture with West Eurasians.

During the Western Zhou (1045–771 BC), there were numerous conflicts with nomadic tribes from the north and the northwest, variously known as the Xianyun, Guifang, or various &quot;Rong&quot; tribes, such as the Xirong, Shanrong or Quanrong. These tribes are recorded as harassing Zhou territory, but at the time the Zhou were expanding northwards, encroaching on their traditional lands, especially into the Wei River valley. Archaeologically, the Zhou expanded to the north and the northwest at the expense of the Siwa culture. The Quanrong put an end to the Western Zhou in 771 BC, sacking the Zhou capital of Haojing and killing the last Western Zhou king You. Thereafter the task of dealing with the northern tribes was left to their vassal, the Qin state.

To the west, the Pazyryk culture (6th-3rd century BC) immediately preceded the formation of the Xiongnus. A Scythian culture, it was identified by excavated artifacts and mummified humans, such as the Siberian Ice Princess, found in the Siberian permafrost, in the Altay Mountains, Kazakhstan and nearby Mongolia. To the south, the Ordos culture had developed in the Ordos Loop (modern Inner Mongolia, China) during the Bronze and early Iron Age from the 6th to 2nd centuries BC. Of unknown ethno-linguistic origin, it is thought to represent the easternmost extension of Indo-European-speakers. The Yuezhi were displaced by the Xiongnu expansion in the 2nd century BC, and had to migrate to Central and Southern Asia.

=== Early history ===

Western Han historian Sima Qian composed an early yet detailed exposition on the Xiongnu in one &quot;liezhuan&quot; (arrayed account) of his &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; ( BC), wherein the Xiongnu were alleged to be descendants of a certain Chunwei, who in turn descended from the &quot;lineage of Lord Xia&quot;, a.k.a. Yu the Great. Even so, Sima Qian also drew a distinct line between the settled Huaxia people (Han) to the pastoral nomads (Xiongnu), characterizing them as two polar groups in the sense of a civilization versus an uncivilized society: the Hua–Yi distinction. Sima Qian also mentioned Xiongnu&#x27;s early appearance north of Wild Goose Gate and Dai commanderies before 265 BCE, just before the Zhao-Xiongnu War; however, sinologist Edwin Pulleyblank (1994) contends that pre-241-BCE references to the Xiongnu are anachronistic substitutions for the Hu people instead. Sometimes the Xiongnu were distinguished from other nomadic peoples; namely, the Hu people; yet on other occasions, Chinese sources often just classified the Xiongnu as a &quot;Hu&quot; people, which was a blanket term for nomadic people. Even Sima Qian was inconsistent: in the chapter &quot;Hereditary House of Zhao&quot;, he considered the Donghu to be the Hu proper, yet elsewhere he considered Xiongnu to be also Hu.

Ancient China often came in contact with the Xianyun and the Xirong nomadic peoples. In later Chinese historiography, some groups of these peoples were believed to be the possible progenitors of the Xiongnu people. These nomadic people often had repeated military confrontations with the Shang and especially the Zhou, who often conquered and enslaved the nomads in an expansion drift. During the Warring States period, the armies from the Qin, Zhao and Yan states were encroaching and conquering various nomadic territories that were inhabited by the Xiongnu and other Hu peoples. The Zhao–Xiongnu War is a notable example of these campaigns.

Pulleyblank argued that the Xiongnu were part of a Xirong group called Yiqu, who had lived in Shaanbei and had been influenced by China for centuries, before they were driven out by the Qin ty. Qin&#x27;s campaign against the Xiongnu expanded Qin&#x27;s territory at the expense of the Xiongnu. After the unification of Qin dynasty, Xiongnu was a threat to the northern border of Qin. They were likely to attack the Qin dynasty when they suffered natural disasters.

=== State formation ===
The first known Xiongnu leader was Touman, who reigned between 220-209 BC. In 215 BC, Chinese Emperor Qin Shi Huang sent General Meng Tian on a military campaign against the Xiongnu. Meng Tian defeated the Xiongnu and expelled them from the Ordos loop, forcing Touman and the Xiongnu to flee north into the Mongolian Plateau. In 210 BC, Meng Tian died, and in 209 BC, Touman&#x27;s son Modu became the Xiongnu Chanyu.

In order to protect the Xiongnu from the threat of the Qin dynasty, Modu Chanyu united the Xiongnu into a powerful confederation. This transformed the Xiongnu into a more formidable polity, able to form larger armies and exercise improved strategic coordination. Two years later, in 207 BC, the Qin dynasty fell, and after a period of internal conflict, it was replaced by the Western Han dynasty in 202 BC. This period of Chinese instability was a time of prosperity for the Xiongnu, who adopted many Han agriculture techniques such as slaves for heavy labor and lived in Han-style homes. 
After forging internal unity, Modu Chanyu expanded the Xiongnu empire in all directions. To the north he conquered a number of nomadic peoples, including the Dingling of southern Siberia. He crushed the power of the Donghu people of eastern Mongolia and Manchuria as well as the Yuezhi in the Hexi Corridor of Gansu, where his son, Jizhu, made a skull cup out of the Yuezhi king. Modu also retook the original homeland of Xiongnu on the Yellow River, which had previously been taken by the Qin general Meng Tian. Under Modu&#x27;s leadership, the Xiongnu became so strong that they began to threaten the Han dynasty.

In 200 BC, Modu besieged the first Han dynasty emperor Gaozu (Gao-Di) with his 320,000-strong army at Peteng Fortress in Baideng (present-day Datong, Shanxi). After Gaozu (Gao-Di) agreed to all Modu&#x27;s terms, such as ceding the northern provinces to the Xiongnu and paying annual taxes, he was allowed to leave the siege. Although Gaozu was able to return to his capital Chang&#x27;an (present-day Xi&#x27;an), Modu occasionally threatened the Han&#x27;s northern frontier and finally in 198 BC, a peace treaty was settled.

Xiongnu in their expansion drove their western neighbour Yuezhi from the Hexi Corridor in year 176 BC, killing the Yuezhi king and asserting their presence in the Western Regions.

By the time of Modu&#x27;s death in 174 BC, the Xiongnu were recognized as the most prominent of the nomads bordering the Chinese Han empire 
According to the &quot;Book of Han&quot;, later quoted in Duan Chengshi&#x27;s ninth-century &quot;Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang&quot;:
=== Xiongnu hierarchy ===
The ruler of the Xiongnu was called the Chanyu. Under him were the Tuqi Kings. The Tuqi King of the Left was normally the heir presumptive. Next lower in the hierarchy came more officials in pairs of left and right: the &quot;guli&quot;, the army commanders, the great governors, the &quot;danghu&quot; and the &quot;gudu&quot;. Beneath them came the commanders of detachments of one thousand, of one hundred, and of ten men. This nation of nomads, a people on the march, was organized like an army.

After Modu, later leaders formed a dualistic system of political organisation with the left and right branches of the Xiongnu divided on a regional basis. The &quot;chanyu&quot; or &quot;shanyu&quot;, a ruler equivalent to the Emperor of China, exercised direct authority over the central territory. Longcheng (around the Khangai Mountains, Otuken) (Chinese: 龍城; Mongolian: Luut; lit. &quot;Dragon City&quot;) became the annual meeting place and served as the Xiongnu capital. The ruins of Longcheng were found south of Ulziit District, Arkhangai Province in 2017.

North of Shanxi with the Tuqi King of the Left was holding the area north of Beijing and the Tuqi King of the Right was holding the Ordos Loop area as far as Gansu.
When the Xiongnu had been driven north, to today&#x27;s Mongolia.

=== Marriage diplomacy with Han dynasty ===

In the winter of 200 BC, following a Xiongnu siege of Taiyuan, Emperor Gaozu of Han personally led a military campaign against Modu Chanyu. At the Battle of Baideng, he was ambushed, reputedly by Xiongnu cavalry. The emperor was cut off from supplies and reinforcements for seven days, only narrowly escaping capture.

The Han dynasty sent random unrelated commoner women falsely labeled as &quot;princesses&quot; and members of the Han imperial family multiple times when they were practicing Heqin marriage alliances with the Xiongnu in order to avoid sending the emperor&#x27;s daughters. The Han sent these &quot;princesses&quot; to marry Xiongnu leaders in their efforts to stop the border raids. Along with arranged marriages, the Han sent gifts to bribe the Xiongnu to stop attacking. After the defeat at Pingcheng in 200 BC, the Han emperor abandoned a military solution to the Xiongnu threat. Instead, in 198 BC, the courtier was dispatched for negotiations. The peace settlement eventually reached between the parties included a Han princess given in marriage to the &quot;chanyu&quot; (called &quot;heqin&quot;) (); periodic gifts to the Xiongnu of silk, distilled beverages and rice; equal status between the states; and a boundary wall as mutual border.

This first treaty set the pattern for relations between the Han and the Xiongnu for sixty years. Up to 135 BC, the treaty was renewed nine times, each time with an increase in the &quot;gifts&quot; to the Xiongnu Empire. In 192 BC, Modun even asked for the hand of Emperor Gaozu of Han widow Empress Lü Zhi. His son and successor, the energetic Jiyu, known as the Laoshang Chanyu, continued his father&#x27;s expansionist policies. Laoshang succeeded in negotiating with Emperor Wen terms for the maintenance of a large scale government sponsored market system.

While the Xiongnu benefited handsomely, from the Chinese perspective marriage treaties were costly, very humiliating and ineffective. Laoshang Chanyu showed that he did not take the peace treaty seriously. On one occasion his scouts penetrated to a point near Chang&#x27;an. In 166 BC he personally led 140,000 cavalry to invade Anding, reaching as far as the imperial retreat at Yong. In 158 BC, his successor sent 30,000 cavalry to attack Shangdang and another 30,000 to Yunzhong.

The Xiongnu also practiced marriage alliances with Han dynasty officers and officials who defected to their side by marrying off sisters and daughters of the Chanyu (the Xiongnu ruler) to Han Chinese who joined the Xiongnu and Xiongnu in Han service. The daughter of the Laoshang Chanyu (and older sister of Junchen Chanyu and Yizhixie Chanyu) was married to the Xiongnu General Zhao Xin, the Marquis of Xi who was serving the Han dynasty. The daughter of Qiedihou Chanyu was married to the Han Chinese General Li Ling after he surrendered and defected. Another Han Chinese General who defected to the Xiongnu was Li Guangli, general in the War of the Heavenly Horses, who also married a daughter of the Hulugu Chanyu. The Han Chinese diplomat Su Wu married a Xiongnu woman given by Li Ling when he was arrested and taken captive. Han Chinese explorer Zhang Qian married a Xiongnu woman and had a child with her when he was taken captive by the Xiongnu.

The Yenisei Kyrgyz khagans of the Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate claimed descent from the Chinese general Li Ling, grandson of the famous Han dynasty general Li Guang. Li Ling was captured by the Xiongnu and defected in the first century BCE. And since the Tang royal Li family also claimed descent from Li Guang, the Kirghiz Khagan was therefore recognized as a member of the Tang Imperial family. This relationship soothed the relationship when Kyrgyz khagan Are (阿熱) invaded Uyghur Khaganate and put Qasar Qaghan to the sword. The news brought to Chang&#x27;an by Kyrgyz ambassador Zhuwu Hesu (註吾合素).

=== Han–Xiongnu war ===
The Han dynasty made preparations for war when the Han Emperor Wu dispatched the Han Chinese explorer Zhang Qian to explore the mysterious kingdoms to the west and to form an alliance with the Yuezhi people in order to combat the Xiongnu. During this time Zhang married a Xiongnu wife, who bore him a son, and gained the trust of the Xiongnu leader. While Zhang Qian did not succeed in this mission, his reports of the west provided even greater incentive to counter the Xiongnu hold on westward routes out of the Han Empire, and the Han prepared to mount a large scale attack using the Northern Silk Road to move men and material.

While the Han dynasty was making preparations for a military confrontation since the reign of Emperor Wen, the break did not come until 133 BC, following an abortive trap to ambush the &quot;chanyu&quot; at Mayi. By that point the empire was consolidated politically, militarily and economically, and was led by an adventurous pro-war faction at court. In that year, Emperor Wu reversed the decision he had made the year before to renew the peace treaty.

Full-scale war broke out in autumn 129 BC, when 40,000 Han cavalry made a surprise attack on the Xiongnu at the border markets. In 127 BC, the Han general Wei Qing retook the Ordos. In 121 BC, the Xiongnu suffered another setback when Huo Qubing led a force of light cavalry westward out of Longxi and within six days fought his way through five Xiongnu kingdoms. The Xiongnu Hunye king was forced to surrender with 40,000 men. In 119 BC both Huo and Wei, each leading 50,000 cavalrymen and 100,000 footsoldiers (in order to keep up with the mobility of the Xiongnu, many of the non-cavalry Han soldiers were mobile infantrymen who traveled on horseback but fought on foot), and advancing along different routes, forced the chanyu and his Xiongnu court to flee north of the Gobi Desert. 
Major logistical difficulties limited the duration and long-term continuation of these campaigns. According to the analysis of Yan You (嚴尤), the difficulties were twofold. Firstly there was the problem of supplying food across long distances. Secondly, the weather in the northern Xiongnu lands was difficult for Han soldiers, who could never carry enough fuel. According to official reports, the Xiongnu lost 80,000 to 90,000 men, and out of the 140,000 horses the Han forces had brought into the desert, fewer than 30,000 returned to the Han Empire.

In 104 and 102 BC, the Han fought and won the War of the Heavenly Horses against the Kingdom of Dayuan. As a result, the Han gained many Ferghana horses which further aided them in their battle against the Xiongnu. As a result of these battles, the Han Empire controlled the strategic region from the Ordos and Gansu corridor to Lop Nor. They succeeded in separating the Xiongnu from the Qiang peoples to the south, and also gained direct access to the Western Regions. Because of strong Han control over the Xiongnu, the Xiongnu became unstable and were no longer a threat to the Han Empire.

Ban Chao, Protector General (都護; &quot;Duhu&quot;) of the Han dynasty, embarked with an army of 70,000 soldiers in a campaign against the Xiongnu remnants who were harassing the trade route now known as the Silk Road. His successful military campaign saw the subjugation of one Xiongnu tribe after another. Ban Chao also sent an envoy named Gan Ying to Daqin (Rome). Ban Chao was created the Marquess of Dingyuan (定遠侯, i.e., &quot;the Marquess who stabilized faraway places&quot;) for his services to the Han Empire and returned to the capital Luoyang at the age of 70 years and died there in the year 102. Following his death, the power of the Xiongnu in the Western Regions increased again, and the emperors of subsequent dynasties did not reach as far west until the Tang dynasty.

=== Xiongnu Civil War (60–53 BC) ===
When a Chanyu died, power could pass to his younger brother if his son was not of age. This system, which can be compared to Gaelic tanistry, normally kept an adult male on the throne, but could cause trouble in later generations when there were several lineages that might claim the throne. When the 12th Chanyu died in 60 BC, power was taken by Woyanqudi, a grandson of the 12th Chanyu&#x27;s cousin. Being something of a usurper, he tried to put his own men in power, which only increased the number of his enemies. The 12th Chanyu&#x27;s son fled east and, in 58 BC, revolted. Few would support Woyanqudi and he was driven to suicide, leaving the rebel son, Huhanye, as the 14th Chanyu. The Woyanqudi faction then set up his brother, Tuqi, as Chanyu (58 BC). In 57 BC three more men declared themselves Chanyu. Two dropped their claims in favor of the third who was defeated by Tuqi in that year and surrendered to Huhanye the following year. In 56 BC Tuqi was defeated by Huhanye and committed suicide, but two more claimants appeared: Runzhen and Huhanye&#x27;s elder brother Zhizhi Chanyu. Runzhen was killed by Zhizhi in 54 BC, leaving only Zhizhi and Huhanye. Zhizhi grew in power, and, in 53 BC, Huhanye moved south and submitted to the Chinese. Huhanye used Chinese support to weaken Zhizhi, who gradually moved west. In 49 BC, a brother to Tuqi set himself up as Chanyu and was killed by Zhizhi. In 36 BC, Zhizhi was killed by a Chinese army while trying to establish a new kingdom in the far west near Lake Balkhash.

=== Tributary relations with the Han ===

In 53 BC Huhanye (呼韓邪) decided to enter into tributary relations with Han China. The original terms insisted on by the Han court were that, first, the &quot;Chanyu&quot; or his representatives should come to the capital to pay homage; secondly, the &quot;Chanyu&quot; should send a hostage prince; and thirdly, the &quot;Chanyu&quot; should present tribute to the Han emperor. The political status of the Xiongnu in the Chinese world order was reduced from that of a &quot;brotherly state&quot; to that of an &quot;outer vassal&quot; (外臣).

Huhanye sent his son, the &quot;wise king of the right&quot; Shuloujutang, to the Han court as hostage. In 51 BC he personally visited Chang&#x27;an to pay homage to the emperor on the Lunar New Year. In the same year, another envoy Qijushan (稽居狦) was received at the Ganquan Palace in the north-west of modern Shanxi. On the financial side, Huhanye was amply rewarded in large quantities of gold, cash, clothes, silk, horses and grain for his participation. Huhanye made two further homage trips, in 49 BC and 33 BC; with each one the imperial gifts were increased. On the last trip, Huhanye took the opportunity to ask to be allowed to become an imperial son-in-law. As a sign of the decline in the political status of the Xiongnu, Emperor Yuan refused, giving him instead five ladies-in-waiting. One of them was Wang Zhaojun, famed in Chinese folklore as one of the Four Beauties.

When Zhizhi learned of his brother&#x27;s submission, he also sent a son to the Han court as hostage in 53 BC. Then twice, in 51 BC and 50 BC, he sent envoys to the Han court with tribute. But having failed to pay homage personally, he was never admitted to the tributary system. In 36 BC, a junior officer named Chen Tang, with the help of Gan Yanshou, protector-general of the Western Regions, assembled an expeditionary force that defeated him at the Battle of Zhizhi and sent his head as a trophy to Chang&#x27;an.

Tributary relations were discontinued during the reign of Huduershi (18 AD–48), corresponding to the political upheavals of the Xin dynasty. The Xiongnu took the opportunity to regain control of the western regions, as well as neighboring peoples such as the Wuhuan. In 24 AD, Hudershi even talked about reversing the tributary system.

=== Southern Xiongnu and Northern Xiongnu ===

The Xiongnu&#x27;s new power was met with a policy of appeasement by Emperor Guangwu. At the height of his power, Huduershi even compared himself to his illustrious ancestor, Modu. Due to growing regionalism among the Xiongnu, however, Huduershi was never able to establish unquestioned authority. In contravention of a principle of fraternal succession established by Huhanye, Huduershi designated his son Punu as heir-apparent. However, as the eldest son of the preceding &quot;chanyu&quot;, Bi (Pi)—the Rizhu King of the Right—had a more legitimate claim. Consequently, Bi refused to attend the annual meeting at the &quot;chanyu&quot;″s court. Nevertheless, in 46 AD, Punu ascended the throne.

In 48 AD, a confederation of eight Xiongnu tribes in Bi&#x27;s power base in the south, with a military force totalling 40,000 to 50,000 men, seceded from Punu&#x27;s kingdom and acclaimed Bi as &quot;chanyu&quot;. This kingdom became known as the Southern Xiongnu.

==== Northern Xiongnu ====
The rump kingdom under Punu, around the Orkhon (modern north central Mongolia) became known as the Northern Xiongnu, with Punu, becoming known as the Northern &quot;Chanyu&quot;. In 49 AD, the Northern Xiongnu was dealt a heavy defeat to the Southern Xiongnu. That same year, Zhai Tong, a Han governor of Liaodong also enticed the Wuhuan and Xianbei into attacking the Northern Xiongnu. Soon, Punu began sending envoys on several separate occasions to negotiate peace with the Han dynasty, but made little to no progress.

In the 60s, the Northern Xiongnu resumed hostilities as they attempted to expand their influence into the Western Regions and launched raids on the Han borders. In 73, the Han responded by sending Dou Gu and Geng Chong to lead a great expedition against the Northern Xiongnu in the Tarim Basin. The expedition, which saw the exploits of the general, Ban Chao, was initially successful, but the Han soon had to temporarily withdraw due to matters back home in 75.&quot;&quot;

For the next decade, the Northern Xiongnu had to endure famines largely in part due to locust plagues. In 87, they suffered a major defeat to the Xianbei, who killed their chanyu Youliu and took his skin as a trophy. With the Northern Xiongnu in disarray, the Han general, Dou Xian launched an expedition and crushed them at the Battle of Ikh Bayan in 89. After another Han attack in 91, the Northern Chanyu fled with his followers to the northwest, never to be seen again, while the Northern Xiongnu that remained behind surrendered to the Han.&quot;&quot;

In 94, dissatisfied with the newly appointed chanyu, the surrendered Northern Xiongnu rebelled and acclaimed Fenghou as their chanyu, who led them to flee outside the border. However, the separatist regime continued to face famines and the growing threat of the Xianbei, prompting 10,000 of them to return to Han in 96. Fenghou later sent envoys to Han intending to submit as a vassal but was rejected. The Northern Xiongnu were scattered, with most of them being absorbed the Xianbei. In 118, a defeated Fenghou brought around a mere 100 followers to surrender to Han.&quot;&quot;

Remnants of the Northern Xiongnu held out in the Tarim Basin as they allied themselves with the Nearer Jushi Kingdom and captured Yiwu in 119. By 126, they were subjugated by the Han general, Ban Yong, while a branch led by a &quot;Huyan King&quot; (呼衍王) continued to resist. The Huyan King was last mentioned in 151 when he launched an attack on Yiwu but was driven away by Han forces. According to the fifth-century &quot;Book of Wei&quot;, the remnants of Northern Chanyu&#x27;s tribe settled as Yueban (悅般), near Kucha and subjugated the Wusun; while the rest fled across the Altai mountains towards Kangju in Transoxania. It states that this group later became the Hephthalites.

==== Southern Xiongnu ====

Coincidentally, the Southern Xiongnu were plagued by natural disasters and misfortunes—in addition to the threat posed by Punu. Consequently, in 50 AD, the Southern Xiongnu submitted to tributary relations with Han China. The system of tribute was considerably tightened by the Han, to keep the Southern Xiongnu under control. The &quot;chanyu&quot; was ordered to establish his court in the Meiji district of Xihe Commandery and the Southern Xiongnu were resettled in eight frontier commanderies. At the same time, large numbers of Chinese were also resettled in these commanderies, in mixed Han-Xiongnu settlements. Economically, the Southern Xiongnu became reliant on trade with the Han and annual subsidies from the Chinese court.

The Southern Xiongnu served as Han auxiliaries to defend the northern borders from nomadic forces and even played a role in defeating the Northern Xiongnu. However, with the fall of their northern counterpart, the Southern Xiongnu continued to suffer the brunt of raids, this time by the Xianbei people of the steppe. In addition to the poor climate and living conditions of the frontiers, the Chinese court would also interfere in the Southern Xiongnu&#x27;s politics and install &quot;chanyu&quot;s loyal to the Han. As a result, the Southern Xiongnu often rebelled, at times joining forces with the Wuhuan and receiving support from the Xianbei.

During the late 2nd century AD, the Southern Xiongnu were drawn into the rebellions then plaguing the Han court. In 188, the &quot;chanyu&quot; sent troops to help the Han suppress a rebellion in Hebei—many of the Xiongnu feared that it would set a precedent for unending military service to the Han court. At the time, another Han vassal, the Xiuchuge people had revolted in Bing province and killed the provincial inspector. Subsequently, a rebellious faction among the Southern Xiongnu allied with the Xiuchuge and killed the &quot;chanyu&quot; as well. The Han court appointed his son, Yufuluo, entitled Chizhi Shizhu (), to succeed him, but he was expelled from his territory by the rebels.

Yufuluo travelled to Luoyang to seek aid from the Han court, but at this time the court was in disorder from the clash between Grand General He Jin and the eunuchs, and the intervention of the warlord Dong Zhuo. The &quot;chanyu&quot; had no choice but to settle down with his followers around Pingyang, east of the Fen River in Shanxi. In 195, he died and was succeeded as &quot;chanyu&quot; by his brother Huchuquan. Meanwhile, the rebels intially elected their own &quot;chanyu&quot;, but after he died just a year into his reign, they left the position vacant and had an elderly nominal king put in place. With the Southern Xiongnu in disarray, many of the tribes opted to distance themselves from the ongoing Han civil war. Yufuluo&#x27;s group and the Xiuchuge remained on the offensive before they were all subjugated by the warlord Cao Cao.&quot;&quot;

Due to the Southern Xiongnu upheaval, several frontier commanderies such as Shuofang and Yunzhong were lost to hostile tribes, prompting Cao Cao to abolish and abandon them. In 216, he detained Huchuquan in the city of Ye and reorganized the last vestiges of the Southern Xiongnu into the Five Divisions (五部; Left, Right, South, North and Centre) around Taiyuan Commandery in modern-day Shanxi, bringing them closer to the Chinese court&#x27;s influence. The office of &quot;chanyu&quot; remained with Huchuquan at Ye up to his death, after which it became vacant, while the Five Divisions were initially placed under the supervision of his uncle, Qubei. Each division was led by a local chief, who in turn was under the surveillance of a Chinese resident. This was aimed at preventing the tribes in Shanxi from engaging in rebellion, and also allowed Cao Cao to use them as auxiliaries in his cavalry.

=== Descendants and later states in northern China ===
Fang Xuanling&#x27;s Book of Jin lists nineteen Xiongnu tribes that resettled within the Great Wall: Chuge (屠各), Xianzhi (鮮支), Koutou (寇頭), Wutan (烏譚), Chile (赤勒), Hanzhi (捍蛭), Heilang (黑狼), Chisha (赤沙), Yugang (鬱鞞), Weisuo (萎莎), Tutong (禿童), Bomie (勃蔑), Qiangqu (羌渠), Helai (賀賴), Zhongqin (鐘跂), Dalou (大樓), Yongqu (雍屈), Zhenshu (真樹) and Lijie (力羯). Among the nineteen tribes, the Chuge, also known as the Xiuchuge, were the most honored and prestigious.

With the fall of the Southern Xiongnu state, the Xiongnu name gradually lost its unifying influence among its descendants, only ever invoked for political and symbolic purposes or as a generic label for tribes that did not belong to one of the major ethnic groups at the time. In Bing province, the Chuge identity held more weight than that of the Xiongnu among the Five Divisions, while those excluded from the group mingled with tribes from various ethnicities and were referred to as &quot;hu&quot; or other vague terms for the non-Chinese. Many of them began adopting Chinese family names such as Liu (劉), which was prevalent among the Five Divisions.&quot;&quot; 

Nonetheless, the Xiongnu are classified as one of the &quot;Five Barbarians&quot; of the Sixteen Kingdoms period. The Han-Zhao and Helian Xia dynasties were both founded by rulers on the basis of their Xiongnu ancestry. The Northern Liang, established by the Lushuihu, is sometimes categorized as a Xiongnu state in recent historiographies. Shi Le, the founder of the Later Zhao dynasty, was a descendant of the Xiongnu Qiangqu tribe, although by his time, he and his people had become a separate ethnic group known as the Jie.

==== Han-Zhao dynasty (304–329) ====
===== Han (304–319) =====

Despite Cao Cao&#x27;s intentions, the Five Divisions eventually grew weary of subservience and attempted to assert their own power. The Commander of the Left Division, Liu Bao briefly unified them during the mid-3rd century before the Cao Wei and Western Jin courts intervened and forced them back into five. To further ensure their loyalty, nobles of the Five Divisions had to send their children to the Chinese capital as hostages, where they became accustomed to Chinese Confucian teachings and culture. They were even allowed to hold government offices under the Jin, but their status remained low compared to their Chinese peers. Amidst the War of the Eight Princes in 304, as Jin authority was collapsing in northern China, the Five Divisions took the opportunity to rebel.

Liu Yuan, the son of Liu Bao and a general serving under one of the Jin princes, was offered by the Five Divisions to lead their rebellion. After deceiving his prince, Liu Yuan returned to Bing province and was acclaimed as the Grand Chanyu. Later that year, he declared himself the King of Han. Liu Yuan and his family members were Chuge people, but he also claimed to be a direct descendant of the Southern Xiongnu &quot;chanyus&quot; and depicted his state as a continuation of the Han dynasty, citing that his alleged ancestors were married to Han princesses through &quot;heqin. &quot;He adopted the Chinese ruling system and allowed the Han Chinese and non-Chinese tribes to serve under him. In 308, he elevated his title to Emperor of Han, and in 309, he settled his capital at Pingyang.

The Western Jin, devastated by war and natural disasters, was unable to stop the growing threat of Han. A few months after Liu Cong took the Han throne, the Jin imperial army was annihilated by his forces in 311. Soon, the Han descended upon the Jin capital Luoyang, sacking the city and capturing Emperor Huai of Jin in an event known as the Disaster of Yongjia. In 316, the Jin restoration in Chang&#x27;an, headed by Emperor Min, was also crushed by Han. After the fall of Chang&#x27;an, the remnants of Jin south of the Yangtze river at Jiankang re-established themselves as the Eastern Jin dynasty in 318.

Although Han enjoyed military success, imperial authority was highly limited, and they suffered from internal strife under Liu Cong. Throughout his reign, Liu Cong faced strong opposition from his own ministers, and so he empowered his consort kins and eunuchs to counter them. The Han court thus fell into a lengthy power struggle which ended in a brutal purge of the government. Liu Cong also failed to constrain Shi Le, a general of Jie ethnicity who effectively held the eastern parts of the empire. After Liu Cong&#x27;s death in 318, his consort kin, Jin Zhun massacred the emperor and a large portion of the aristocracy before being defeated by a combined force led by Liu Cong&#x27;s cousin, Liu Yao, and Shi Le.

===== Former Zhao (319–329) =====
During Jin Zhun&#x27;s rebellion, the Han loyalists that escaped the massacre acclaimed Liu Yao as the new emperor. In 319, he moved the capital from Pingyang to Chang&#x27;an and renamed the dynasty as Zhao. Unlike his predecessors, Liu Yao appealed more to his Xiongnu ancestry by honouring Modu Chanyu and distancing himself from the state&#x27;s initial positioning of restoring the Han dynasty. However, this was not a break from Liu Yuan, as he continued to honor Liu Yuan and Liu Cong posthumously; it is hence known to historians collectively as Han-Zhao. That same year, Shi Le proclaimed independence and formed his own state of Zhao, challenging Liu Yao for hegemony over northern China. For this reason, Han-Zhao is also known to historians as the Former Zhao to distinguish it from Shi Le&#x27;s Later Zhao.

Liu Yao retained control over the Guanzhong region and expanded his domain westward by campaigning against remnants of the Jin, Former Liang and Chouchi. Eventually, Liu Yao led his army to fight Later Zhao for control over Luoyang but was captured by Shi Le&#x27;s forces in battle and executed in 329. Chang&#x27;an soon fell to Later Zhao and the last of Former Zhao&#x27;s forces were destroyed. Thus ended the Han-Zhao dynasty; northern China would be dominated by the Later Zhao for the next 20 years. Despite the Han-Zhao&#x27;s defeat, the Chuge survived and remained a prominent ethnic group in northern China for the next two centuries.

==== Tiefu tribe and Helian Xia dynasty (309–431) ====
The chieftains of the Tiefu tribe were descendants of Qubei and were related to another tribe, the Dugu. Based on their name, which meant a person whose father was a Xiongnu and mother was a Xianbei, the Tiefu had mingled with the Xianbei, and records refer to them as &quot;Wuhuan&quot;, which by the 4th-century had become a generic term for miscellaneous &quot;hu&quot; tribes with Donghu elements. In 309, their chieftain, Liu Hu rebelled against the Western Jin in Shanxi but was driven out to Shuofang Commandery in the Ordos Loop. The Tiefu resided there for most of their existence, often as a vassal to their stronger neighbours before their power was destroyed by the Northern Wei dynasty in 392.

Liu Bobo, a surviving member of the Tiefu, went into exile and eventually offered his services to the Qiang-led Later Qin. He was assigned to guard Shuofang, but in 407, angered by Qin holding peace talks with the Northern Wei, he rebelled and founded a state known as the Helian Xia dynasty. Bobo strongly affirmed his Xiongnu lineage; his state name of &quot;Xia&quot; was based on the claim that the Xiongnu were descendants of the Xia dynasty, and he later changed his family name from &quot;Liu&quot; (劉) to the more Xiongnu-like &quot;Helian&quot; (赫連), believing it inappropriate to follow his matrilineal line from the Han. Helian Bobo placed the Later Qin in a perpetual state of warfare and greatly contributed to its decline. In 418, he conquered the Guanzhong region from the Eastern Jin dynasty after Jin destroyed Qin the previous year.

After Helian Bobo&#x27;s death in 425, the Xia quickly declined due to pressure from the Northern Wei. In 428, the emperor, Helian Chang and capital were both captured by Wei forces. His brother, Helian Ding succeeded him and conquered the Western Qin in 431, but that same year, he was ambushed and imprisoned by the Tuyuhun while attempting a campaign against Northern Liang. The Xia was at its end, and the following year, Helian Ding was sent to Wei where he was executed.

Tongwancheng (meaning &quot;Unite All Nations&quot;), was one of the capitals of the Xia that was built during the reign of Helian Bobo. The ruined city was discovered in 1996 and the State Council designated it as a cultural relic under top state protection. The repair of the Yong&#x27;an Platform, where Helian Bobo reviewed parading troops, has been finished and restoration on the 31-meter-tall turret follows.

==== Juqu clan and Northern Liang dynasty (401–460) ====

The Juqu clan were a Lushuihu family that founded the Northern Liang dynasty in modern-day Gansu in 397. Recent historiographies often classify the Northern Liang as a &quot;Xiongnu&quot; state, but there is still ongoing debate on the exact origin of the Lushuihu. A leading theory is that the Lushuihu were descendants of the Lesser Yuezhi that had intermingled with the Qiang people, but based on the fact that the Juqu&#x27;s ancestors once served the Xiongnu empire, the Lushuihu could still be considered a branch of the Xiongnu. Regardless, contemporaneous records treat the Lushuihu as a distinct ethnic group. The Northern Liang was known for its propagation of Buddhism in Gansu through their construction of Buddhist sites such as the Tiantishan and Mogao caves, and for being the last of the so-called Sixteen Kingdoms after it was conquered by the Northern Wei dynasty in 439. There was also the Northern Liang of Gaochang, which existed between 442 and 460.

== Significance ==
The Xiongnu confederation was unusually long-lived for a steppe empire. The purpose of raiding the Central Plain was not simply for goods, but to force the Central Plain polity to pay regular tribute. The power of the Xiongnu ruler was based on his control of Han tribute which he used to reward his supporters. The Han and Xiongnu empires rose at the same time because the Xiongnu state depended on Han tribute. A major Xiongnu weakness was the custom of lateral succession. If a dead ruler&#x27;s son was not old enough to take command, power passed to the late ruler&#x27;s brother. This worked in the first generation but could lead to civil war in the second generation. The first time this happened, in 60 BC, the weaker party adopted what Barfield calls the &#x27;inner frontier strategy.&#x27; They moved south and submitted to the dominant Central Plain regime and then used the resources obtained from their overlord to defeat the Northern Xiongnu and re-establish the empire. The second time this happened, about 47 AD, the strategy failed. The southern ruler was unable to defeat the northern ruler and the Xiongnu remained divided.

== Ethnolinguistic origins ==
The Xiongnu empire is widely thought to have been multiethnic. There are several theories on the ethnolinguistic identity of the Xiongnu, though there is no consensus among scholars as to what language was spoken by the Xiongnu elite.

=== Proposed link to the Huns ===
The Xiongnu-Hun hypothesis was originally proposed by the 18th-century French historian Joseph de Guignes, who noticed that ancient Chinese scholars had referred to members of tribes which were associated with the Xiongnu by names which were similar to the name &quot;Hun&quot;, albeit with varying Chinese characters. Étienne de la Vaissière has shown that, in the Sogdian script used in the so-called &quot;Sogdian Ancient Letters&quot;, both the Xiongnu and the Huns were referred to as the γwn (&quot;xwn&quot;), which indicates that the two names were synonymous. Although the theory that the Xiongnu were the precursors of the Huns as they were later known in Europe is now accepted by many scholars, it has yet to become a consensus view. The identification with the Huns may either be incorrect or it may be an oversimplification (as would appear to be the case with a proto-Mongol people, the Rouran, who have sometimes been linked to the Avars of Central Europe).

=== Iranian theories ===

Most scholars agree that the Xiongnu elite may have been initially of Sogdian origin, while later switching to a Turkic language. Harold Walter Bailey proposed an Iranian origin of the Xiongnu, recognizing all of the earliest Xiongnu names of the 2nd century BC as being of the Iranian type. Central Asian scholar Christopher I. Beckwith notes that the Xiongnu name could be a cognate of Scythian, Saka and Sogdia, corresponding to a name for Eastern Iranian Scythians. According to Beckwith the Xiongnu could have contained a leading Iranian component when they started out, but more likely they had earlier been subjects of an Iranian people and learned the Iranian nomadic model from them.

In the 1994 UNESCO-published &quot;History of Civilizations of Central Asia&quot;, its editor János Harmatta claims that the royal tribes and kings of the Xiongnu bore Iranian names, that all Xiongnu words noted by the Chinese can be explained from a Scythian language, and that it is therefore clear that the majority of Xiongnu tribes spoke an Eastern Iranian language.

According to a study by Alexander Savelyev and Choongwon Jeong, published in 2020 in the journal Evolutionary Human Sciences by Cambridge University Press, &quot;The predominant part of the Xiongnu population is likely to have spoken Turkic&quot;. However, important cultural, technological and political elements may have been transmitted by Eastern Iranian-speaking Steppe nomads: &quot;Arguably, these Iranian-speaking groups were assimilated over time by the predominant Turkic-speaking part of the Xiongnu population&quot;.

=== Yeniseian theories ===
Lajos Ligeti was the first to suggest that the Xiongnu spoke a Yeniseian language. In the early 1960s Edwin Pulleyblank was the first to expand upon this idea with credible evidence. The Yeniseian theory proposes that the Jie, a western Xiongnu people, spoke a Yeniseian language. Hyun Jin Kim notes that the 7th AD Chinese conpendium, &quot;Jin Shu&quot;, contains a transliterated song of Jie origin, which appears to be Yeniseian. This song has led researchers Pulleyblank and Vovin to argue for a Yeniseian Jie dominant minority, that ruled over the other Xiongnu ethnicities, like Iranian and Turkic people. Kim has stated that the dominant Xiongnu language was likely Turkic or Yeniseian, but has cautioned that the Xiongnu were definitely a multi-ethnic society.

Pulleybank and D. N. Keightley asserted that the Xiongnu titles &quot;were originally Siberian words but were later borrowed by the Turkic and Mongolic peoples&quot;. Titles such as tarqan, tegin and kaghan were also inherited from the Xiongnu language and are possibly of Yeniseian origin. For example, the Xiongnu word for &quot;heaven&quot; is theorized to come from Proto-Yeniseian *&quot;tɨŋVr&quot;.

Vocabulary from Xiongnu inscriptions sometimes appears to have Yeniseian cognates which were used by Vovin to support his theory that the Xiongnu has a large Yeniseian component, examples of proposed cognates include words such as Xiongnu kʷala &#x27;son&#x27; and Ket qalek &#x27;younger son&#x27;, Xiongnu sakdak &#x27;boot&#x27; and Ket sagdi &#x27;boot&#x27;, Xiongnu gʷawa &quot;prince&quot; and Ket gij &quot;prince&quot;, Xiongnu &quot;attij&quot; &#x27;wife&#x27; and proto-Yeniseian &quot;alrit&quot;, Ket &quot;alit&quot; and Xiongnu dar &quot;north&quot; compared to Yugh tɨr &quot;north&quot;. Pulleyblank also argued that because Xiongnu words appear to have clusters with r and l, in the beginning of the word it is unlikely to be of Turkic origin, and instead believed that most vocabulary we have mostly resemble Yeniseian languages.

Alexander Vovin also wrote, that some names of horses in the Xiongnu language appear to be Turkic words with Yeniseian prefixes.

An analysis by Savelyev and Jeong (2020) has cast doubt on the Yeniseian theory. If assuming that the ancient Yeniseians were represented by modern Ket people, who are more genetically similar to Samoyedic speakers, the Xiongnu do not display a genetic affinity for Yeniseian peoples. A review by Wilson (2023) argues that the presence of Yeniseian-speakers among the multi-ethnic Xiongnu should not be rejected, and that &quot;Yeniseian-speaking peoples must have played a more prominent (than heretofore recognized) role in the history of Eurasia during the first millennium of the Common Era&quot;.

=== Turkic theories ===
According to a study by Alexander Savelyev and Choongwon Jeong, published in 2020 in the journal Evolutionary Human Sciences by Cambridge University Press, &quot;The predominant part of the Xiongnu population is likely to have spoken Turkic&quot;. However, genetic studies found a mixture of haplogroups from western and eastern Eurasian origins that suggested a large genetic diversity within, and possibly multiple origins of Xiongnu elites. The Turkic-related component may be brought by eastern Eurasian genetic substratum.

Other proponents of a Turkic language theory include E.H. Parker, Jean-Pierre Abel-Rémusat, Julius Klaproth, Gustaf John Ramstedt, Annemarie von Gabain, and Charles Hucker. André Wink states that the Xiongnu probably spoke an early form of Turkic; even if Xiongnu were not &quot;Turks&quot; nor Turkic-speaking, they were in close contact with Turkic-speakers very early on. Craig Benjamin sees the Xiongnu as either proto-Turks or proto-Mongols who possibly spoke a language related to the Dingling.

Chinese sources link several Turkic peoples to the Xiongnu: 
* According to the &quot;Book of Zhou&quot;, &quot;History of the Northern Dynasties&quot;, &quot;Tongdian&quot;, &quot;New Book of Tang&quot;, the Göktürks and the ruling Ashina clan was a component of the Xiongnu confederation, 
** However, the Ashina-surnamed Göktürks were also stated to be they were &quot;mixed barbarians&quot; (; &quot;záhú&quot;) who fled from Pingliang (now in modern Gansu province, China). or from an obscure Suo state (索國), north of the Xiongnu.
* Uyghur Khagans claimed descent from the Xiongnu (according to Chinese history &quot;Weishu&quot;, the founder of the Uyghur Khaganate was descended from a Xiongnu ruler).
* Book of Wei states that the Yueban descended from remnants of the Northern Xiongnu chanyu&#x27;s tribe and that Yueban&#x27;s language and customs resembled Gaoche (高車), another name of the Tiele.
* Book of Jin lists 19 southern Xiongnu tribes who entered Former Yan&#x27;s borders, the 14th being the Alat (Ch. 賀賴 &quot;Helai&quot; ~ 賀蘭 &quot;Helan&quot; ~ 曷剌 &quot;Hela&quot;); &quot;Alat&quot; being glossed &quot;piebald horse&quot; (Ch. 駁馬 ~ 駮馬 &quot;Boma&quot;) in Old Turkic.

However, Chinese sources also ascribe Xiongnu origins to the Para-Mongolic-speaking Kumo Xi and Khitans.

=== Mongolic theories ===
Mongolian and other scholars have suggested that the Xiongnu spoke a language related to the Mongolic languages. Mongolian archaeologists proposed that the Slab Grave Culture people were the ancestors of the Xiongnu, and some scholars have suggested that the Xiongnu may have been the ancestors of the Mongols. Nikita Bichurin considered Xiongnu and Xianbei to be two subgroups (or dynasties) of but one same ethnicity.

According to the &quot;Book of Song&quot;, the Rourans, whom Book of Wei identified as offspring of Proto-Mongolic Donghu people, possessed the alternative name(s) 大檀 &quot;Dàtán&quot; &quot;Tatar&quot; and/or 檀檀 &quot;Tántán&quot; &quot;Tartar&quot; and according to Book of Liang, &quot;they also constituted a separate branch of the Xiongnu&quot;. Old Book of Tang mentioned twenty Shiwei tribes, whom other Chinese sources (Book of Sui, New Book of Tang) associated with the Khitans, another people who in turn descended from the Xianbei and were also associated with the Xiongnu. While the Xianbei, Khitans, and Shiwei are generally believed to be predominantly Mongolic- and Para-Mongolic-speaking, yet Xianbei were stated to descend from the Donghu, whom Sima Qian distinguished from the Xiongnu. (notwithstanding Sima Qian&#x27;s inconsistency). Additionally, Chinese chroniclers routinely ascribed Xiongnu origins to various nomadic groups: for examples, Xiongnu ancestry was ascribed to Para-Mongolic-speaking Kumo Xi as well as Turkic-speaking Göktürks and Tiele;

Genghis Khan refers to the time of Modu Chanyu as &quot;the remote times of our Chanyu&quot; in his letter to Daoist Qiu Chuji. Sun and moon symbol of Xiongnu that discovered by archaeologists is similar to Mongolian Soyombo symbol.

=== Multiple ethnicities ===

Since the early 19th century, a number of Western scholars have proposed a connection between various language families or subfamilies and the language or languages of the Xiongnu. Albert Terrien de Lacouperie considered them to be multi-component groups. Many scholars believe the Xiongnu confederation was a mixture of different ethno-linguistic groups, and that their main language (as represented in the Chinese sources) and its relationships have not yet been satisfactorily determined. Kim rejects &quot;old racial theories or even ethnic affiliations&quot; in favour of the &quot;historical reality of these extensive, multiethnic, polyglot steppe empires&quot;.

Chinese sources link the Tiele people and Ashina to the Xiongnu, not all Turkic peoples. According to the &quot;Book of Zhou&quot; and the &quot;History of the Northern Dynasties&quot;, the Ashina clan was a component of the Xiongnu confederation, but this connection is disputed, and according to the &quot;Book of Sui&quot; and the &quot;Tongdian&quot;, they were &quot;mixed nomads&quot; () from Pingliang. The Ashina and Tiele may have been separate ethnic groups who mixed with the Xiongnu. Indeed, Chinese sources link many nomadic peoples (&quot;hu&quot;; see &quot;Wu Hu&quot;) on their northern borders to the Xiongnu, just as Greco-Roman historiographers called Avars and Huns &quot;Scythians&quot;. The Greek cognate of &quot;Tourkia&quot; () was used by the Byzantine emperor and scholar Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in his book &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;, though in his use, &quot;Turks&quot; always referred to Magyars. Such archaizing was a common literary &quot;topos&quot;, and implied similar geographic origins and nomadic lifestyle but not direct filiation.

Some Uyghurs claimed descent from the Xiongnu (according to Chinese history &quot;Weishu&quot;, the founder of the Uyghur Khaganate was descended from a Xiongnu ruler), but many contemporary scholars do not consider the modern Uyghurs to be of direct linear descent from the old Uyghur Khaganate because modern Uyghur language and Old Uyghur languages are different. Rather, they consider them to be descendants of a number of people, one of them the ancient Uyghurs.

In various kinds of ancient inscriptions on monuments of Munmu of Silla, it is recorded that King Munmu had Xiongnu ancestry. According to several historians, it is possible that there were tribes of Koreanic origin. There are also some Korean researchers that point out that the grave goods of Silla and of the eastern Xiongnu are alike.

=== Language isolate theories ===
Turkologist Gerhard Doerfer has denied any possibility of a relationship between the Xiongnu language and any other known language, even any connection with Turkic or Mongolian.

== Geographic origins ==
The original geographic location of the Xiongnu is disputed among steppe archaeologists. Since the 1960s, the geographic origin of the Xiongnu has attempted to be traced through an analysis of Early Iron Age burial constructions. No region has been proven to have mortuary practices that clearly match those of the Xiongnu.

=== Archaeology ===

In the 1920s, Pyotr Kozlov oversaw the excavation of royal tombs at the Noin-Ula burial site in northern Mongolia, dated to around the first century CE. Other Xiongnu sites have been unearthed in Inner Mongolia, such as the Ordos culture. Sinologist Otto Maenchen-Helfen has said that depictions of the Xiongnu of Transbaikalia and the Ordos commonly show individuals with West Eurasian features. Iaroslav Lebedynsky said that West Eurasian depictions in the Ordos region should be attributed to a &quot;Scythian affinity&quot;.

Portraits found in the Noin-Ula excavations demonstrate other cultural evidences and influences, showing that Chinese and Xiongnu art have influenced each other mutually. Some of these embroidered portraits in the Noin-Ula kurgans also depict the Xiongnu with long braided hair with wide ribbons, which is seen to be identical with the Ashina clan hair-style. Well-preserved bodies in Xiongnu and pre-Xiongnu tombs in the Mongolian Republic and southern Siberia show both East Asian and West Eurasian features.

Analysis of cranial remains from some sites attributed to the Xiongnu have revealed that they had dolichocephalic skulls with East Asian craniometrical features, setting them apart from neighboring populations in present-day Mongolia. Russian and Chinese anthropological and craniofacial studies show that the Xiongnu were physically very heterogenous, with six different population clusters showing different degrees of West Eurasian and East Asian physical traits.
Presently, there exist four fully excavated and well documented cemeteries: Ivolga, Dyrestui, Burkhan Tolgoi, and Daodunzi. Additionally thousands of tombs have been recorded in Transbaikalia and Mongolia.

The archaeologists have chosen to, for the most part, refrain from positing anything about Han-Xiongnu relations based on the material excavated. However, they were willing to mention the following: &quot;There is no clear indication of the ethnicity of this tomb occupant, but in a similar brick-chambered tomb of the late Eastern Han period at the same cemetery, archaeologists discovered a bronze seal with the official title that the Han government bestowed upon the leader of the Xiongnu. The excavators suggested that these brick chamber tombs all belong to the Xiongnu (Qinghai 1993).&quot;Classifications of these burial sites make distinction between two prevailing type of burials: &quot;(1) monumental ramped terrace tombs which are often flanked by smaller &quot;satellite&quot; burials and (2) &#x27;circular&#x27; or &#x27;ring&#x27; burials.&quot; Some scholars consider this a division between &quot;elite&quot; graves and &quot;commoner&quot; graves. Other scholars, find this division too simplistic and not evocative of a true distinction because it shows &quot;ignorance of the nature of the mortuary investments and typically luxuriant burial assemblages [and does not account for] the discovery of other lesser interments that do not qualify as either of these types.&quot;

== Genetics ==
=== Maternal lineages ===

A 2003 study found that 89% of Xiongnu maternal lineages are of East Asian origin, while 11% were of West Eurasian origin. However, a 2016 study found that 37.5% of Xiongnu maternal lineages were West Eurasian, in a central Mongolian sample.

According to Rogers &amp; Kaestle (2022), these studies make clear that the Xiongnu population is extremely similar to the preceding Slab Grave population, which had a similar frequency of Eastern and Western maternal haplogroups, supporting a hypothesis of continuity from the Slab Grave period to the Xiongnu. They wrote that the bulk of the genetics research indicates that roughly 27% of Xiongnu maternal haplogroups were of West Eurasian origin, while the rest were East Asian.

Some examples of maternal haplogroups observed in Xiongnu specimens include D4b2b4, N9a2a, G3a3, D4a6 and D4b2b2b. and U2e1.

===Paternal lineages===
According to Rogers &amp; Kaestle (2022), roughly 47% of Xiongnu period remains belonged to paternal haplogroups associated with modern West Eurasians, while the rest (53%) belonged to East Asian haplogroups. They observed that this contrasts strongly with the preceding Slab Grave period, which was dominated by East Asian patrilineages. They suggest that this may reflect an aggressive expansion of people with West Eurasian paternal haplogroups, or perhaps the practice of marriage alliances or cultural networks favoring people with Western patrilines.

Some examples of paternal haplogroups in Xiongnu specimens include Q1b, C3, R1, R1b, O3a and O3a3b2, R1a1a1b2a-Z94, R1a1a1b2a2-Z2124, Q1a, N1a, J2a, J1a and E1b1b1a.

According to Lee &amp; Kuang, the main paternal lineages of 62 Xiongnu Elite remains in the Egiin Gol valley belonged to the paternal haplogroups N1c1, Q-M242, and C-M217. One sample from Duurlig Nars belonged to R1a1 and another to C-M217. Xiongnu remains from Barkol belonged exclusively to haplogroup Q. They argue that the haplogroups C2, Q and N likely formed the major paternal haplogroups of the Xiongnu tribes, while R1a was the most common paternal haplogroup (44.5%) among neighbouring nomads from the Altai mountain, who were probably incorporated into the Xiongnu confederation and may be associated with the Jie people.

===Autosomal ancestry===
A study published in the &quot;American Journal of Physical Anthropology&quot; in October 2006 detected significant genetic continuity between the examined individuals at Egyin Gol and modern Mongolians.
A genetic study published in &quot;Nature&quot; in May 2018 examined the remains of five Xiongnu. The study concluded that Xiongnu confederation was genetically heterogeneous, and Xiongnu individuals belonging to two distinct groups, one being of primarily East Asian origin (associated with the earlier Slab-grave culture) and the other presenting considerable admixture levels with West Eurasian (possibly from Central Saka) sources. The evidence suggested that the Huns probably emerged through minor male-driven geneflow into the Saka through westward migrations of the Xiongnu.

A study published in November 2020 examined 60 early and late Xiongnu individuals from across Mongolia. The study found that the Xiongnu resulted from the admixture of three different clusters from the Mongolian region. The two early genetic clusters are &quot;early Xiongnu_west&quot; from the Altai Mountains (formed at 92% by the hybrid Eurasian Chandman ancestry, and 8% BMAC ancestry), and &quot;early Xiongnu_rest&quot; from the Mongolian Plateau (individuals with primarily Ulaanzuukh-Slab Grave ancestry, or mixed with &quot;early Xiongnu_west&quot;). The later third cluster named &quot;late Xiongnu&quot; has even higher heterogenity, with the continued combination of Chandman and Ulaanzuukh-Slab Grave ancestry, and additional geneflow from Sarmatian and Han Chinese sources. Their uniparental haplogroup assignments also showed heterogenetic influence on their ethnogenesis as well as their connection with Huns. In contrast, the later Mongols had a much higher eastern Eurasian ancestry as a whole, similar to that of modern-day Mongolic-speaking populations.

A Xiongnu remain (GD1-4) analysed in a 2024 study was found to be entirely derived from Ancient Northeast Asians without any West Eurasian-associated ancestry. The sample clustered closely with a Göktürk remain (GD1-1) from the later Turkic period.

====Relationship between ethnicity and status among the Xiongnu====

Although the Xiongnu were ethnically heterogeneous as a whole, it appears that variability was highly related to social status. Genetic heterogeneity was highest among retainers of low status, as identified by their smaller and peripheral tombs. These retainers mainly displayed ancestry related to the Chandman/Uyuk culture (characterized by a hybrid Eurasian gene pool combining the genetic profile of the Sintashta culture and Baikal hunter-gatherers (Baikal EBA)), or various combinations of Chandman/Uyuk and Ancient Northeast Asian Ulaanzuukh/Slab Grave profiles.

On the contrary, high status Xiongnu individuals tended to have less genetic diversity, and their ancestry was essentially derived from the Eastern Eurasian Ulaanzuukh/Slab Grave culture, or alternatively from the Xianbei, suggesting multiple sources for their Eastern ancestry. High Eastern ancestry was more common among high status female samples, while low status male samples tended to be more diverse and having higher Western ancestry. A likely &quot;chanyu&quot;, a male ruler of the Empire identified by his prestigious tomb, was shown to have had similar ancestry as a high status female in the &quot;western frontiers&quot;, deriving about 39.3% Slab Grave (or Ancient Northeast Asian) genetic ancestry, 51.9% Han (or Yellow River farmers) ancestry, with the rest (8.8%) being Saka (Chandman) ancestry.
== Culture ==
===Art===

Within the Xiongnu culture more variety is visible from site to site than from &quot;era&quot; to &quot;era,&quot; in terms of the Chinese chronology, yet all form a whole that is distinct from that of the Han and other peoples of the non-Chinese north. In some instances, the iconography cannot be used as the main cultural identifier, because art depicting animal predation is common among the steppe peoples. An example of animal predation associated with Xiongnu culture is that of a tiger carrying dead prey. A similar motif appears in work from Maoqinggou, a site which is presumed to have been under Xiongnu political control but is still clearly non-Xiongnu. In the Maoqinggou example, the prey is replaced with an extension of the tiger&#x27;s foot. The work also depicts a cruder level of execution; Maoqinggou work was executed in a rounder, less detailed style. In its broadest sense, Xiongnu iconography of animal predation includes examples such as the gold headdress from Aluchaideng and gold earrings with a turquoise and jade inlay discovered in Xigoupan, Inner Mongolia.

Xiongnu art is harder to distinguish from Saka or Scythian art. There is a similarity present in stylistic execution, but Xiongnu art and Saka art often differ in terms of iconography. Saka art does not appear to have included predation scenes, especially with dead prey, or same-animal combat. Additionally, Saka art included elements not common to Xiongnu iconography, such as winged, horned horses. The two cultures also used two different kinds of bird heads. Xiongnu depictions of birds tend to have a medium-sized eye and beak, and they are also depicted with ears, while Saka birds have a pronounced eye and beak, and no ears. Some scholars claim these differences are indicative of cultural differences. Scholar Sophia-Karin Psarras suggests that Xiongnu images of animal predation, specifically tiger-and-prey, are spiritual, representative of death and rebirth, and that same-animal combat is representative of the acquisition or maintenance of power.

=== Rock art and writing ===

The rock art of the Yin and Helan Mountains is dated from the 9th millennium BC to the 19th century AD. It consists mainly of engraved signs (petroglyphs) and only minimally of painted images.

Chinese sources indicate that the Xiongnu did not have an ideographic form of writing like Chinese, but in the 2nd century BC, a renegade Chinese dignitary Yue &quot;taught the Shanyu to write official letters to the Chinese court on a wooden tablet 31 cm long, and to use a seal and large-sized folder.&quot; The same sources tell that when the Xiongnu noted down something or transmitted a message, they made cuts on a piece of wood (&#x27;ke-mu&#x27;), and they also mention a &quot;Hu script&quot; (vol. 110). At Noin-Ula and other Xiongnu burial sites in Mongolia and the region north of Lake Baikal, among the objects discovered during excavations conducted between 1924 and 1925 were over 20 carved characters. Most of these characters are either identical or very similar to letters of the Old Turkic alphabet of the Early Middle Ages found on the Eurasian steppes. From this, some specialists conclude that the Xiongnu used a script similar to the ancient &quot;Eurasian runiform&quot;, and that this alphabet was a basis for later Turkic writing.

=== Religion and diet ===
According to the Book of Han, &quot;the Xiongnu called Heaven (天) &#x27;Chēnglí,&#x27; (撐犁) a Chinese transcription of Tengri. The Xiongnu were a nomadic people. From their lifestyle of herding flocks and their horse-trade with China, it can be concluded that their diet consist mainly of mutton, horse meat and wild geese that were shot down. Historical evidence gives reason to believe that, from the 2nd century BC, proto-Mongol peoples (the Xiongnu, Xianbei, and Khitans) were familiar with Buddhism. On the territory of the Ivolginsk Settlement, remains of Buddhist prayer beads were found in a Xiongnu grave.

== See also ==
* List of Xiongnu rulers (Chanyus)
* Rulers family tree
* Nomadic empire
* Ethnic groups in Chinese history
* History of the Han dynasty
* Ban Yong
* Zubu
* List of largest empires
* Ordos culture

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; Primary sources
* Ban Gu et al., &quot;Book of Han&quot;, esp. vol. 94, part 1, part 2.
* Fan Ye et al., &quot;Book of the Later Han&quot;, esp. vol. 89.
* Sima Qian et al., &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot;, esp. vol. 110.

; Other sources consulted
* 
* 
* ()
* 
* (Proceedings of the First International Conference of Eurasian Archaeology, University of Chicago, 3–4 May 2002.)
* (original edition)
* (First paperback edition)
* 
* 
* Hall, Mark &amp; Minyaev, Sergey. Chemical Analyses of Xiong-nu Pottery: A Preliminary Study of Exchange and Trade on the Inner Asian Steppes. In: &quot;Journal of Archaeological Science&quot; (2002) 29, pp. 135–144
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Internet Archive
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Chapters:
** 〈魏晋杂胡考 一 屠各〉
** 〈魏晋杂胡考 四 乌丸〉
** 〈魏晋杂胡考 二 卢水胡〉
* 
* AuthorHouse.
== Further reading ==
* Davydova, Anthonina. The Ivolga archaeological complex. Part 1. The Ivolga fortress. In: &quot;Archaeological sites of the Xiongnu&quot;, vol. 1. St Petersburg, 1995.
* Davydova, Anthonina. The Ivolga archaeological complex. Part 2. The Ivolga cemetery. In: &quot;Archaeological sites of the Xiongnu&quot;, vol. 2. St Petersburg, 1996.
* Davydova, Anthonina &amp; Minyaev Sergey. The complex of archaeological sites near Dureny village. In: &quot;Archaeological sites of the Xiongnu&quot;, vol. 5. St Petersburg, 2003.
* Davydova, Anthonina &amp; Minyaev Sergey. The Xiongnu Decorative bronzes. In: &quot;Archaeological sites of the Xiongnu&quot;, vol. 6. St Petersburg, 2003.
* Helimski, Eugen. &quot;A szamojéd népek vázlatos története&quot; (Short History of the Samoyedic peoples). In: &quot;The History of the Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic Peoples&quot;. 2000, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
* Kiuner (Kjuner, Küner) [Кюнер], N.V. 1961. &quot;Китайские известия о народах Южной Сибири, Центральной Азии и Дальнего Востока&quot; (Chinese reports about peoples of Southern Siberia, Central Asia, and Far East). Moscow.
* Klyashtorny S.G. [Кляшторный С.Г.] 1964. &quot;Древнетюркские рунические памятники как источник по истории Средней Азии&quot;. (Ancient Türkic runiform monuments as a source for the history of Central Asia). Moscow: Nauka.
* Kradin , Nikolay. 2002. &quot;Hun Empire&quot;. Acad. 2nd ed., updated and added., Moscow: Logos, 
* Kradin, Nikolay. 2005. Social and Economic Structure of the Xiongnu of the Trans-Baikal Region. &quot;Archaeology, Ethnology &amp; Anthropology of Eurasia&quot;, No 1 (21), p. 79–86.
* Kradin, Nikolay. 2012. New Approaches and Challenges for the Xiongnu Studies. In: &quot;Xiongnu and its eastward Neighbours&quot;. Seoul, p. 35–51.
* Liu Mau-tsai. 1958. &quot;Die chinesischen Nachrichten zur Geschichte der Ost-Türken (T&#x27;u-küe)&quot;. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
* Minyaev, Sergey. On the origin of the Xiongnu // Bulletin of International association for the study of the culture of Central Asia, UNESCO. Moscow, 1985, No. 9.
* Minyaev, Sergey. News of Xiongnu Archaeology // Das Altertum, vol. 35. Berlin, 1989.
* Minyaev, Sergey. &quot;Niche Grave Burials of the Xiong-nu Period in Central Asia&quot;, Information Bulletin, Inter-national Association for the Cultures of Central Asia 17 (1990): 91–99.
* Minyaev, Sergey. The excavation of Xiongnu Sites in the Buryatia Republic// &quot;Orientations&quot;, vol. 26, n. 10, Hong Kong, November 1995.
* Minyaev, Sergey. Les Xiongnu// Dossiers d&#x27; archaeologie, # 212. Paris 1996.
* Minyaev, Sergey. Archaeologie des Xiongnu en Russie: nouvelles decouvertes et quelques Problemes. In: &quot;Arts Asiatiques&quot;, tome 51, Paris, 1996.
* Minyaev, Sergey. Derestuj cemetery. In: Archaeological sites of the Xiongnu, vol. 3. St-Petersburg, 1998.
* Minyaev, Sergey. The origins of the &quot;Geometric Style&quot; in Hsiungnu art // BAR International series 890. London, 2000.
* Minyaev, Sergey. Art and archeology of the Xiongnu: new discoveries in Russia. In: Circle of Iner Asia Art, Newsletter, Issue 14, December 2001, pp. 3–9
* Minyaev, Sergey. The Xiongnu cultural complex: location and chronology. In: &quot;Ancient and Middle Age History of Eastern Asia&quot;. Vladivostok, 2001, pp. 295–305.
* Miniaev, Sergey &amp; Elikhina, Julia. On the chronology of the Noyon Uul barrows. The Silk Road 7 (2009): 21–30.
* Minyaev, Sergey &amp; Sakharovskaja, Lidya. Investigation of a Xiongnu Royal Tomb in the Tsaraam valley, part 1. In: &quot;Newsletters of the Silk Road Foundation&quot;, vol. 4, no.1, 2006.
* Minyaev, Sergey &amp; Sakharovskaja, Lidya. Investigation of a Xiongnu Royal Tomb in the Tsaraam valley, part 2. In: &quot;Newsletters of the Silk Road Foundation&quot;, vol. 5, no.1, 2007.
* Minyaev, Sergey &amp; Smolarsky Phillipe. Art of the Steppes. Brussels, Foundation Richard Liu, 2002.
* Obrusánszky, Borbála. August 2009. Tongwancheng, city of the southern Huns. &quot;Transoxiana&quot;, August 2009, 14. .
* Petkovski, Elizabet. 2006. &quot;Polymorphismes ponctuels de séquence et identification génétique: étude par spectrométrie de masse MALDI-TOF&quot;. Strasbourg: Université Louis Pasteur. Dissertation
* Potapov, L.P. 1969. &quot;Этнический состав и происхождение алтайцев&quot; (Etnicheskii sostav i proiskhozhdenie altaitsev, Ethnic composition and origins of the Altaians). Leningrad: Nauka. Facsimile in Microsoft Word format.
* Potapov, L.P. [Потапов, Л.П.] 1966. Этнионим &quot;Теле&quot; и Алтайцы. &quot;Тюркологический сборник&quot; (The ethnonym &quot;Tele&quot; and the Altaians. &quot;Turcologica&quot;): 233–240. Moscow: Nauka.
* Talko-Gryntsevich, Julian. 1999. Paleo-Ethnology of Trans-Baikal area. In: &quot;Archaeological sites of the Xiongnu&quot;, vol. 4. St Petersburg.
* Taskin V.S. [Таскин В.С.]. 1984. &quot;Материалы по истории древних кочевых народов группы Дунху&quot; (Materials on the history of the ancient nomadic peoples of the Dunhu group). Moscow.
* Brosseder, Ursula, and Bryan Miller. &quot;Xiongnu Archaeology: Multidisciplinary Perspectives of the First Steppe Empire in Inner Asia&quot;. Bonn: Freiburger Graphische Betriebe- Freiburg, 2011.
* Hill, John E. (2009) &quot;Through the Jade Gate to Rome: A Study of the Silk Routes during the Later Han Dynasty, 1st to 2nd centuries CE&quot;. BookSurge, Charleston, South Carolina. . (Especially pp. 69–74)
* Houle, J. and L.G. Broderick (2011) &quot;Settlement Patterns and Domestic Economy of the Xiongnu in Khanui Valley, Mongolia&quot;, 137–152. In &quot;Xiongnu Archaeology: Multidisciplinary Perspectives of the First Steppe Empire in Inner Asia&quot;.
* 
* 
* Yap, Joseph P, (2019). The Western Regions, Xiongnu and Han, from the Shiji, Hanshu and Hou Hanshu. 


== External links ==

* Material Culture presented by University of Washington
* Encyclopedic Archive on Xiongnu
* The Xiongnu Empire
* The Silk Road Volume 4 Number 1
* The Silk Road Volume 9
* Gold Headdress from Aluchaideng
* Belt buckle, Xiongnu type, 3rd–2nd century B.C.
* Videodocumentation: Xiongnu – the burial site of the Hun prince (Mongolia)
* The National Museum of Mongolian History :: Xiongnu
* Xiongnu and the Central Plains: The Collision and Fusion of Civilizations, Henan Provincial Museum exhibition </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="4" end="11" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="31" end="44" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="48" end="63" title="Nomad" label="nomadic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="90" end="105" title="Chinese historiography" label="Chinese sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="129" end="144" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="197" end="208" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="255" end="269" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="321" end="327" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="374" end="380" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="385" end="394" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="411" end="428" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="480" end="487" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="489" end="503" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="505" end="510" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="515" end="523" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="555" end="572" title="Chinese dynasties" label="Chinese dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="717" end="728" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q744969" start="734" end="757" title="Han–Xiongnu Wars" label="centuries-long conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="893" end="909" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="942" end="957" title="Five Barbarians" label="Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="1014" end="1022" title="Han-Zhao" label="Han-Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539360" start="1024" end="1038" title="Northern Liang" label="Northern Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q546282" start="1043" end="1053" title="Xia (Sixteen Kingdoms)" label="Helian Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="1124" end="1129" title="Sakas" label="Sakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="1134" end="1144" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q636489" start="1179" end="1194" title="archaeogenetics" label="archaeogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="1285" end="1289" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1510" end="1517" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="1547" end="1551" title="Huna people" label="Huna"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="1663" end="1669" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="1671" end="1678" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="1680" end="1688" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="1690" end="1696" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27639" start="1698" end="1707" title="Yeniseian languages" label="Yeniseian"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="1938" end="1954" title="standard Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="2082" end="2093" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="2283" end="2294" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15910826" start="2339" end="2358" title="Eastern Han Chinese" label="Eastern Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="2788" end="2792" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="2812" end="2816" title="Huna people" label="Hūṇā"/>
<link wikidata="Q504017" start="2963" end="2973" title="Ongi River" label="Ongi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="2980" end="2988" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="3207" end="3225" title="Slab Grave Culture" label="Slab Grave Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="3227" end="3250" title="Ancient Northeast Asian" label="Ancient Northeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="3502" end="3514" title="Western Zhou" label="Western Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q860522" start="3637" end="3644" title="Xianyun" label="Xianyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144641" start="3646" end="3653" title="Guifang" label="Guifang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="3703" end="3709" title="Xirong" label="Xirong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049025" start="3711" end="3719" title="Shanrong" label="Shanrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018710" start="3723" end="3731" title="Quanrong" label="Quanrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q847641" start="3900" end="3916" title="Wei River" label="Wei River valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q285605" start="4007" end="4019" title="Siwa culture" label="Siwa culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818368" start="4104" end="4111" title="Haojing" label="Haojing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193397" start="4151" end="4154" title="King You of Zhou" label="You"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="4242" end="4251" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q917982" start="4271" end="4286" title="Pazyryk culture" label="Pazyryk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q72339091" start="4362" end="4370" title="Scythian cultures" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972343" start="4455" end="4476" title="Siberian Ice Princess" label="Siberian Ice Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4491" end="4498" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="4500" end="4510" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="4519" end="4534" title="Altay Mountains" label="Altay Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="4536" end="4546" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="4558" end="4566" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455" start="4586" end="4599" title="Ordos culture" label="Ordos culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="4621" end="4631" title="Ordos Loop" label="Ordos Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="4640" end="4654" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4656" end="4661" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4674" end="4680" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="4691" end="4699" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="4854" end="4860" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4997" end="5008" title="Han dynasty#Western Han" label="Western Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="5019" end="5028" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="5145" end="5175" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548287" start="5253" end="5260" title="Chunwei" label="Chunwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q627784" start="5333" end="5345" title="Yu the Great" label="Yu the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673403" start="5412" end="5418" title="Huaxia" label="Huaxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030751" start="5572" end="5590" title="Hua–Yi distinction" label="Hua–Yi distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163792" start="5658" end="5673" title="Yanmen Commandery" label="Wild Goose Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884456" start="5678" end="5681" title="Dai Commandery" label="Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909850" start="5727" end="5743" title="Zhao-Xiongnu War" label="Zhao-Xiongnu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q269915" start="5754" end="5764" title="sinologist" label="sinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294587" start="5765" end="5782" title="Edwin G. Pulleyblank" label="Edwin Pulleyblank"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="5882" end="5891" title="Donghu people" label="Hu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="5982" end="5991" title="Donghu people" label="Hu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="6072" end="6093" title="Five Barbarians" label="&amp;quot;Hu&amp;quot; people"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="6124" end="6138" title="nomadic people" label="nomadic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q860522" start="6369" end="6376" title="Xianyun" label="Xianyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="6385" end="6391" title="Xirong" label="Xirong"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="6612" end="6617" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="6637" end="6641" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="6721" end="6742" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="6764" end="6767" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q197430" start="6769" end="6773" title="Zhao (state)" label="Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055713" start="6778" end="6781" title="Yan (state)" label="Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909850" start="6910" end="6926" title="Zhao–Xiongnu War" label="Zhao–Xiongnu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="7020" end="7026" title="Xirong" label="Xirong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10877828" start="7040" end="7044" title="Yiqu" label="Yiqu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570252" start="7063" end="7071" title="Shaanbei" label="Shaanbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="7155" end="7161" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin ty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267754" start="7163" end="7202" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s campaign against the Xiongnu" label="Qin&amp;#x27;s campaign against the Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q719747" start="7495" end="7501" title="Touman" label="Touman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="7562" end="7575" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151702" start="7589" end="7598" title="Meng Tian" label="Meng Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267754" start="7604" end="7621" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s campaign against the Xiongnu" label="military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="7701" end="7711" title="Ordos Plateau" label="Ordos loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q719747" start="7721" end="7727" title="Touman" label="Touman"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="7767" end="7784" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="7846" end="7850" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="7870" end="7876" title="Chanyu" label="Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="7934" end="7945" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="7947" end="7958" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="7994" end="8007" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151705" start="8214" end="8231" title="Chu–Han Contention" label="internal conflict"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8256" end="8275" title="Han dynasty#Western Han" label="Western Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="8381" end="8384" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="8500" end="8511" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290031" start="8628" end="8636" title="Dingling" label="Dingling"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="8686" end="8699" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="8749" end="8755" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052359" start="8763" end="8776" title="Hexi Corridor" label="Hexi Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="8780" end="8785" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073056" start="8816" end="8825" title="skull cup" label="skull cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="8907" end="8919" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="9143" end="9148" title="Emperor Gaozu of Han" label="Gaozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190423" start="9780" end="9795" title="Western Regions" label="Western Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q846905" start="9963" end="9974" title="Book of Han" label="Book of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q855746" start="9998" end="10011" title="Duan Chengshi" label="Duan Chengshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q121905" start="10039" end="10073" title="Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang" label="Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="10147" end="10153" title="Chanyu" label="Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853616" start="10174" end="10183" title="Tuqi King" label="Tuqi King"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="10835" end="10851" title="Emperor of China" label="Emperor of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q747843" start="10930" end="10947" title="Khangai Mountains" label="Khangai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122026" start="10949" end="10955" title="Otuken" label="Otuken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="10958" end="10965" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="10971" end="10980" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089837" start="11128" end="11134" title="Ölziit, Arkhangai" label="Ulziit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207809" start="11145" end="11163" title="Arkhangai Province" label="Arkhangai Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="11183" end="11189" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="11306" end="11316" title="Ordos Loop" label="Ordos Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="11332" end="11337" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="11496" end="11501" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q72778" start="11505" end="11512" title="Taiyuan" label="Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="11514" end="11534" title="Emperor Gaozu of Han" label="Emperor Gaozu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="11578" end="11589" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271565" start="11598" end="11615" title="Battle of Baideng" label="Battle of Baideng"/>
<link wikidata="Q72877" start="12263" end="12272" title="Datong" label="Pingcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q697395" start="12561" end="12566" title="heqin" label="heqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="12611" end="12615" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="12617" end="12635" title="distilled beverage" label="distilled beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="12641" end="12645" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="12686" end="12699" title="Great Wall of China" label="boundary wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="12779" end="12782" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="12951" end="12956" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="12984" end="13004" title="Emperor Gaozu of Han" label="Emperor Gaozu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q298039" start="13011" end="13025" title="Empress Lü Zhi" label="Empress Lü Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593729" start="13083" end="13098" title="Laoshang Chanyu" label="Laoshang Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7221" start="13190" end="13201" title="Emperor Wen of Han" label="Emperor Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593729" start="13416" end="13431" title="Laoshang Chanyu" label="Laoshang Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="13542" end="13555" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q10946585" start="13611" end="13617" title="Anding Commandery" label="Anding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488378" start="13723" end="13732" title="Shangdang" label="Shangdang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880714" start="13755" end="13763" title="Yunzhong Commandery" label="Yunzhong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13783" end="13851" title="Heqin#Xiongnu" label="practiced marriage alliances with Han dynasty officers and officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="13924" end="13930" title="Chanyu" label="Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593729" start="14037" end="14045" title="Laoshang" label="Laoshang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="14046" end="14052" title="Chanyu" label="Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660024" start="14074" end="14081" title="Junchen" label="Junchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660255" start="14093" end="14101" title="Yizhixie" label="Yizhixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820363" start="14145" end="14153" title="Zhao Xin (general)" label="Zhao Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660263" start="14222" end="14230" title="Qiedihou" label="Qiedihou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="14257" end="14268" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q704673" start="14277" end="14284" title="Li Ling" label="Li Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q709993" start="14380" end="14390" title="Li Guangli" label="Li Guangli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968690" start="14407" end="14433" title="War of the Heavenly Horses" label="War of the Heavenly Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q857852" start="14470" end="14476" title="Hulugu" label="Hulugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280148" start="14510" end="14515" title="Su Wu" label="Su Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q197276" start="14618" end="14628" title="Zhang Qian" label="Zhang Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="14725" end="14739" title="Yenisei Kyrgyz" label="Yenisei Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="14740" end="14746" title="khagan" label="khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047076" start="14755" end="14779" title="Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate" label="Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q704673" start="14821" end="14828" title="Li Ling" label="Li Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="14853" end="14864" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q706443" start="14873" end="14881" title="Li Guang" label="Li Guang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15176" end="15179" title="Are Khagan" label="Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="15193" end="15209" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="15265" end="15278" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="15348" end="15359" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="15395" end="15409" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Han Emperor Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q197276" start="15446" end="15456" title="Zhang Qian" label="Zhang Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446144" start="15931" end="15949" title="Northern Silk Road" label="Northern Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7221" start="16071" end="16082" title="Emperor Wen of Han" label="Emperor Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q722331" start="16131" end="16188" title="Battle of Mayi" label="an abortive trap to ambush the &amp;quot;chanyu&amp;quot; at Mayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="16344" end="16354" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="16492" end="16499" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q701330" start="16588" end="16596" title="Wei Qing" label="Wei Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q380583" start="16668" end="16678" title="Huo Qubing" label="Huo Qubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="17207" end="17218" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968690" start="17820" end="17846" title="War of the Heavenly Horses" label="War of the Heavenly Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179260" start="17870" end="17876" title="Dayuan" label="Dayuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151796" start="17911" end="17925" title="Ferghana horse" label="Ferghana horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670841" start="18075" end="18080" title="Ordos Desert" label="Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q319412" start="18103" end="18110" title="Lop Nor" label="Lop Nor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="18162" end="18175" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190423" start="18227" end="18242" title="Western Regions" label="Western Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q366132" start="18368" end="18376" title="Ban Chao" label="Ban Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="18575" end="18584" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q315678" start="18709" end="18717" title="Gan Ying" label="Gan Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521359" start="18721" end="18726" title="Daqin" label="Daqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="18912" end="18919" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="19138" end="19150" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669878" start="19322" end="19330" title="tanistry" label="tanistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q857831" start="19537" end="19546" title="Woyanqudi" label="Woyanqudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986904" start="19852" end="19859" title="Huhanye" label="Huhanye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101072" start="20272" end="20285" title="Zhizhi Chanyu" label="Zhizhi Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q134485" start="20705" end="20718" title="Lake Balkhash" label="Lake Balkhash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986904" start="20772" end="20779" title="Huhanye" label="Huhanye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="20833" end="20842" title="Han China" label="Han China"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="21489" end="21503" title="Chinese New Year" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710367" start="21572" end="21586" title="Ganquan Palace" label="Ganquan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="21615" end="21621" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232" start="22038" end="22050" title="Emperor Yuan of Han" label="Emperor Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q701037" start="22119" end="22131" title="Wang Zhaojun" label="Wang Zhaojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202919" start="22173" end="22186" title="Four Beauties" label="Four Beauties"/>
<link wikidata="Q699886" start="22502" end="22511" title="Chen Tang (general)" label="Chen Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q870947" start="22643" end="22659" title="Battle of Zhizhi" label="Battle of Zhizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504769" start="22837" end="22848" title="Xin dynasty" label="Xin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="22968" end="22974" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268" start="23162" end="23177" title="Emperor Guangwu of Han" label="Emperor Guangwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q931522" start="23426" end="23446" title="fraternal succession" label="fraternal succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="23508" end="23521" title="heir-apparent" label="heir-apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453235" start="24126" end="24132" title="Orkhon Valley" label="Orkhon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24362" end="24371" title="Zhai Tong" label="Zhai Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q326917" start="24391" end="24399" title="Liaodong Peninsula" label="Liaodong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="24417" end="24423" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="24428" end="24435" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190423" start="24715" end="24730" title="Western Regions" label="Western Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299531" start="24806" end="24812" title="Dou Gu" label="Dou Gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818075" start="24838" end="24854" title="Battle of Yiwulu" label="great expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216622" start="24891" end="24902" title="Tarim Basin" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q366132" start="24959" end="24967" title="Ban Chao" label="Ban Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853969" start="25264" end="25270" title="Youliu" label="Youliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251323" start="25358" end="25366" title="Dou Xian" label="Dou Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q726485" start="25414" end="25433" title="Battle of Ikh Bayan" label="Battle of Ikh Bayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058229" start="25477" end="25492" title="Northern Chanyu" label="Northern Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25753" end="25760" title="Fenghou" label="Fenghou"/>
<link wikidata="Q129854572" start="26323" end="26343" title="Jushi Kingdom" label="Nearer Jushi Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q989892" start="26357" end="26361" title="Hami" label="Yiwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q855776" start="26419" end="26427" title="Ban Yong" label="Ban Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269357" start="26651" end="26662" title="Book of Wei" label="Book of Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q154923" start="26726" end="26732" title="Yueban" label="Yueban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328546" start="26744" end="26749" title="Kucha" label="Kucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q854062" start="26769" end="26774" title="Wusun" label="Wusun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="26807" end="26822" title="Altai mountains" label="Altai mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q915517" start="26831" end="26837" title="Kangju" label="Kangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="26841" end="26852" title="Transoxania" label="Transoxania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="26897" end="26909" title="Hephthalites" label="Hephthalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926379" start="27350" end="27365" title="Xihe Commandery" label="Xihe Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="27964" end="27971" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="28278" end="28284" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="28522" end="28527" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q28409718" start="28670" end="28678" title="Chuge" label="Xiuchuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038508" start="28702" end="28715" title="Bingzhou" label="Bing province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192088" start="28916" end="28923" title="Yufuluo" label="Yufuluo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="29044" end="29051" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q714428" start="29164" end="29170" title="He Jin" label="He Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q718232" start="29179" end="29186" title="Ten Attendants" label="eunuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q334081" start="29224" end="29233" title="Dong Zhuo" label="Dong Zhuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q73156" start="29317" end="29325" title="Linfen" label="Pingyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154778" start="29339" end="29348" title="Fen River" label="Fen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="29352" end="29358" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152716" start="29431" end="29440" title="Huchuquan Chanyu" label="Huchuquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116123" start="29737" end="29750" title="End of the Han dynasty" label="Han civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="29863" end="29870" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505185" start="29961" end="29969" title="Shuofang Commandery" label="Shuofang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880714" start="29974" end="29982" title="Yunzhong Commandery" label="Yunzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152716" start="30079" end="30088" title="Huchuquan Chanyu" label="Huchuquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274372" start="30104" end="30106" title="Ye, China" label="Ye"/>
<link wikidata="Q10941075" start="30239" end="30257" title="Taiyuan Commandery" label="Taiyuan Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="30272" end="30278" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273270" start="30533" end="30538" title="Qubei" label="Qubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q736647" start="30844" end="30857" title="Fang Xuanling" label="Fang Xuanling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154753" start="30865" end="30876" title="Book of Jin" label="Book of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28409718" start="30945" end="30950" title="Chuge" label="Chuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q112316701" start="30957" end="30964" title="Xianzhi" label="Xianzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320869" start="30996" end="31001" title="Tiele people" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q112316659" start="31035" end="31041" title="Chisha" label="Chisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474564" start="31113" end="31118" title="Alat tribe" label="Helai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038508" start="31580" end="31593" title="Bingzhou" label="Bing province"/>
<link wikidata="Q910051" start="31793" end="31795" title="Hu (people)" label="hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="32030" end="32045" title="Five Barbarians" label="Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="32059" end="32075" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="32088" end="32096" title="Han-Zhao" label="Han-Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q546282" start="32101" end="32111" title="Helian Xia" label="Helian Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539360" start="32194" end="32208" title="Northern Liang" label="Northern Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040487" start="32229" end="32237" title="Lushuihu" label="Lushuihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196190" start="32311" end="32317" title="Shi Le" label="Shi Le"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314907" start="32338" end="32348" title="Later Zhao" label="Later Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="32493" end="32496" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144801" start="32732" end="32739" title="Liu Bao" label="Liu Bao"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="32799" end="32806" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="32811" end="32822" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Western Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="33038" end="33047" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="33210" end="33234" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="War of the Eight Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q714159" start="33345" end="33353" title="Liu Yuan (Han-Zhao)" label="Liu Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="33830" end="33841" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q697395" start="33922" end="33927" title="heqin" label="heqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q73156" start="34130" end="34138" title="Linfen" label="Pingyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q714176" start="34264" end="34272" title="Liu Cong (Han-Zhao)" label="Liu Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="34399" end="34406" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361" start="34439" end="34458" title="Emperor Huai of Jin" label="Emperor Huai of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481148" start="34484" end="34503" title="Disaster of Yongjia" label="Disaster of Yongjia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="34536" end="34549" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382" start="34561" end="34572" title="Emperor Min of Jin" label="Emperor Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="34665" end="34678" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330294" start="34682" end="34690" title="Jiankang" label="Jiankang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="34724" end="34743" title="Eastern Jin dynasty" label="Eastern Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050320" start="34989" end="35001" title="Consort kin" label="consort kins"/>
<link wikidata="Q28654" start="35006" end="35013" title="Eunuchs in China" label="eunuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196190" start="35168" end="35174" title="Shi Le" label="Shi Le"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="35189" end="35192" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028544" start="35310" end="35318" title="Jin Zhun" label="Jin Zhun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149197" start="35453" end="35460" title="Liu Yao" label="Liu Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149197" start="35597" end="35604" title="Liu Yao" label="Liu Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="35802" end="35813" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q714176" start="35992" end="36000" title="Liu Cong (Han-Zhao)" label="Liu Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="36063" end="36071" title="Han-Zhao" label="Han-Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="36269" end="36280" title="Former Zhao" label="Former Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314907" start="36318" end="36328" title="Later Zhao" label="Later Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q189923" start="36365" end="36374" title="Guanzhong" label="Guanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q943392" start="36459" end="36471" title="Former Liang" label="Former Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196298" start="36476" end="36483" title="Chouchi" label="Chouchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="36555" end="36562" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q546282" start="37056" end="37061" title="Tiefu" label="Tiefu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273270" start="37088" end="37093" title="Qubei" label="Qubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7219813" start="37133" end="37137" title="Dugu (surname)" label="Dugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="37225" end="37232" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="37309" end="37315" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q910051" start="37398" end="37400" title="Hu (people)" label="hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="37419" end="37425" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10878207" start="37461" end="37467" title="Liu Hu (Tiefu)" label="Liu Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505185" start="37533" end="37552" title="Shuofang Commandery" label="Shuofang Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="37560" end="37570" title="Ordos Loop" label="Ordos Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="37712" end="37732" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q254752" start="37742" end="37750" title="Liu Bobo" label="Liu Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="37844" end="37849" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730130" start="37854" end="37863" title="Later Qin" label="Later Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q546282" start="38015" end="38033" title="Hu Xia dynasty" label="Helian Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="38177" end="38188" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q189923" start="38504" end="38513" title="Guanzhong" label="Guanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="38530" end="38549" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Eastern Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653875" start="38556" end="38573" title="Liu Yu&amp;#x27;s Northern Expeditions" label="Jin destroyed Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149447" start="38718" end="38730" title="Helian Chang" label="Helian Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149413" start="38790" end="38801" title="Helian Ding" label="Helian Ding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668970" start="38834" end="38845" title="Western Qin" label="Western Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196201" start="38912" end="38919" title="Tuyuhun" label="Tuyuhun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539360" start="38956" end="38970" title="Northern Liang" label="Northern Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q897898" start="39072" end="39084" title="Tongwancheng" label="Tongwancheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040487" start="39568" end="39576" title="Lushuihu" label="Lushuihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539360" start="39601" end="39623" title="Northern Liang" label="Northern Liang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="39638" end="39643" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="39875" end="39888" title="Yuezhi" label="Lesser Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="39920" end="39925" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="40218" end="40226" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800426" start="40293" end="40303" title="Tiantishan Caves" label="Tiantishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43286" start="40308" end="40313" title="Mogao Caves" label="Mogao"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="40408" end="40428" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q877381" start="40474" end="40482" title="Gaochang" label="Gaochang"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="40638" end="40651" title="Zhongyuan" label="Central Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708317" start="42073" end="42090" title="Joseph de Guignes" label="Joseph de Guignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q290194" start="42304" end="42327" title="Étienne de la Vaissière" label="Étienne de la Vaissière"/>
<link wikidata="Q578359" start="42351" end="42365" title="Sogdian alphabet" label="Sogdian script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892172" start="42862" end="42874" title="Proto-Mongols" label="proto-Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="42887" end="42893" title="Rouran" label="Rouran"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="42933" end="42956" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars of Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205979" start="43056" end="43063" title="Sogdian language" label="Sogdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430369" start="43116" end="43136" title="Harold Walter Bailey" label="Harold Walter Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="43149" end="43156" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="43264" end="43271" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q967263" start="43300" end="43323" title="Christopher I. Beckwith" label="Christopher I. Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="43374" end="43382" title="Scythians" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="43384" end="43388" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="43393" end="43399" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q391015" start="43429" end="43454" title="Eastern Iranian languages" label="Eastern Iranian Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="43692" end="43698" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034062" start="43774" end="43788" title="János Harmatta" label="János Harmatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q749834" start="43931" end="43948" title="Scythian languages" label="Scythian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q368183" start="44610" end="44622" title="Lajos Ligeti" label="Lajos Ligeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294587" start="44712" end="44729" title="Edwin Pulleyblank" label="Edwin Pulleyblank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="44832" end="44835" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q75921884" start="44891" end="44903" title="Hyun Jin Kim" label="Hyun Jin Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q848595" start="45090" end="45095" title="Alexander Vovin" label="Vovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q918008" start="45563" end="45569" title="Tarkhan" label="tarqan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453700" start="45571" end="45576" title="tegin" label="tegin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="45581" end="45587" title="Khagan" label="kaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503083" start="46917" end="46927" title="Ket people" label="Ket people"/>
<link wikidata="Q34005" start="46965" end="46974" title="Samoyedic languages" label="Samoyedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343324" start="47978" end="47989" title="Edward Harper Parker" label="E.H. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q716743" start="47991" end="48015" title="Jean-Pierre Abel-Rémusat" label="Jean-Pierre Abel-Rémusat"/>
<link wikidata="Q77068" start="48017" end="48032" title="Julius Klaproth" label="Julius Klaproth"/>
<link wikidata="Q162051" start="48034" end="48054" title="Gustaf John Ramstedt" label="Gustaf John Ramstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77945" start="48056" end="48076" title="Annemarie von Gabain" label="Annemarie von Gabain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079209" start="48082" end="48096" title="Charles Hucker" label="Charles Hucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090275" start="48300" end="48314" title="Craig Benjamin" label="Craig Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892172" start="48357" end="48370" title="proto-Mongols" label="proto-Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290031" start="48416" end="48424" title="Dingling" label="Dingling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285731" start="48513" end="48525" title="Book of Zhou" label="Book of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188548" start="48539" end="48572" title="History of the Northern Dynasties" label="History of the Northern Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615272" start="48586" end="48594" title="Tongdian" label="Tongdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q386073" start="48608" end="48624" title="New Book of Tang" label="New Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="48636" end="48644" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürks"/>
<link wikidata="Q686722" start="48660" end="48666" title="Ashina tribe" label="Ashina"/>
<link wikidata="Q533985" start="48857" end="48866" title="Pingliang" label="Pingliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="48882" end="48896" title="Gansu province" label="Gansu province"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="48898" end="48903" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269357" start="49049" end="49055" title="Weishu" label="Weishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="49082" end="49098" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269357" start="49138" end="49149" title="Book of Wei" label="Book of Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058229" start="49204" end="49227" title="Northern Chanyu" label="Northern Xiongnu chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154753" start="49337" end="49348" title="Book of Jin" label="Book of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472004" start="49394" end="49404" title="Former Yan" label="Former Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474564" start="49440" end="49444" title="Alat tribe" label="Alat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34988" start="49609" end="49619" title="Old Turkic" label="Old Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="49706" end="49713" title="Kumo Xi" label="Kumo Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="49718" end="49725" title="Khitans" label="Khitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="49847" end="49865" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="49910" end="49928" title="Slab Grave Culture" label="Slab Grave Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="50056" end="50063" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q381482" start="50065" end="50080" title="Hyacinth (Bichurin)" label="Nikita Bichurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="50104" end="50111" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="50136" end="50145" title="dynasty" label="dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="50163" end="50172" title="ethnicity" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143142" start="50198" end="50210" title="Book of Song" label="Book of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="50222" end="50228" title="Rouran Khaganate" label="Rouran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269357" start="50236" end="50247" title="Book of Wei" label="Book of Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892172" start="50275" end="50289" title="proto-Mongols" label="Proto-Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="50290" end="50303" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317268" start="50366" end="50371" title="Tatar confederation" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285767" start="50443" end="50456" title="Book of Liang" label="Book of Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146980" start="50526" end="50542" title="Old Book of Tang" label="Old Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156924" start="50603" end="50614" title="Book of Sui" label="Book of Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q386073" start="50616" end="50632" title="New Book of Tang" label="New Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="50654" end="50661" title="Khitan people" label="Khitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="50842" end="50851" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic-"/>
<link wikidata="Q107619002" start="50856" end="50870" title="Para-Mongolic languages" label="Para-Mongolic-"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="50924" end="50930" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="51195" end="51202" title="Kumo Xi" label="Kumo Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="51230" end="51238" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320869" start="51243" end="51248" title="Tiele people" label="Tiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="51251" end="51263" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q565148" start="51368" end="51377" title="Qiu Chuji" label="Qiu Chuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q857896" start="51468" end="51482" title="Soyombo symbol" label="Soyombo symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627210" start="51696" end="51724" title="Albert Terrien de Lacouperie" label="Albert Terrien de Lacouperie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320869" start="52211" end="52223" title="Tiele people" label="Tiele people"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="52259" end="52273" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285731" start="52298" end="52310" title="Book of Zhou" label="Book of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188548" start="52331" end="52364" title="History of Northern Dynasties" label="History of the Northern Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q686722" start="52376" end="52382" title="Ashina tribe" label="Ashina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156924" start="52494" end="52505" title="Book of Sui" label="Book of Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615272" start="52526" end="52534" title="Tongdian" label="Tongdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q533985" start="52585" end="52594" title="Pingliang" label="Pingliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="52759" end="52764" title="Five Barbarians" label="Wu Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="52858" end="52863" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="52868" end="52872" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="52879" end="52888" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="52906" end="52913" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404252" start="52923" end="52930" title="Name of Turkey" label="Tourkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="52956" end="52965" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="52966" end="52985" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="emperor and scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="52986" end="53017" title="Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus" label="Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="53036" end="53060" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="53124" end="53131" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34283" start="53283" end="53290" title="Yugur" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269357" start="53360" end="53366" title="Weishu" label="Weishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="53393" end="53409" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263" start="53589" end="53604" title="Uyghur language" label="Uyghur language"/>
<link wikidata="Q428299" start="53609" end="53628" title="Old Uyghur language" label="Old Uyghur language"/>
<link wikidata="Q494532" start="53804" end="53818" title="Munmu of Silla" label="Munmu of Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11263525" start="53947" end="53955" title="Koreanic languages" label="Koreanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q120987" start="54133" end="54148" title="Gerhard Doerfer" label="Gerhard Doerfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="54518" end="54532" title="Early Iron Age" label="Early Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451172" start="54589" end="54597" title="Morgue" label="mortuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377678" start="54685" end="54697" title="Pyotr Kozlov" label="Pyotr Kozlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822100" start="54743" end="54763" title="Noin-Ula burial site" label="Noin-Ula burial site"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="54867" end="54881" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455" start="54895" end="54908" title="Ordos culture" label="Ordos culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q269915" start="54910" end="54920" title="Sinologist" label="Sinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q644111" start="54985" end="54996" title="Transbaikal" label="Transbaikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822100" start="55224" end="55244" title="Noin-Ula burial site" label="Noin-Ula excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737" start="55424" end="55430" title="kurgan" label="kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q686722" start="55537" end="55548" title="Ashina tribe" label="Ashina clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="55623" end="55641" title="Mongolian Republic" label="Mongolian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="55655" end="55662" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748758" start="55811" end="55826" title="dolichocephalic" label="dolichocephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197240" start="56256" end="56262" title="Ivolga archaeological site" label="Ivolga"/>
<link wikidata="Q644111" start="56358" end="56369" title="Transbaikal" label="Transbaikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="58102" end="58112" title="Slab Grave culture" label="Slab Grave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58529" end="58535" title="Haplogroup D (mtDNA)#D4" label="D4b2b4"/>
<link wikidata="Q118710" start="58537" end="58542" title="Haplogroup N (mtDNA)" label="N9a2a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544382" start="58544" end="58548" title="Haplogroup G (mtDNA)" label="G3a3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58550" end="58554" title="Haplogroup D (mtDNA)#D4" label="D4a6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58559" end="58566" title="Haplogroup D (mtDNA)#D4" label="D4b2b2b"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58572" end="58576" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)#Haplogroup U2" label="U2e1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="58874" end="58884" title="Slab Grave culture" label="Slab Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q169543" start="59228" end="59231" title="haplogroup Q (Y-DNA)" label="Q1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651742" start="59233" end="59235" title="Haplogroup C-M217" label="C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133474" start="59237" end="59239" title="Haplogroup R1" label="R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="59241" end="59244" title="Haplogroup R1b" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q428871" start="59246" end="59249" title="Haplogroup O-M175" label="O3a"/>
<link wikidata="Q428871" start="59254" end="59260" title="Haplogroup O-M175" label="O3a3b2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024914" start="59305" end="59308" title="Haplogroup J-M172" label="J2a"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118590" start="59310" end="59313" title="Haplogroup J-M267" label="J1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033864" start="59318" end="59325" title="E1b1b" label="E1b1b1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q236910" start="59420" end="59429" title="Egiin Gol" label="Egiin Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q49681" start="59462" end="59478" title="Haplogroup N1c1" label="haplogroups N1c1"/>
<link wikidata="Q169543" start="59480" end="59486" title="Haplogroup Q-M242" label="Q-M242"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651742" start="59492" end="59498" title="Haplogroup C-M217" label="C-M217"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="59541" end="59545" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a1"/>
<link wikidata="Q808309" start="59590" end="59596" title="Barkol Kazakh Autonomous County" label="Barkol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="59949" end="59959" title="Jie people" label="Jie people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744260" start="60018" end="60059" title="American Journal of Physical Anthropology" label="American Journal of Physical Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="60226" end="60232" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="60448" end="60458" title="East Asian" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="60495" end="60513" title="Slab-grave culture" label="Slab-grave culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="60659" end="60663" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="61070" end="61085" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914731" start="61124" end="61132" title="Chandman" label="Chandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054850" start="61150" end="61154" title="Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex" label="BMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="61210" end="61218" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q118898954" start="61256" end="61266" title="Ulaanzuukh" label="Ulaanzuukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="61267" end="61277" title="Slab Grave" label="Slab Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914731" start="61454" end="61462" title="Chandman" label="Chandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q118898954" start="61467" end="61477" title="Ulaanzuukh" label="Ulaanzuukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="61478" end="61488" title="Slab Grave" label="Slab Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="61528" end="61537" title="Sarmatian" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="61542" end="61553" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="61724" end="61731" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="61938" end="61962" title="Ancient Northeast Asians" label="Ancient Northeast Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="62046" end="62053" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914731" start="62472" end="62493" title="Chandman culture" label="Chandman/Uyuk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q656393" start="62577" end="62594" title="Sintashta culture" label="Sintashta culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="62624" end="62634" title="Baikal EBA" label="Baikal EBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914731" start="62665" end="62678" title="Chandman culture" label="Chandman/Uyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q118898954" start="62707" end="62717" title="Ulaanzuukh" label="Ulaanzuukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="62718" end="62728" title="Slab Grave" label="Slab Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q118898954" start="62897" end="62907" title="Ulaanzuukh" label="Ulaanzuukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="62908" end="62926" title="Slab Grave culture" label="Slab Grave culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="62954" end="62961" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="63198" end="63204" title="chanyu" label="chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="63397" end="63407" title="Slab Grave culture" label="Slab Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="63412" end="63435" title="Ancient Northeast Asian" label="Ancient Northeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="63461" end="63464" title="Han people" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="63528" end="63532" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914731" start="63534" end="63542" title="Chandman culture" label="Chandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q124092285" start="64130" end="64140" title="Maoqinggou" label="Maoqinggou"/>
<link wikidata="Q123105303" start="64642" end="64650" title="Xigoupan" label="Xigoupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="64711" end="64715" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092377" start="64719" end="64731" title="Scythian art" label="Scythian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152132" start="65682" end="65685" title="Yin Mountains" label="Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13770" start="65690" end="65705" title="Helan Mountains" label="Helan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="65856" end="65871" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Chinese sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="66033" end="66039" title="Shanyu" label="Shanyu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66364" end="66367" title=":zh:s:史記/卷110" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058305" start="66654" end="66673" title="Old Turkic alphabet" label="Old Turkic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q846905" start="66957" end="66968" title="Book of Han" label="Book of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481517" start="67059" end="67065" title="Tengri" label="Tengri"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="67229" end="67235" title="Lamb and mutton" label="mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124327" start="67237" end="67247" title="horse meat" label="horse meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="67394" end="67401" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="67407" end="67414" title="Khitan people" label="Khitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129913" start="67511" end="67523" title="prayer beads" label="prayer beads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67573" end="67605" title="Chanyu#List of Xiongnu Chanyus" label="List of Xiongnu rulers (Chanyus)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67608" end="67626" title="Chanyu#Chanyu family trees" label="Rulers family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495771" start="67629" end="67643" title="Nomadic empire" label="Nomadic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141544" start="67646" end="67678" title="Ethnic groups in Chinese history" label="Ethnic groups in Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709899" start="67681" end="67707" title="History of the Han dynasty" label="History of the Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q855776" start="67710" end="67718" title="Ban Yong" label="Ban Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567112" start="67721" end="67725" title="Zubu" label="Zubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="67728" end="67751" title="List of largest empires" label="List of largest empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455" start="67754" end="67767" title="Ordos culture" label="Ordos culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q439681" start="67853" end="67859" title="Ban Gu" label="Ban Gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q846905" start="67874" end="67885" title="Book of Han" label="Book of Han"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67907" end="67913" title=":zh:s:漢書/卷094上" label="part 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67915" end="67921" title=":zh:s:漢書/卷094下" label="part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q740373" start="67925" end="67931" title="Fan Ye (historian)" label="Fan Ye"/>
<link wikidata="Q430428" start="67946" end="67967" title="Book of the Later Han" label="Book of the Later Han"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67980" end="67987" title=":zh:s:後漢書/卷89" label="vol. 89"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="67991" end="68000" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="68015" end="68045" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="68058" end="68066" title=":zh:s:史記/卷110" label="vol. 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070691" start="70209" end="70261" title="Archaeology, Ethnology &amp;amp; Anthropology of Eurasia" label="Archaeology, Ethnology &amp;amp; Anthropology of Eurasia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74321" wikidata="Q2688940" url="?curid=74321" title="Fotheringhay">
<text>Fotheringhay is a village and civil parish in North Northamptonshire, England. It is north-east of Oundle and around west of Peterborough. It is most noted for being the site of Fotheringhay (or Fotheringay) Castle which was razed in 1627. There is nothing left of the castle to be seen today other than the motte on which it was built that provides excellent views of the River Nene. The Nene Way long distance footpath runs through the village.

As the home of the great Yorkist line, the village was, for a considerable part of the 15th and 16th centuries, of national standing. The death of Richard III at Bosworth Field altered its history irrevocably. As the historian John Nicholls stated, &quot;Fotheringhay has been distinguished beyond any other place in Britain, except the Capital, by the aggravated misfortunes of Royalty.&quot;

At the time of the 2001 census, the parish&#x27;s population was 123 people, reducing to 119 at the 2011 census.

== History ==

The first written mention of a settlement here was in 1060, and the Domesday Book of 1086 lists the site as &#x27;Fodringeia&#x27;. John Leland wrote this as &#x27;Foderingeye&#x27; or &quot;Fodering inclosure&quot;, referring to the section of the forest that is segregated for the purpose of producing hay. During the medieval period the village was variously mentioned as Foderingey, Foderinghay, Forderinghay, and Fotheringhaye.

Access to the village was formerly via a ford of the Nene adjacent to the former castle site. The first bridge built was ordered by Elizabeth I in 1573. The present bridge was built by George Portwood of Stamford in 1722 under the orders of the Earl of Nottingham, then proprietor of the estate.

In medieval times, it hosted a weekly market, held between at least the start of the fourteenth century and around the mid-fifteenth century, and was also the site of an annual fair beginning on the eve of the feast of St Michael (later moving to the Sunday after Relic Sunday in July and still celebrated in the nineteenth century).

Sixteenth-century Fotheringhay, as observed by Leland, consisted a single street of around 40 houses and a population of around 300. In the 17th century the population dropped sharply when the castle was destroyed. By 1811 it had risen to a peak of around 310 but has fallen steadily since. The present population is 125 (2006 est.).

The village was formerly home to a renowned grammar school, believed to have been formed as the continuation of the collegiate church and probably founded by Edward VI.

Notable former residents include Walter de Foderingey, the first principal of Balliol College, Oxford in 1282.

The lordship of the town and the castle passed through many hands through the years. From the Earl of Newport, the lordship passed to George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax, and thence to his son, William Savile, the second Marquis, who died without issue. The manor and castle were then sold by his father-in-law, Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham, to Hewer Edgeley Hewer (heir to William Hewer, Samuel Pepys&#x27; onetime servant and later protégé in the Admiralty). Hewer himself died without issue on 6 November 1728, when it passed to Hewer&#x27;s heirs, the Blackborne family. In 1797 Samuel Pepys&#x27;s great-great-nephew Samuel Pepys Cockerell sold the estate of Rev. Abraham Blackborne in Fotheringhay.

Eventually the lordship of the manor and castle came to the Belsey family.

== Fotheringhay Castle ==
After the manor came into the possession of Edward III he passed it to his son Edmund of Langley, 1st Duke of York, founder of the Yorkist line. The castle then became the home of the Dukes of York. Richard III was born there in 1452, and his father, Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York was re-buried at the nearby church in 1476. Duke Richard&#x27;s wife, Cecily Neville, Duchess of York, was later interred in the same tomb. The tomb opposite contains the body of Edward, the 2nd Duke of York, who was killed at the Battle of Agincourt.

Fotheringhay is also where Mary, Queen of Scots, was tried and beheaded in 1587, and her body lay there for some months before its burial at Peterborough Cathedral and then its final burial in Westminster Abbey. Although it is often said that James I destroyed the castle because his mother was killed there, the facts are rather more prosaic; it fell into such disrepair that it had to be pulled down, and the stones were all taken to be used in other buildings. Local legend has it that the staircase from the castle is now in the Talbot Hotel in Oundle.

== Church of St Mary and All Saints ==


The work on the present church was begun by Edward III who also built a college as a cloister on the church&#x27;s southern side. After completion in around 1430, a parish church of similar style was added to the western end of the collegiate church with work beginning in 1434. It is the parish church which still remains.

The large present church is named in honour of St Mary and All Saints, and has a distinctive tall tower dominating the local skyline. The church is Perpendicular in style and although only the nave, aisles and octagonal tower remain of the original building it is still in the best style of its period.

The church contains a notable 15th-century painted pulpit donated by Edward IV.

Edward of Norwich, 2nd Duke of York, who was killed at the Battle of Agincourt in 1415, Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York, and his wife, Cecily Neville as well as his son Edmund, Earl of Rutland, who with Richard himself, fell at the Battle of Wakefield in 1460, are buried in the church. After the choir of the church was destroyed in the 16th century, Elizabeth I ordered the removal of the smashed York tombs and created the present monuments to the third Duke and his wife around the altar.

The birthday of Richard III is commemorated annually by the Richard III Society by the placing of white roses in the church.

==References==
==External links==

*Pictures of Fotheringhay</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2688940" start="0" end="12" title="Fotheringhay" label="Fotheringhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30" end="42" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790121" start="46" end="68" title="North Northamptonshire" label="North Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q263497" start="99" end="105" title="Oundle" label="Oundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172438" start="125" end="137" title="Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439593" start="178" end="214" title="Fotheringhay Castle" label="Fotheringhay (or Fotheringay) Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="308" end="313" title="motte-and-bailey" label="motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q19722" start="373" end="383" title="River Nene" label="River Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991605" start="389" end="397" title="Nene Way" label="Nene Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405588" start="398" end="420" title="long distance footpath" label="long distance footpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="473" end="480" title="House of York" label="Yorkist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="595" end="606" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="610" end="624" title="Battle of Bosworth Field" label="Bosworth Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="862" end="873" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1040" end="1053" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="1104" end="1115" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="John Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743" start="1447" end="1451" title="ford (crossing)" label="ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1538" end="1549" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42828310" start="1591" end="1606" title="George Portwood" label="George Portwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000662" start="1610" end="1618" title="Stamford, Lincolnshire" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619683" start="1651" end="1669" title="Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham" label="Earl of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="1909" end="1932" title="Michaelmas" label="the feast of St Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311056" start="1967" end="1979" title="Relic Sunday" label="Relic Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="2531" end="2540" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="2621" end="2644" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326344" start="2749" end="2764" title="Earl of Newport" label="Earl of Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q335280" start="2789" end="2827" title="George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax" label="George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018148" start="2852" end="2866" title="William Savile, 2nd Marquess of Halifax" label="William Savile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619683" start="2970" end="3006" title="Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham" label="Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012287" start="3040" end="3053" title="William Hewer" label="William Hewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="3055" end="3067" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412384" start="3288" end="3310" title="Samuel Pepys Cockerell" label="Samuel Pepys Cockerell"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="3518" end="3528" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q305002" start="3553" end="3588" title="Edmund of Langley, 1st Duke of York" label="Edmund of Langley, 1st Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q337222" start="3658" end="3671" title="Duke of York" label="Dukes of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="3673" end="3684" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q312137" start="3725" end="3762" title="Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York" label="Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q238004" start="3833" end="3847" title="Cecily Neville" label="Cecily Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="4043" end="4063" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="4079" end="4087" title="Decapitation" label="beheaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259104" start="4157" end="4179" title="Peterborough Cathedral" label="Peterborough Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="4209" end="4226" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="4259" end="4266" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q263497" start="4565" end="4571" title="Oundle" label="Oundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="4659" end="4669" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609295" start="5088" end="5101" title="Perpendicular Period" label="Perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="5295" end="5301" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="5313" end="5322" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q452639" start="5325" end="5360" title="Edward of Norwich, 2nd Duke of York" label="Edward of Norwich, 2nd Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q188495" start="5384" end="5403" title="Battle of Agincourt" label="Battle of Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q312137" start="5413" end="5450" title="Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York" label="Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q238004" start="5466" end="5480" title="Cecily Neville" label="Cecily Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285898" start="5500" end="5523" title="Edmund, Earl of Rutland" label="Edmund, Earl of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q906912" start="5563" end="5582" title="Battle of Wakefield" label="Battle of Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5683" end="5694" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q104585676" start="5885" end="5904" title="Richard III Society" label="Richard III Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74323" wikidata="Q357760" url="?curid=74323" title="Adjective phrase">
<text>An adjective phrase (or adjectival phrase) is a phrase whose head is an adjective. Almost any grammar or syntax textbook or dictionary of linguistics terminology defines the adjective phrase in a similar way, e.g. Kesner Bland (1996:499), Crystal (1996:9), Greenbaum (1996:288ff.), Haegeman and Guéron (1999:70f.), Brinton (2000:172f.), Jurafsky and Martin (2000:362). The adjective can initiate the phrase (e.g. &quot;fond of steak&quot;), conclude the phrase (e.g. &quot;very happy&quot;), or appear in a medial position (e.g. &quot;quite upset about it&quot;). The dependents of the head adjective—i.e. the other words and phrases inside the adjective phrase—are typically adverb or prepositional phrases, but they can also be clauses (e.g. &quot;louder than you are&quot;). Adjectives and adjective phrases function in two basic ways, attributively or predicatively. An attributive adjective (phrase) precedes the noun of a noun phrase (e.g. &quot;a very happy&quot; man). A predicative adjective (phrase) follows a linking verb and serves to describe the preceding subject, e.g. &quot;The man is very happy&quot;.

==Attributive vs. predicative==
The adjective phrases are underlined in the following example sentences. The head adjective in each of these phrases is in bold, and how the adjective phrase is functioning—attributively or predicatively—is stated to the right of each example:

The distinguishing characteristic of an attributive adjective phrase is that it appears inside the noun phrase that it modifies. An interesting trait of these phrases in English is that an attributive adjective alone generally precedes the noun, e.g. &quot;a proud man&quot;, whereas a head-initial or head-medial adjective phrase follows its noun, e.g. &quot;a man proud of his children&quot;. A predicative adjective (phrase), in contrast, appears outside of the noun phrase that it describes, usually after a linking verb, e.g. &quot;The man is proud of his children&quot;.

==Adjective vs. adjectival==
There is a tendency to call a phrase an &quot;adjectival phrase&quot; when that phrase is functioning like an adjective phrase, but is not actually headed by an adjective. For example, in &quot;Mr Clinton is a man of wealth&quot;, the prepositional phrase &quot;of wealth&quot; modifies &quot;a man&quot; in a manner similar to how an adjective phrase would, and it can be reworded with an adjective, e.g. &quot;Mr Clinton is a wealthy man&quot;. A more accurate term for such cases is &quot;phrasal attributive&quot; or &quot;attributive phrase&quot;.

== Constituency tests ==
Constituency tests can also be used to identify adjectives and adjective phrases. Here are the three constituency tests, according to X-bar theory, that prove the adjective phrase is both a constituent, and an AP.

In the following tests, consider the sentence: Sam ordered a very spicy pizza.

== Semantic ambiguity ==
Although constituency tests can prove the existence of an AP in a sentence, the meanings of these AP may be ambiguous. This ambiguity must be considered when considering the semantic versus pragmatic meaning. The following examples prove two things: 
# Adjective phrases that are pre-nominal create ambiguous interpretations.
# Head adjectives that move to post-nominal position creates unambiguous interpretations.

&quot;Note: This section can be added into the adjectives page, but ambiguity can also apply to adjective phrases. Additionally, comma placements and intonations may have a role in figuring out ambiguity, but English has a written form of communication that is more ambiguous than spoken communication.&quot;

The following examples show the different interpretive properties of pre- and post-nominal adjectives which are inside adjective phrases.

=== Intersective versus non-intersective interpretation of AP ===

This example showed then entire adjective phrase moving, creating the same ambiguity as example 1. Therefore, the placement of the adjective relative to the subject is important for creating unambiguous statements.

=== Restrictive versus non-restrictive interpretation of AP ===

The adjective blessed is ambiguous in pre-nominal position because it creates a restrictive and a nonrestrictive interpretation (a), while in post-nominal position it only displays a restrictive interpretation (b). Plus, when the main adjective of the adjective phrase is moved to post-nominal position, only one interpretation is possible.

There is cross-linguistic validity, according to the multiple articles referenced in Cinque&#x27;s article, which studied this adjective placement in Italian as well. Cinque discovered that exactly the same pattern was seen in Italian, because ambiguous interpretations only appeared when the adjective phrase was placed in pre-nominal position. Next, other research articles also confirm that this word order phenomenon exists in Mandarin Chinese, creating ambiguous interpretations. For example, an adjective phrase with the head adjective &quot;private&quot; in pre-object position, creates two interpretations. On the other hand, an adjective phrase with the head adjective &quot;private&quot; placed in post-object position only creates one interpretation.

==Tree diagram representations==
The structure of adjective phrases (and of all other phrase types) can be represented using tree structures. There are two modern conventions for doing this, constituency-based trees of phrase structure grammars and dependency-based trees of dependency grammars. Both types of trees are produced here. The important aspect of these tree structures—regardless of whether one uses constituency or dependency to show the structure of phrases—is that they are identified as adjective phrases by the label on the top node of each tree.

=== Head-final adjective phrases ===
The following trees illustrate head-final adjective phrases, i.e. adjective phrases that have their head adjective on the right side of the phrase:

The labels on the nodes in the trees are acronyms: A = adjective, Adv = adverb, AP = adjective phrase, N = noun/pronoun, P = preposition, PP = prepositional phrase. The constituency trees identify these phrases as adjective phrases by labeling the top node with AP, and the dependency trees accomplish the same thing by positioning the A node at the top of the tree.

=== Head-initial adjective phrases ===
The following trees illustrate the structure of head-initial adjective phrases, i.e. adjective phrases that have their head on the left side of the phrase:

=== Head-medial adjective phrases ===
The following trees illustrate the structure of head-medial adjective phrases:

==Notes==
==References==

*Brinton, L. 2000. &quot;The structure of modern English: A linguistic introduction&quot;. 
*Bolinger, D. 1967. Adjectives in English: Attribution and predication. Lingua18: 1–34.
*Carnie, A. 2013. &quot;Syntax: A generative introduction&quot;. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
*Cinque, G. (2014). The semantic classification of adjectives. A view from syntax. Studies in Chinese Linguistics. 35. 1-30. 
*Crystal, D. 1997. &quot;A dictionary of linguistics and phonetics&quot;, 4th edition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
*Culicover, Peter and Ray Jackendoff. 2005. &quot;Simpler Syntax&quot;. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
*Eroms, H.-W. 2000. &quot;Syntax der deutschen Sprache&quot;. Berlin: de Gruyter.
*Greenbaum, S. 1996. &quot;The Oxford English grammar&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 
*Haegeman, L. and J. Guéron 1999. &quot;English Grammar: A generative perspective&quot;. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
*Jurafsky, M. and J. Martin. 2000. &quot;Speech and language processing&quot;. Dorling Kindersley (India): Pearson Education, Inc.
*Kesner Bland, S. 1996. &quot;Intermediate grammar: From form to means and use&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press.
*Osborne, T. 2003. The left elbow constraint. &quot;Studia Linguistica&quot; 57, 3: 233–257.
*Ouhalla, J. 1994. &quot;Transformational grammar: From principles and parameters to minimalism&quot;. London: Arnold.
*Radford, A. 2004. &quot;English syntax: An introduction&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
*Sportiche, D., Koopman, H. J., &amp; Stabler, E. P. (2014). An introduction to syntactic analysis and theory. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
*Starosta, S. 1988. &quot;The case for lexicase&quot;. London: Pinter Publishers.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357760" start="3" end="19" title="Adjective phrase" label="adjective phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q357760" start="24" end="41" title="Adjective phrase" label="adjectival phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="48" end="54" title="phrase" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277394" start="61" end="65" title="Head (linguistics)" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="72" end="81" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q357760" start="373" end="382" title="Adjective phrase" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q117364" start="730" end="736" title="clause" label="clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931259" start="856" end="869" title="Predicative expression" label="predicatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="928" end="939" title="noun phrase" label="noun phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129955" start="1020" end="1032" title="linking verb" label="linking verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786828" start="2583" end="2595" title="Constituent (linguistics)" label="Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="3011" end="3020" title="Ambiguity" label="ambiguous"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841961" start="3077" end="3085" title="Semantic ambiguity" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="3093" end="3102" title="Pragmatics" label="pragmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="3367" end="3376" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="4890" end="4906" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="5441" end="5465" title="phrase structure grammar" label="phrase structure grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="5497" end="5515" title="dependency grammar" label="dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628027" start="7913" end="7931" title="Studia Linguistica" label="Studia Linguistica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74325" wikidata="Q28381902" url="?curid=74325" title="The Magic Roundabout">
<text>The Magic Roundabout is an English-language children&#x27;s programme that ran on BBC Television from 1965 to 1977.

It used the footage of the French stop motion animation show &quot;Le Manège enchanté&quot; but with completely different scripts and characters. The French series, created by Serge Danot with the help of Ivor Wood and Wood&#x27;s French wife, Josiane, was broadcast from 1964 to 1974 on ORTF (Office de Radiodiffusion Télévision Française). The scripts are simple fantasy stories aimed at pre-school children, with no relation to the real world. The BBC originally rejected translating the series because it was &quot;charming... but difficult to dub into English&quot;, but later produced a version of the series using the French footage with new English-language scripts unrelated to the original storylines. This version, written and told by Eric Thompson, was broadcast in 441 five-minute episodes between 18 October 1965 and 25 January 1977. It proved a great success and attained cult status, and when in October 1966 it was moved from the slot just before the evening news to an earlier children&#x27;s viewing time, adult viewers complained to the BBC.

==Characters==
Although the characters are common to both versions, they were given different names and personalities depending on the language.

The main character is Dougal (also known as Doogal) (Pollux in the original French-language version), who was a drop-eared variety of the Skye Terrier.

Other characters include Zebedee (Zébulon), a talking jack-in-the-box with magical powers; Brian (Ambroise), a snail; Ermintrude (Azalée), a cow; and Dylan (named after Bob Dylan) (Flappy), a hippy rabbit. There are two notable human characters: Florence (Margote), a young girl; and Mr Rusty (le Père Pivoine), the elderly moustached operator of the roundabout.

Other characters included Mr McHenry (Bonhomme Jouvence), the elderly gardener who rode a tricycle, and a talking locomotive with a 4-2-2 wheel arrangement and a two-wheel tender. Three other children, Paul, Basil and Rosalie, appeared in the original black-and-white serial and in the credit sequence of the colour episodes, but very rarely in subsequent episodes.

Dougal, Brian, Ermintrude and Dylan all reside in a place called The Magic Garden (Beautywood in the US version). The exact distance from where the roundabout and The Magic Garden are in relation to each other was never specifically stated, but, given Zebedee and Florence would always travel there by magical teleportation, it was either considerably far away or it was simply faster to get there by those means.

The show has a distinctive visual style. The set is a brightly coloured and stylised park containing the eponymous roundabout (a fairground carousel). The programmes were created by stop motion animation, which meant that Dougal was made without legs to make him easier to animate. Zebedee was created from a giant pea which was available in the animation studio and was re-painted. The look of these characters was the responsibility of British animator Ivor Wood, who was working at Danot&#x27;s studio at the time (and who subsequently animated &quot;The Herbs&quot;, &quot;Paddington Bear&quot;, &quot;Postman Pat&quot;, &quot;Gran&quot; and &quot;Bertha&quot;).

==English-language version==
Narration in the British BBC version was entirely new and bears very little to no resemblance to the French version. It was created by Eric Thompson from just the visuals, without any translation of the French scripts by Serge Danot. Thompson provided all the voices, whereas in the French version each character was voiced by a different actor.

The first British broadcasts were shown every weekday on BBC1 at 17:50, just before the early-evening news at 17:55. Although the exact time of the early evening news varied over the years, &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; kept its slot before the bulletins for the duration of its original broadcasting, except for 16:55 time slots during October to November 1966, and earlier times during parts of 1972 and 1973. This was the first time an entertainment programme had been transmitted in this way in the UK. The original series, which was a serial, was made in black and white. From the second series onwards it was made in colour, but the series was still broadcast in black and white by the BBC; the first colour episode of the show (&quot;Chocolate Soldiers&quot;) was transmitted on 5 October 1970.

(At the time of broadcast, the main BBC1 channel was still broadcast on the VHF band which was limited to 405 lines and did not support colour, while the newer BBC2 channel was in colour in the higher UHF band using PAL transmission for 625 lines.) 

52 additional episodes, claimed to have been not previously broadcast, were shown in the United Kingdom from January to March 1992 on Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;The Channel Four Daily&quot;. Thompson had died by this time, and the job of narrating them in a pastiche of Thompson&#x27;s style went to actor Nigel Planer. These episodes actually had been previously narrated by Thompson (particularly from the 1970-1971 series), being redubbed editions of the original French colour episodes by AB Productions (with different music) broadcast in 1990. An additional 43 episodes were narrated by Planer from April to September 1993, this time, with most of the episodes coming from a batch of new French episodes broadcast during that same year up until 1995.

The English version of Dougal was generally disparaging and had similarities with the television character of Tony Hancock, an actor and comedian. Ermintrude was rather matronly and fond of singing. Dylan was a hippy-like, guitar-playing rabbit, and rather dopey. Florence was portrayed as courteous and level-headed. Brian was unsophisticated but well-meaning.

Part of the show&#x27;s attraction was that it appealed to adults, who enjoyed the world-weary Hancock-style comments made by Dougal, as well as to children. The audience measured eight million at its peak. There are speculations about possible interpretations of the show. One is that the characters represented French politicians of the time, and that Dougal represented Charles de Gaulle. In fact, when Serge Danot was interviewed by Joan Bakewell on &quot;Late Night Line-Up&quot; in 1968 his associate (perhaps Jean Biard) said that in France it was thought at first that the UK version of Pollux had been renamed &quot;De Gaulle&quot;, mishearing the name Dougal (as seen in the Channel 4 documentary &quot;The Return of the Magic Roundabout&quot; (broadcast 08:50 on 25 December 1991 and 18:00 on 5 January 1992), and in the 2003 BBC4 documentary &quot;The Magic Roundabout Story&quot;).

Sometimes, the series broke the fourth wall. At the end of one episode, &quot;A Peaceful Day&quot;, when Zebedee called his catchphrase of &quot;Time for bed&quot;, Florence asked &quot;Already?&quot;, and Zebedee replied that &quot;It&#x27;s nearly time for the news, and you&#x27;ve had enough magic for one day&quot;. The news was broadcast just after &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot;. This story was later republished in print from Bloomsbury&#x27;s 1998 book &quot;The Adventures of Brian&quot;.

In 1971 Brockhampton Press, under their paperback imprint Knight Books, published two books written by Eric Thompson, &quot;The Adventures of Dougal&quot; and &quot;Dougal&#x27;s Scottish Holiday&quot;. These were original stories written by Thompson using the characters, and not versions of scripts from the series.

In 1998, Thompson&#x27;s stories were published by Bloomsbury Publishing Plc as a series of four paperbacks, &quot;The Adventures of Dougal&quot;, &quot;The Adventures of Brian&quot;, &quot;The Adventures of Dylan&quot; and &quot;The Adventures of Ermintrude&quot; with forewords by his daughter Emma Thompson. While &quot;The Adventures of Dougal&quot; featured republications of three exclusive book stories, the latter three featured scripts from the TV series. She explains that her father had felt that he was most like Brian of all the characters and that Ermintrude was in some respects based upon his wife, Phyllida Law.

For years, the series had reruns on Cartoon Network and was later moved to its sister channel, Boomerang. These airings mainly used episodes from the 1974 series, which have been renarrated by Jimmy Hibbert (who unlike the previous British dubs, actually translated the French scripts, though not entirely verbatim), though some episodes from the Nigel Planer dub aired as well.

A new version is being made by Method Animation, initially targeted for 2024, that will try to &quot;find a balance between the French and English contexts&quot;.

==Foreign-language versions==
* In Italy, the series was known as &quot;La giostra incantata&quot; (&quot;The Enchanted Carousel&quot;) and part of the series was broadcast since 1970 by the RAI state television network. In this version, Pollux/Dougal was renamed Bobo (initially Peluche) and the show stuck with the idea of giving each character its own voice. Bobo was still referred to as English but did not have an accent. The series was then re-distributed to local broadcasters as &quot;Bobo &amp; Company&quot;.
* In Portugal, the series was known as &quot;Carrossel Mágico&quot; (spelled as &quot;Carrocel Mágico&quot;), and aired on RTP in 1966. The dub was based on the original French version (with the characters having their own voices), and several of the characters were renamed, with Pollux/Dougal being called &quot;Franjinhas&quot;. It was also the first foreign children&#x27;s series to be dubbed into European Portuguese.
* In Germany and in Austria it was translated to &quot;Das Zauberkarussell&quot;. Most of the characters are given different names, except for Dougal and Zebedee who retain their original French names (Pollux and Zebulon, respectively).
** In Austria there was in 1974/75 a special version in &quot;Betthupferl&quot; (the same as the German &quot;Mr Sandman&quot;) called &quot;Gucki und seine Freunde&quot; (&quot;Cookie and his Friends&quot;), in which Cookie and his friend Apollonius always went through a hole in a tree to join the garden.
* In the United States, the series was called &quot;The Magic Carousel&quot; and it aired in the 1980s on &quot;Pinwheel&quot;, a programme on the children&#x27;s channel Nickelodeon. This version used American actors such as Michael Karp (the voice of Dougal in this version) and was based on the original French incarnation, such as the scripts being word for word translations, and the characters having voices strikingly similar to the French dub&#x27;s voices. Dylan and Mr. McHenry also retain their original French names (Flappy and Bonhomme Jouvence a.k.a. Mr. Young, respectively) with Mr Rusty having Mr. McHenry&#x27;s name. Aside from that however, most of the characters have their names from the British version.
* In the Netherlands, a Dutch version was aired by the NTS (Dutch Television Foundation, one of the national broadcasters at the time) in black and white as &#x27;De Minimolen&#x27; (&#x27;The Mini Carousel&#x27;). Starting on 5 June till 30 September 1967 the series aired on a six-day per week basis. The script in Dutch was written by Wim Meuldijk, at the time very successful in writing (and co-producing) the &#x27;Pipo&#x27; children&#x27;s series. A brief second run of &#x27;De Minimolen&#x27; went on air in the late summer of 1980.

==Theme tunes==
The show&#x27;s theme by Alain Legrand, was a cheerful organ tune. In the early black-and-white episodes, it was played more slowly with a degree of sadness. There were also two different additional theme songs for reruns of the original French version; the first, &quot;C&#x27;est moi, Pollux&quot; (1983), was a moderately popular single in France, while the theme from 1990 was an upbeat Hammond organ pop tune with children&#x27;s vocals.

==Film versions==
Unlike the series, both films featured a villain in the Magic Roundabout canon.

===&quot;Dougal and the Blue Cat&quot;===

Danot made a longer film, &quot;Pollux et le chat bleu&quot;, in 1970 which was also adapted by Thompson and shown in Britain as &quot;Dougal and the Blue Cat&quot;. The story centers around Dougal, who becomes suspicious when a blue cat arrives at the Magic Garden. It turned out the cat, named Buxton, was working for an unseen voice (named the Blue Voice) of an abandoned factory, who wanted to take over the garden and turn everything into the colour blue. Upon this takeover, the residents of the garden also ended up being imprisoned, except for Dougal, who made a plan to rescue his friends. Among the film&#x27;s many highlights, Buxton made a disguised Dougal face his ultimate weakness by locking him in a room full of sugar. The Blue Voice was voiced by Fenella Fielding and was the only time that Eric Thompson called in another person to voice a character.

===2005 film===

In 2005, a film adaptation (also called &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot;) was released. The movie was about Dougal, Ermintrude, Brian and Dylan going on a quest to stop Zebadee&#x27;s evil twin Zeebad, who intends on creating an eternal winter. It was made using modern computer animation, and adopted the approach of the original creator, Serge Danot, of giving each character its own voice rather than using a narrator. The voices included Tom Baker, Joanna Lumley, Ian McKellen, Jim Broadbent, Kylie Minogue, Robbie Williams, Ray Winstone, Bill Nighy and Lee Evans. The film received mixed reviews, with a 50% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, while &quot;Total Film&quot; ranked it as the 45th worst children&#x27;s movie ever made. The two-disc special edition of the UK DVD of the film features five of the original &quot;Magic Roundabout&quot; episodes (including the English version of &quot;Mr. Rusty Meets Zebedee&quot;, the very first episode from 1965) on the second disc. They are all presented in the original black and white with the option of viewing them in English or in the original French.

In 2006, the film was released in the U.S. as &quot;Doogal&quot;. The majority of original British voices were replaced by celebrities more familiar to the American public, such as Whoopi Goldberg and Chevy Chase. Only two original voices remained: those of Kylie Minogue and Ian McKellen. The final North American version was panned. As of September 2020, it had an 8% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. It received a score of 23 out of 100 (&quot;generally unfavorable&quot;) on Metacritic, and an F rating from &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; magazine. It was also a financial failure, grossing a total of 7.2 million dollars in the United States, which is considered low by CGI animated film standards.

====2007 continuation as a TV series ====
In 2007, a new TV version of &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; was created, with 52 x 11-minute episodes. The series was produced by Action Synthese, Films Action, Ellipsanime and Play Production with the participation of M6, Nickelodeon UK and Disney Television France. The scripts and voices were produced in the UK. The show was directed by Graham Ralph of Silver Fox Films and produced by Theresa Plummer Andrews.

Using the CGI designed versions of the original characters from the 2005 movie also produced by Action Synthese, the only new characters taken from the film are Mr. Grimsdale the baker and Soldier Sam. The series takes place after the events of the 2005 film of the same name. The new series also created a few original characters of its own such as Fly and Dougal&#x27;s Auntie Primrose.

Every episode would begin with Zebedee giving a brief summary to the audience of what will happen, before the plot begins. The episodes would also end with Zebedee throwing a party after the problems have been solved, with Dylan droopily remarking, &quot;I wish it was time for bed, man...&quot; (in reference to the original series&#x27; quote &quot;Time for bed&quot;) before drifting off to sleep.

The series was first broadcast in the UK from 22 October 2007 at 8.00 am on satellite channel Nick Jr. It was also broadcast on the children&#x27;s channel of China Central Television (CCTV-14) in Chinese during 2017 and was briefly available on Netflix in the US.

In October 2008, a Double DVD Bumper Pack Boxset of the 2007 reboot was released from Abbey Home Media, called &quot;Dougal&#x27;s Darling and The Wishing Tree&quot;. It featured 12 Season 1 episodes, all of which are in order except for the two titular episodes.

In 2010, a second season of 52 11-minute episodes was created. This season included ZDF as an additional participator.

==Parodies==
In 1975, Jasper Carrott released &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; (originally featured on his first live LP &quot;Jasper Carrot – In the Club&quot;), a short, risqué comic monologue, parodying the children&#x27;s TV series, as the B-side of a 7-inch single, featuring his comic song &quot;Funky Moped&quot; on the A-side. The record was a hit, reaching number 5 in the UK Singles Chart. The show&#x27;s theme music also featured on two minor UK hit singles in 1991, &quot;Summer&#x27;s Magic&quot; by Mark Summers and &quot;Magic Style&quot; by The Badman.

==Records==
In 1971, BBC Records released &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; (RBT 8), an LP containing 10 stories taken from the soundtracks of the TV series as told by Eric Thompson. The stories were: &quot;Dougal&#x27;s Experiment&quot;, &quot;A Starry Night&quot;, &quot;The Moody Concerto&quot;, &quot;Dougal&#x27;s Adventure&quot;, and &quot;The Stiff Necked Heliotropes&quot; on side one and &quot;The Birds School&quot;, &quot;The Piano Carrier&quot;, &quot;Banana Skin&quot;, &quot;The Musical Box&quot;, and &quot;The Announcer&quot; on side two. This album has been re-released twice on CD by the BBC, first in 2005 (BBC Audio:Children&#x27;s) to coincide with the &#x27;new&#x27; film and again in 2010 (Vintage Beeb), featuring the original LP artwork and a bonus interview with Eric Thompson.

French soundtrack recordings were also issued in France in the 1960s on three EPs and again on an LP &quot;Pollux&quot; in 1983, along with an original single &quot;C&#x27;est moi Pollux&quot;.

==Home releases==
Between 1993 and 1997, two videos of the re-narrated version have been released by PolyGram Video.

In 1999, the original film &quot;Dougal and the Blue Cat&quot; has released on video by Second Sight Television.

Apart from the original film &quot;Dougal and the Blue Cat&quot;, the series has yet to receive any standalone release on DVD, but five of the original black-and-white episodes, including the series premiere, &quot;Mr. Rusty Meets Zebedee&quot;, have been included as a bonus on the second disc of the UK Special Edition DVD of the 2005 CGI film. The other episodes included are &quot;Camping&quot;, &quot;Perfume&quot;, &quot;Jumping Beans&quot;, and &quot;Rocking Chair&quot; from March 1967. Except for the series premiere, those four episodes also feature their original French versions with English subtitles.

Between 2008 and 2010, five DVDs of the 2007 reboot series have been released by Abbey Home Media.

==In popular culture==
* Giant versions of Dougal and Zebedee, both the size of a small house, are featured in &quot;The Goodies&quot; episode &quot;The Goodies Rule – O.K.?&quot; Dougal also makes a brief appearance in another Goodies episode, &quot;It Might as Well Be String&quot;.
* The title and characters appeared as a regular weekly feature in the children&#x27;s comics &quot;TV Toyland&quot;, &quot;Playhour&quot;, &quot;Bonnie&quot;, and &quot;Playgroup&quot;. In &quot;Playhour&quot; Gordon Hutchings drew comic strips based on &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; for that magazine&#x27;s front cover.
* No. 8 Squadron RAF nicknamed their Avro Shackleton early warning aircraft after characters from the show as well as characters from &quot;The Herbs&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* Website about the show</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="44" end="59" title="children&amp;#x27;s television series" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="82" end="96" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="151" end="162" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170884" start="184" end="202" title="Le Manège enchanté" label="Le Manège enchanté"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479266" start="293" end="304" title="Serge Danot" label="Serge Danot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131882" start="322" end="331" title="Ivor Wood" label="Ivor Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q362280" start="405" end="409" title="Office de Radiodiffusion Télévision Française" label="ORTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="568" end="571" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351697" start="863" end="876" title="Eric Thompson" label="Eric Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052" start="1464" end="1476" title="Skye Terrier" label="Skye Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q139479" start="1533" end="1548" title="jack-in-the-box" label="jack-in-the-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="1590" end="1595" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="1648" end="1657" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901670" start="1975" end="1980" title="4-2-2" label="4-2-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q208322" start="2765" end="2773" title="carousel" label="carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233173" start="3179" end="3188" title="The Herbs" label="The Herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="3202" end="3217" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143800" start="3231" end="3242" title="Postman Pat" label="Postman Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593967" start="3256" end="3260" title="Gran (TV series)" label="Gran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092547" start="3277" end="3283" title="Bertha (TV series)" label="Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="4860" end="4869" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128018" start="4980" end="4988" title="pastiche" label="pastiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="5028" end="5040" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365832" start="5590" end="5602" title="Tony Hancock" label="Tony Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="5691" end="5696" title="hippy" label="hippy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="6216" end="6233" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690715" start="6280" end="6293" title="Joan Bakewell" label="Joan Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495266" start="6303" end="6321" title="Late Night Line-Up" label="Late Night Line-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="6771" end="6782" title="fourth wall" label="fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972797" start="7249" end="7267" title="Brockhampton Press" label="Brockhampton Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="7611" end="7636" title="Bloomsbury Publishing Plc" label="Bloomsbury Publishing Plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358138" start="7830" end="7838" title="foreword" label="foreword"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="7856" end="7869" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q432357" start="8175" end="8187" title="Phyllida Law" label="Phyllida Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q856616" start="8226" end="8241" title="Cartoon Network (UK &amp;amp; Ireland)" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q834624" start="8285" end="8294" title="Boomerang (UK &amp;amp; Ireland)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200354" start="8383" end="8396" title="Jimmy Hibbert" label="Jimmy Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352864" start="8601" end="8617" title="Method Animation" label="Method Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="8925" end="8928" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196575" start="10335" end="10343" title="Pinwheel (TV series)" label="Pinwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="10394" end="10405" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170884" start="10517" end="10548" title="Le Manège enchanté" label="the original French incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11288" end="11300" title=":nl:Wim Meuldijk" label="Wim Meuldijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443308" start="12860" end="12876" title="Fenella Fielding" label="Fenella Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="13253" end="13271" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q358421" start="13425" end="13434" title="Tom Baker" label="Tom Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="13436" end="13449" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Joanna Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="13451" end="13463" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185079" start="13465" end="13478" title="Jim Broadbent" label="Jim Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="13480" end="13493" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="13495" end="13510" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="13512" end="13524" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207179" start="13526" end="13536" title="Bill Nighy" label="Bill Nighy"/>
<link wikidata="Q725412" start="13541" end="13550" title="Lee Evans (comedian)" label="Lee Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="13615" end="13630" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="13644" end="13654" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14148" end="14154" title="The Magic Roundabout (film)#Doogal (United States and Canada)" label="Doogal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="14277" end="14292" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q310926" start="14297" end="14308" title="Chevy Chase" label="Chevy Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="14354" end="14367" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="14372" end="14384" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="14578" end="14588" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="14617" end="14637" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823658" start="14980" end="14995" title="Action Synthese" label="Action Synthese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44224" start="15011" end="15022" title="Ellipsanime" label="Ellipsanime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881062" start="15069" end="15071" title="M6 (TV channel)" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985664" start="15073" end="15087" title="Nickelodeon UK" label="Nickelodeon UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523270" start="15092" end="15116" title="The Walt Disney Company France" label="Disney Television France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="15276" end="15279" title="computer generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q594537" start="15339" end="15344" title="The Magic Roundabout (film)" label="movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985439" start="16152" end="16160" title="Nick Jr. (UK and Ireland)" label="Nick Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5009744" start="16243" end="16250" title="CCTV-14" label="CCTV-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="16673" end="16676" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597366" start="16731" end="16745" title="Jasper Carrott" label="Jasper Carrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="16894" end="16903" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="17091" end="17107" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769905" start="17223" end="17235" title="Mark Summers" label="Mark Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987329" start="19345" end="19356" title="The Goodies (TV series)" label="The Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737310" start="19377" end="19401" title="The Goodies Rule – O.K.?" label="The Goodies Rule – O.K.?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091932" start="19479" end="19505" title="It Might as Well Be String" label="It Might as Well Be String"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967233" start="19637" end="19645" title="Playhour" label="Playhour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043865" start="19841" end="19859" title="No. 8 Squadron RAF" label="No. 8 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q791508" start="19876" end="19891" title="Avro Shackleton" label="Avro Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233173" start="19979" end="19988" title="The Herbs" label="The Herbs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74326" wikidata="Q33228" url="?curid=74326" title="Nadia Comăneci">
<text>Nadia Elena Comăneci Conner (; born November 12, 1961) is a Romanian retired gymnast. She is a five-time Olympic gold medalist, all in individual events. In 1976, at the age of 14, Comăneci was the first gymnast to be awarded a perfect score of 10.0 at the Olympic Games. At the same Games (1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal), she received six more perfect 10s for events en route to winning three gold medals. At the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, she won two more gold medals and achieved two more perfect 10s. During her career, she won nine Olympic medals and four World Artistic Gymnastics Championship medals.

One of the world&#x27;s best-known gymnasts, Comăneci was praised for her artistry and grace, which brought unprecedented global popularity to the sport in the mid-1970s. Called &quot;the most iconic gymnast of the 20th century&quot; by &quot;El País&quot;, Comăneci was named one of the Athletes of the 20th century by the Laureus World Sports Academy.

Comăneci has lived in the United States since 1989, when she defected from then-Communist Romania, before its revolution in December that year. She later worked with and married American Olympic gold-medal gymnast Bart Conner — a wedding which was held in Bucharest after the fall of the Communist regime and televised live in Romania.

== Early life ==

Nadia Elena Comăneci was born on November 12, 1961, in Onești, a small town in the Carpathian Mountains, in Bacău County, Romania, in the historical region of Western Moldavia. She was born to Gheorghe (1936–2012) and Ștefania Comăneci, and has a younger brother. Her parents separated in the 1970s and her father later moved to Bucharest, the capital. She and her brother, Adrian, were raised in the Romanian Orthodox Church. In a 2011 interview, her mother said that she enrolled Comăneci into gymnastics classes because, as a child, she was so full of energy and active that she was difficult to manage. After years of top-level athletic competition, Comăneci graduated from Politehnica University of Bucharest with a degree in sports education, which qualified her to coach gymnastics.

== Gymnastics career ==
=== Early gymnastics career ===
Nadia began gymnastics in kindergarten with a local team called &quot;Flacără&quot; (&quot;The Flame&quot;), with coaches Duncan and Munteanu. At age 6, she was chosen to attend Béla Károlyi&#x27;s experimental gymnastics school, after Károlyi spotted her and a friend turning cartwheels in a schoolyard. Károlyi was looking for gymnasts he could train from a young age. When recess ended, the girls quickly went inside and Károlyi went around the classrooms trying to find them; he eventually spotted Comăneci. The other girl, Viorica Dumitru, developed in a different direction and became one of Romania&#x27;s top ballerinas.

By 1968, when she was seven, Comăneci started training with Károlyi. She was one of the first students at the gymnastics school established in Onești by Károlyi and his wife, Márta. As a resident of the town, Comăneci was able to live at home for many years; most of the other students boarded at the school.

In 1970, Comăneci began competing as a member of her home town team and, at age nine, became the youngest gymnast ever to win the Romanian Nationals. In 1971 she participated in her first international competition, a dual junior meet between Romania and Yugoslavia, winning her first all-around title and contributing to the team gold. For the next few years, she competed as a junior in numerous national contests in Romania and dual meets with countries such as Hungary, Italy and Poland. At the age of 11, in 1973, she won the all-around gold, as well as the vault and uneven bars titles, at the Junior Friendship Tournament (Druzhba), an important international meet for junior gymnasts.

Comăneci&#x27;s first major international success came at the age of 13, when she nearly swept the board at the 1975 European Women&#x27;s Artistic Gymnastics Championships in Skien, Norway. She won the all-around and gold medals in every event but the floor exercise, in which she was placed second. She continued to enjoy success that year, winning the all-around at the &#x27;Champions All&#x27; competition and coming first in the all-around, vault, beam and bars at the Romanian National Championships. In the pre-Olympic test event in Montreal Comăneci won the all-around and the balance beam golds as well as silvers in the vault, floor and bars. Accomplished Soviet gymnast Nellie Kim won the golds in those events and was one of Comăneci&#x27;s greatest rivals for the next five years.
===1976===
====American Cup====
In March 1976, Comăneci competed in the inaugural edition of the American Cup at Madison Square Garden in Manhattan. She received rare scores of 10, which signified a perfect routine without any deductions, for her vault in the preliminary stage and for her floor exercise routine in the final of the all-around competition, which she won. During this competition, Comăneci met American gymnast Bart Conner for the first time. While he remembered this meeting, Comăneci noted in her memoirs that she had to be reminded of it later in life. She was 14 and Conner was celebrating his 18th birthday. They both won a silver cup and were photographed together. A few months later, they participated in the 1976 Summer Olympics that Comăneci dominated, while Conner was a marginal figure. Conner later said, &quot;Nobody knew me, and [Comăneci] certainly didn&#x27;t pay attention to me.&quot;

====1976 Summer Olympics====


On July 18, 1976, Comăneci made history at the Montreal Olympics. During the team compulsory portion of the competition, she was awarded the first perfect 10 in Olympic gymnastics for her routine on the uneven bars. Omega SA, the official Olympics scoreboard manufacturer, had been led to believe that competitors could not receive a perfect ten, and had not programmed the scoreboard to display this score. Comăneci&#x27;s perfect 10 thus appeared as &quot;1.00,&quot; the only means by which the judges could indicate that she had received a 10.

During the remainder of the Montreal Games, Comăneci earned six additional &quot;10s&quot;. She won gold medals for the individual all-around, the balance beam and uneven bars. She also won a bronze for the floor exercise and a silver as part of the team all-around. Soviet gymnast Nellie Kim was her main rival during the Montreal Olympics; Kim became the second gymnast to receive a perfect ten, in her case for her performance on the vault. Comăneci took over the media spotlight from gymnast Olga Korbut, who had been the darling of the 1972 Munich Games.

Comăneci was the first Romanian gymnast to win the Olympic all-around title. She also holds the record as the youngest ever Olympic gymnastics all-around champion at age 14. The sport has since raised its age-eligibility requirements so that gymnasts must be at least 16 in the same calendar year of the Olympics in order to compete. When Comăneci competed in 1976, gymnasts had only to be 14 by the first day of the competition. Unless the age of eligibility is lowered, Comăneci&#x27;s record cannot be broken.

She was ranked as the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year for 1976 and the Associated Press&#x27; 1976 &quot;Female Athlete of the Year&quot;. Back home in Romania, Comăneci was awarded the Sickle and Hammer Gold Medal for her success, and she was named a Hero of Socialist Labor. She was the youngest Romanian to receive such recognition during the administration of Nicolae Ceaușescu.

=====&quot;Nadia&#x27;s Theme&quot;=====
&quot;Nadia&#x27;s Theme&quot; refers to an instrumental piece that became linked to Comăneci shortly after the 1976 Olympics. It was part of the musical score of the 1971 film &quot;Bless the Beasts and Children&quot; and originally titled &quot;Cotton&#x27;s Dream&quot;. It was also used as the title theme music for the American soap opera &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;.

Robert Riger used it in association with slow-motion montages of Comăneci on the television program &quot;ABC&#x27;s Wide World Of Sports&quot;. The song became a top-10 single in the fall of 1976, and composers Barry De Vorzon and Perry Botkin Jr. renamed it as &quot;Nadia&#x27;s Theme&quot; in Comăneci&#x27;s honor. Comăneci never performed to &quot;Nadia&#x27;s Theme&quot;, however. Her floor exercise music was a medley of the songs &quot;Yes Sir, That&#x27;s My Baby&quot; and &quot;Jump in the Line&quot;, arranged for piano.

===1977–1979===
Comăneci successfully defended her European all-around title at the championship competition in 1977. When questions were raised at the competition about the scoring, Ceaușescu ordered the Romanian gymnasts to return home. The team followed orders amid controversy and walked out of the competition during the event finals.

Following the 1977 Europeans, the Romanian Gymnastics Federation removed Comăneci from her longtime coaches, the Károlyis, and sent her to Bucharest on August 23 to train at the sports complex. She did not find this change positive and was struggling with bodily changes as she grew older. Her gymnastics skills suffered, and she was unhappy to the point of losing the desire to live. After surviving a suicide attempt, Comăneci competed in the 1978 World Championships in Strasbourg &quot;seven inches taller and a stone and a half [21 pounds] heavier&quot; than she was in the 1976 Olympics. A fall from the uneven bars resulted in a fourth-place finish in the all-around behind Soviets Elena Mukhina, Nellie Kim, and Natalia Shaposhnikova. Comăneci did win the world title on beam, and a silver on vault.

After the 1978 &quot;Worlds&quot;, Comăneci was permitted to return to Deva and the Károlyis&#x27; school. In 1979, Comăneci won her third consecutive European all-around title, becoming the first gymnast, male or female, to achieve this feat. At the World Championships in Fort Worth that December, Comăneci led the field after the compulsory competition. She was hospitalized before the optional portion of the team competition for blood poisoning, which had resulted from a cut in her wrist from her metal grip buckle. Against doctors&#x27; orders, she left the hospital and competed on the beam, where she scored a 9.95. Her performance helped give the Romanians their first team gold medal. After her performance, Comăneci spent several days recovering in All Saints Hospital. She had to undergo a minor surgical procedure for the infected hand, which had developed an abscess.

===1980–1984===

====1980 Summer Olympics====

Comăneci was chosen to participate in the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. As a result of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, President Jimmy Carter declared that the United States would boycott the Olympics (several other countries also participated in the boycott, though their reasons varied). According to Comăneci, the Romanian government &quot;touted the 1980 Olympic games as the first all-Communist Games.&quot; However, she also noted in her memoir, &quot;in Moscow, we walked into the mouth of a lion&#x27;s den; it was the Russians&#x27; home turf.&quot; She won two gold medals, one for the balance beam and one for the floor exercise (in which she tied with Soviet gymnast Nellie Kim, against whom she had also competed in the 1976 Montreal Olympics and other events). She also won two silver medals, one for the team all-around and one for individual all-around. Controversies arose concerning the scoring in the all-around and floor exercise competitions. As of the 2020 Summer Games, she is the only gymnast to defend her Olympic gold medal in the balance beam apparatus.

Her coach, Bela Károlyi, protested that she was scored unfairly. His protests were captured on television. According to Comăneci&#x27;s memoir, the Romanian government was upset about Károlyi&#x27;s public behavior, feeling that he had humiliated them. Life became very difficult for Károlyi from that point on.

====&quot;Nadia &#x27;81&quot;====
In 1981, the Gymnastics Federation contacted Comăneci and informed her that she would be part of an official tour of the United States named &quot;Nadia &#x27;81&quot; and her coaches Béla and Márta Károlyi would lead the group. During this tour, Comăneci&#x27;s team shared a bus trip with American gymnasts; it was the third time she had encountered Bart Conner. They had earlier met in 1976. She later remembered thinking, &quot;Conner was cute. He bounced around the bus talking to everyone—he was incredibly friendly and fun.&quot;

The Károlyis defected on the last day of the tour, along with the Romanian team choreographer Géza Pozsár. Prior to defecting, Károlyi hinted a few times to Comăneci that he might attempt to do so and indirectly asked if she wanted to join him. At that time, she had no interest in defecting, and said she wanted to go home to Romania. After the defection of the Károlyis, life changed drastically for Comăneci in Romania, as she could not have predicted. Officials feared that she would also defect. Feeling she was a national asset, they strictly monitored her actions, refusing to allow her to travel outside the country.

====1984 Summer Olympics====
The government did allow Comăneci to participate in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles as part of the Romanian delegation. Although a number of Communist nations boycotted the 1984 Summer Olympics in a tit-for-tat against the U.S.-led boycott of the Olympics in Moscow four years before, Romania chose to participate. Comăneci later wrote in her memoir that many believed Romania went to the Olympics because an agreement had been made with the United States not to accept defectors. But Comăneci did not participate in the Games as a member of the Romanian team; she served as an observer. She was able to see Károlyi&#x27;s new protégé, American gymnast Mary Lou Retton, who won five medals, including one gold. The Romanian delegation did not allow her to talk with Károlyi and closely watched her the entire time.

====Retirement====

The Romanian government continued to restrict Comăneci from leaving Romania, aside from a few select trips to Moscow and Cuba. Throughout her career, she had been subjected to round-the-clock surveillance at the hands of the Securitate secret police. She had started thinking about retiring a few years earlier, but her official retirement ceremony took place in Bucharest in 1984. It was attended by the chairman of the International Olympic Committee.

Comăneci later wrote in her memoir:
Life took on a new bleakness. I was cut off from making the small amount of extra money that had really made a difference in my family&#x27;s life. It was also insulting that a normal person in Romania had the chance to travel, whereas I could not ... when my gymnastics career was over, there was no longer any need to keep me happy. I was to do as I was instructed, just as I&#x27;d done my entire life…. If Béla hadn&#x27;t defected, I would still have been watched, but his defection brought a spotlight on my life, and it was blinding. I started to feel like a prisoner.

==Personal life==

On the night of November 27, 1989, a few weeks before the Romanian revolution, Comăneci defected with a group of other Romanians, crossing the Hungary–Romania border around Cenad. They were guided by Constantin Panait, a Romanian who later became an American citizen after defecting. Their journey was mostly on foot and at night. They traveled through Hungary and Austria and finally were able to take a plane to the United States.

Comăneci moved to Oklahoma in 1991 to help her friend Bart Conner, another Olympic gold medalist, with his gymnastics school. She lived with the family of Paul Ziert and eventually hired him as her manager. Comăneci and Conner were together for four years before they became engaged, marrying in 1996. She returned to Romania for their wedding, which was held in Bucharest. This was after the fall of the Communist regime and the establishment of a democratic Romania; the government welcomed her as a national hero. The wedding was televised live in Romania, and the couple&#x27;s reception was held in the former presidential palace. Comăneci became a naturalized US citizen in 2001 while retaining her Romanian citizenship. In 2006, the couple&#x27;s son Dylan was born.

On May 18, 1997, Comăneci and Conner guest-starred on the season 3 finale of &quot;Touched by an Angel&quot;, titled &quot;A Delicate Balance,&quot; where they performed a brief floor exercise within a montage scene.

Since 1994, the Nadia Comăneci International Invitational has welcomed gymnasts ranging from USAG level 4 to level 10. The competition also hosted international elite competition in the mid-2010s, with Rebeca Andrade being a notable attendee in 2013 among others.

She was the featured speaker at the 50th annual Independence Day Naturalization Ceremony on July 4, 2012, at Monticello, the first athlete invited to speak in the history of the ceremony.

==Leadership roles==
Comăneci is a well-known figure in the world of gymnastics; she serves as the honorary president of the Romanian Gymnastics Federation, the honorary president of the Romanian Olympic Committee, the sports ambassador of Romania, and as a member of the International Gymnastics Federation Foundation. She and Conner own the Bart Conner Gymnastics Academy, the Perfect 10 Production Company, and several sports equipment shops, and are the editors of &quot;International Gymnast Magazine&quot;.

She is also still involved with the Olympic Games. During the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, one of her perfect-10 Montreal uneven bars routines was featured in a commercial for Adidas. In addition, both Comăneci and her husband Bart Conner provided television commentary for the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. A few years later, on July 21, 2012, Comăneci, along with former basketball star John Amaechi, carried the Olympic torch to the roof of the O2 Arena as part of the torch relay for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. Prior to the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Comăneci appeared in a TIDE advertisement called &quot;The Evolution of Power&quot; with Simone Biles and three-time Olympic gymnast Dominique Dawes. She also offered daily analysis of the 2016 games (along with other Olympic champions such as Mark Spitz, Carl Lewis, and Conner), for the late-night show &quot;É Campeão,&quot; broadcast on Brazil&#x27;s SporTV. On July 26, 2024, she participated in the opening ceremony of the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris, alongside past Olympians Carl Lewis, Serena Williams, and Rafael Nadal, carrying the Olympic flame in the final stages of the torch relay up the river Seine to the Louvre museum on its way to the lighting of the Olympic cauldron in the Tuileries Garden.

In addition, Comăneci is highly involved in fundraising for a number of charities. She personally funded the construction and operation of the Nadia Comăneci Children&#x27;s Clinic in Bucharest that provides low-cost and free medical and social support to Romanian children. In 2003, the Romanian government appointed her as an honorary consul general of Romania to the United States to deal with bilateral relations between the two nations. In addition, both Comăneci and Conner are involved with the Special Olympics.

To raise money for charity, Comăneci participated in the celebrity version of Donald Trump&#x27;s reality show &quot;The Apprentice&quot;. Comăneci was a member of &quot;The Empresario&quot; team (all women), which lost to &quot;The Hydra&quot; team (all men) in the second episode. Trump responded to this loss by firing Comăneci, Comăneci later commented on her participation in the show, saying she &quot;had great fun. I only did it because it was all for charity.&quot;

==Honors and awards==

* 1975 and 1976: The United Press International Athlete of the Year Award
* 1976: Hero of Socialist Labour
* 1976: Associated Press Athlete of the Year
* 1976: BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year
* 1983: The Olympic Order
* 1990: International Women&#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame
* 1993: International Gymnastics Hall of Fame
* 1998: Marca Leyenda
* 1998: Flo Hyman Award
* 2004: The Olympic Order
* 2016: Great Immigrant Honoree: Carnegie Corporation of New York
* 2017: She was recognized as one of the BBC&#x27;s 100 Women of 2017.
* 2017: an area in the Olympic Park in Montreal was renamed &quot;Place Nadia Comaneci&quot;.
* 2021: Order of the Star of Romania, Grand Officer

== Skills ==
Comăneci was known for her clean technique, innovative and difficult original skills, and her stoic, cool demeanor in competition. On the balance beam, she was the first gymnast to successfully perform an aerial cartwheel-back handspring series. She is also credited as being the first gymnast to perform a double-twist dismount. Her skills on the floor exercise included a tucked double back salto and a double twist.

Comăneci has two eponymous uneven bars skills listed in the Code of Points, the Comăneci salto and the Comăneci dismount.
==Competitive history==


==Book and films==
* Comăneci&#x27;s 2004 memoir, &quot;Letters to a Young Gymnast&quot;, is part of the &quot;Art of Mentoring&quot; series by Basic Books.
* Katie Holmes directed a short 2015 documentary for ESPN about Comăneci entitled &quot;Eternal Princess&quot; that premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival.
* In 2016, Arte France produced a Pola Rapaport documentary about Comăneci entitled &quot;Nadia Comăneci, la gymnaste et le dictateur&quot; (&quot;Nadia Comăneci: The Gymnast and the Dictator&quot;).
* In 1984, Comăneci was the subject of a biopic television film, &quot;Nadia&quot;. The film was developed without her involvement (although the content was described to her by others). She later stated publicly that the producers never made contact with her: &quot;I sincerely don&#x27;t even want to see it; I feel so badly about it. It distorts my life so totally.&quot;
* In 2012, Universal Pictures chose Comăneci to dub Granny Norma in Romanian in the animated movie &quot;The Lorax&quot;.
* In 2021, Stejărel Olaru published in Romanian a biographical volume, &quot;Nadia și Securitatea&quot; (&quot;Nadia and the Securitate&quot;), at Epica Publishing House.

== See also ==

* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists
* List of Olympic female gymnasts for Romania
* List of Olympic medal leaders in women&#x27;s gymnastics
* List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games
* List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Cited sources ===


== Further reading ==
* online scholarly book review
*
*
*
*

== External links ==
* 
* 
* 
* Voices of Oklahoma interview with Bart Conner – First person interview conducted on February 28, 2013, with Bart Conner, husband of Nadia Comăneci.

Video clips:
* Nadia Comăneci makes history at the Montreal 1976 Olympics – The Olympic Channel, 2010
* Nadia Comăneci – First Olympics Perfect 10 (Uneven Bars) – Montreal 1976 Olympics – The Olympic Channel, 2015
* Nadia Comăneci – Selections from all of her routines – Montreal 1976 Olympics (overview) – The Olympic Channel, 2012
* The Adorable Way This Olympic Couple First Met | Where Are They Now | Oprah Winfrey Network – Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel), 2016
* Nadia Comaneci &amp; Bart Conner Commentate on Their Perfect Olympic Routines | Take the Mic – The Olympic Channel, 2016
* Nadia Comaneci and Bart Conner, 11 Olympic Medals in this Olympic Family – The Olympic Channel, 2016</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33228" start="0" end="27" title="Nadia Comăneci" label="Nadia Elena Comăneci Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="60" end="68" title="Romanians" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="77" end="84" title="gymnastics" label="gymnast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167947" start="228" end="249" title="perfect 10 (gymnastics)" label="perfect score of 10.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="291" end="311" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="315" end="323" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="417" end="437" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="441" end="447" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191199" start="569" end="607" title="World Artistic Gymnastics Championships" label="World Artistic Gymnastics Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="860" end="867" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="941" end="969" title="Laureus World Sports Awards" label="Laureus World Sports Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="1047" end="1069" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="then-Communist Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="1082" end="1114" title="Romanian revolution" label="revolution in December that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q383942" start="1186" end="1197" title="Bart Conner" label="Bart Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q543436" start="1382" end="1388" title="Onești" label="Onești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="1410" end="1430" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q179779" start="1435" end="1447" title="Bacău County" label="Bacău County"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1449" end="1456" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q209754" start="1486" end="1502" title="Western Moldavia" label="Western Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="1656" end="1665" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="1728" end="1752" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465448" start="2005" end="2040" title="Politehnica University of Bucharest" label="Politehnica University of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="2058" end="2074" title="Physical education" label="sports education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290841" start="2352" end="2364" title="Béla Károlyi" label="Béla Károlyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q867295" start="2451" end="2461" title="Cartwheel (gymnastics)" label="cartwheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="2791" end="2801" title="Ballet" label="ballerinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273156" start="2979" end="2984" title="Márta Károlyi" label="Márta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="3368" end="3378" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3398" end="3408" title="List of gymnastics terms#A" label="all-around"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="3444" end="3448" title="Gold medal" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="3578" end="3585" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3587" end="3592" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3597" end="3603" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q598168" start="3676" end="3681" title="Vault (gymnastics)" label="vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q89670998" start="3686" end="3697" title="uneven bars" label="uneven bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15588699" start="3924" end="3979" title="European Women&amp;#x27;s Artistic Gymnastics Championships" label="European Women&amp;#x27;s Artistic Gymnastics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272" start="3983" end="3988" title="Skien" label="Skien"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3990" end="3996" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q828144" start="4060" end="4074" title="Floor (gymnastics)" label="floor exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q655301" start="4261" end="4265" title="Balance beam" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083976" start="4282" end="4313" title="Romanian Gymnastics National Championships" label="Romanian National Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4348" end="4356" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q847956" start="4423" end="4430" title="Silver medal" label="silvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="4474" end="4488" title="Soviet people" label="Soviet gymnast"/>
<link wikidata="Q234785" start="4489" end="4499" title="Nellie Kim" label="Nellie Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614055" start="4699" end="4711" title="American Cup (Gymnastics)" label="American Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="4715" end="4736" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q383942" start="5029" end="5040" title="Bart Conner" label="Bart Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="5335" end="5355" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167947" start="5701" end="5733" title="Perfect 10 (gymnastics)" label="perfect 10 in Olympic gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439449" start="5757" end="5768" title="Gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s uneven bars" label="uneven bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q659224" start="5770" end="5778" title="Omega SA" label="Omega SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439137" start="6219" end="6244" title="Gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s artistic individual all-around" label="the individual all-around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439437" start="6246" end="6262" title="Gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s balance beam" label="the balance beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439449" start="6267" end="6278" title="Gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s uneven bars" label="uneven bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439129" start="6310" end="6324" title="Gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s floor" label="floor exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439426" start="6353" end="6368" title="Gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s artistic team all-around" label="team all-around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="6370" end="6376" title="Soviet people" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q234785" start="6385" end="6395" title="Nellie Kim" label="Nellie Kim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6400" end="6443" title="Nellie Kim#Olympics and World Championships" label="her main rival during the Montreal Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q221575" start="6599" end="6610" title="Olga Korbut" label="Olga Korbut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="7200" end="7243" title="BBC Sports Personality World Sport Star of the Year" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="7261" end="7277" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q743122" start="7295" end="7321" title="Associated Press Athlete of the Year" label="Female Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="7376" end="7393" title="Hammer and sickle" label="Sickle and Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208167" start="7442" end="7465" title="Hero of Socialist Labor" label="Hero of Socialist Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="7554" end="7571" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334858" start="7621" end="7639" title="Nadia&amp;#x27;s Theme" label="Nadia&amp;#x27;s Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087909" start="7798" end="7827" title="Bless the Beasts and Children (film)" label="Bless the Beasts and Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="7965" end="7991" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436165" start="8000" end="8012" title="Robert Riger" label="Robert Riger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567942" start="8106" end="8137" title="Wide World of Sports (U.S. TV series)" label="ABC&amp;#x27;s Wide World Of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684" start="8212" end="8227" title="Barry De Vorzon" label="Barry De Vorzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375624" start="8232" end="8248" title="Perry Botkin Jr." label="Perry Botkin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8052768" start="8446" end="8474" title="Yes Sir, That&amp;#x27;s My Baby (song)" label="Yes Sir, That&amp;#x27;s My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016571" start="8491" end="8507" title="Jump in the Line" label="Jump in the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="9016" end="9025" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034037" start="9322" end="9346" title="1978 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships" label="1978 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="9350" end="9360" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q261698" start="9566" end="9579" title="Elena Mukhina" label="Elena Mukhina"/>
<link wikidata="Q234785" start="9581" end="9591" title="Nellie Kim" label="Nellie Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q962934" start="9597" end="9618" title="Natalia Shaposhnikova" label="Natalia Shaposhnikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034729" start="9937" end="9956" title="1979 World Championships in Artistic Gymnastics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="9960" end="9970" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="10560" end="10567" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="10659" end="10679" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10683" end="10689" title="Moscow#Soviet era (1917–1991)" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="10710" end="10740" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="10742" end="10751" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="10752" end="10764" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="10803" end="10823" title="1980 Summer Olympics boycott" label="boycott the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389177" start="11219" end="11231" title="Gymnastics at the 1980 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s balance beam" label="balance beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389161" start="11248" end="11262" title="Gymnastics at the 1980 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s floor" label="floor exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389315" start="11438" end="11457" title="Gymnastics at the 1980 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s artistic team all-around" label="the team all-around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389197" start="11470" end="11491" title="Gymnastics at the 1980 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s artistic individual all-around" label="individual all-around"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="11597" end="11614" title="2020 Summer Games" label="2020 Summer Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290841" start="12237" end="12241" title="Béla Károlyi" label="Béla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273156" start="12246" end="12259" title="Márta Károlyi" label="Márta Károlyi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12604" end="12612" title="Defection#International politics" label="defected"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="13302" end="13322" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="13326" end="13337" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581897" start="13413" end="13447" title="1984 Summer Olympics boycott" label="boycotted the 1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367487" start="13453" end="13464" title="tit-for-tat" label="tit-for-tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q235975" start="13907" end="13922" title="Mary Lou Retton" label="Mary Lou Retton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="14315" end="14325" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="14511" end="14542" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290841" start="14991" end="14995" title="Béla Károlyi" label="Béla"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="15235" end="15254" title="Romanian revolution" label="Romanian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452547" start="15320" end="15342" title="Hungary–Romania border" label="Hungary–Romania border"/>
<link wikidata="Q946757" start="15350" end="15355" title="Cenad" label="Cenad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="15530" end="15537" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="15542" end="15549" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q383942" start="15665" end="15676" title="Bart Conner" label="Bart Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154547" start="15766" end="15776" title="Paul Ziert" label="Paul Ziert"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="15929" end="15936" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="15974" end="15983" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="16016" end="16032" title="Communist Romania" label="Communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727198" start="16444" end="16452" title="Touched by an Angel season 3" label="season 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q174972" start="16469" end="16488" title="Touched by an Angel" label="Touched by an Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10357885" start="16806" end="16820" title="Rebeca Andrade" label="Rebeca Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q199618" start="16978" end="16988" title="Monticello" label="Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880606" start="17533" end="17563" title="International Gymnast Magazine" label="International Gymnast Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="17634" end="17654" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="17658" end="17664" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="17751" end="17757" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q383942" start="17802" end="17813" title="Bart Conner" label="Bart Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="17853" end="17873" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="17877" end="17884" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q706052" start="17967" end="17979" title="John Amaechi" label="John Amaechi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364202" start="18026" end="18034" title="The O2 Arena (London)" label="O2 Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="18070" end="18090" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="18094" end="18100" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="18115" end="18135" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="18139" end="18153" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520267" start="18244" end="18256" title="Simone Biles" label="Simone Biles"/>
<link wikidata="Q887677" start="18288" end="18303" title="Dominique Dawes" label="Dominique Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180748" start="18399" end="18409" title="Mark Spitz" label="Mark Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131237" start="18411" end="18421" title="Carl Lewis" label="Carl Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493786" start="18510" end="18516" title="SporTV" label="SporTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q110321308" start="18560" end="18576" title="2024 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="18584" end="18604" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="18608" end="18613" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459" start="18652" end="18667" title="Serena Williams" label="Serena Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="18673" end="18685" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="18700" end="18713" title="Olympic flame" label="Olympic flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q120064168" start="18741" end="18752" title="2024 Summer Olympics torch relay" label="torch relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="18766" end="18771" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="18779" end="18785" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18811" end="18843" title="Olympic flame#Olympic cauldron lighting" label="lighting of the Olympic cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q818517" start="18851" end="18867" title="Tuileries Garden" label="Tuileries Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362683" start="19277" end="19310" title="Romania–United States relations" label="relations between the two nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="19372" end="19388" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714060" start="19448" end="19465" title="The Apprentice (U.S. season 7)" label="celebrity version"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="19469" end="19481" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="19489" end="19501" title="Reality television" label="reality show"/>
<link wikidata="Q863122" start="19508" end="19522" title="The Apprentice (American TV series)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19911" end="19963" title="United Press International Athlete of the Year Award#Female winners" label="United Press International Athlete of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q208167" start="19972" end="19996" title="Hero of Socialist Labour" label="Hero of Socialist Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q743122" start="20005" end="20041" title="Associated Press Athlete of the Year" label="Associated Press Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="20050" end="20093" title="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227923" start="20128" end="20174" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666611" start="20183" end="20220" title="International Gymnastics Hall of Fame" label="International Gymnastics Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820035" start="20229" end="20242" title="Marca Leyenda" label="Marca Leyenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459809" start="20251" end="20266" title="Flo Hyman Award" label="Flo Hyman Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q634353" start="20279" end="20292" title="Olympic Order" label="Olympic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660410" start="20326" end="20358" title="Carnegie Corporation of New York" label="Carnegie Corporation of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153104" start="20400" end="20420" title="100 Women (BBC)" label="BBC&amp;#x27;s 100 Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q304838" start="20453" end="20465" title="Olympic Park, Montreal" label="Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="20532" end="20560" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Order of the Star of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19516578" start="20817" end="20827" title="Handspring (gymnastics)" label="handspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="20910" end="20918" title="dismount" label="dismount"/>
<link wikidata="Q767472" start="20983" end="20988" title="Somersault" label="salto"/>
<link wikidata="Q457790" start="21070" end="21084" title="Code of Points (gymnastics)" label="Code of Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157881" start="21090" end="21104" title="Comăneci salto" label="Comăneci salto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797241" start="21269" end="21285" title="Art of Mentoring" label="Art of Mentoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q174346" start="21317" end="21329" title="Katie Holmes" label="Katie Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="21368" end="21372" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q853325" start="21448" end="21469" title="Tribeca Film Festival" label="Tribeca Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073" start="21482" end="21486" title="Arte" label="Arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282506" start="21742" end="21747" title="Nadia (film)" label="Nadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="22056" end="22074" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q786594" start="22150" end="22159" title="The Lorax (film)" label="The Lorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q915373" start="22357" end="22396" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q13846463" start="22399" end="22442" title="List of Olympic female gymnasts for Romania" label="List of Olympic female gymnasts for Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212111" start="22445" end="22501" title="List of Olympic medal leaders in women&amp;#x27;s gymnastics" label="List of Olympic medal leaders in women&amp;#x27;s gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629541" start="22504" end="22556" title="List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games" label="List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q52459737" start="22559" end="22600" title="List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists" label="List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="22992" end="23011" title="International Olympic Committee" label="The Olympic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="23104" end="23123" title="International Olympic Committee" label="The Olympic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="23223" end="23242" title="International Olympic Committee" label="The Olympic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573619" start="23345" end="23384" title="Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel)" label="Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="23488" end="23507" title="International Olympic Committee" label="The Olympic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="23591" end="23610" title="International Olympic Committee" label="The Olympic Channel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74327" wikidata="Q945995" url="?curid=74327" title="Principle of relativity">
<text>In physics, the principle of relativity is the requirement that the equations describing the laws of physics have the same form in all admissible frames of reference.

For example, in the framework of special relativity, the Maxwell equations have the same form in all inertial frames of reference. In the framework of general relativity, the Maxwell equations or the Einstein field equations have the same form in arbitrary frames of reference.

Several principles of relativity have been successfully applied throughout science, whether implicitly (as in Newtonian mechanics) or explicitly (as in Albert Einstein&#x27;s special relativity and general relativity).

==Basic concepts==

Certain principles of relativity have been widely assumed in most scientific disciplines. One of the most widespread is the belief that any law of nature should be the same at all times; and scientific investigations generally assume that laws of nature are the same regardless of the person measuring them. These sorts of principles have been incorporated into scientific inquiry at the most fundamental of levels.
Any principle of relativity prescribes a symmetry in natural law: that is, the laws must look the same to one observer as they do to another. According to a theoretical result called Noether&#x27;s theorem, any such symmetry will also imply a conservation law alongside. For example, if two observers at different times see the same laws, then a quantity called energy will be conserved. In this light, relativity principles make testable predictions about how nature behaves.

==Special principle of relativity==
According to the first postulate of the special theory of relativity:
This postulate defines an inertial frame of reference.

The special principle of relativity states that physical laws should be the same in every inertial frame of reference, but that they may vary across non-inertial ones. This principle is used in both Newtonian mechanics and the theory of special relativity. Its influence in the latter is so strong that Max Planck named the theory after the principle.

The principle requires physical laws to be the same for any body moving at constant velocity as they are for a body at rest. A consequence is that an observer in an inertial reference frame cannot determine an absolute speed or direction of travel in space, and may only speak of speed or direction relative to some other object.

The principle does not extend to non-inertial reference frames because those frames do not, in general experience, seem to abide by the same laws of physics. In classical physics, fictitious forces are used to describe acceleration in non-inertial reference frames.

===In Newtonian mechanics===

The special principle of relativity was first explicitly enunciated by Galileo Galilei in 1632 in his &quot;Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems&quot;, using the metaphor of Galileo&#x27;s ship.

Newtonian mechanics added to the special principle several other concepts, including laws of motion, gravitation, and an assertion of an absolute time. When formulated in the context of these laws, the special principle of relativity states that the laws of mechanics are &quot;invariant&quot; under a Galilean transformation.

===In special relativity===
Joseph Larmor and Hendrik Lorentz discovered that Maxwell&#x27;s equations, used in the theory of electromagnetism, were invariant only by a certain change of time and length units. This left some confusion among physicists, many of whom thought that a luminiferous aether was incompatible with the relativity principle, in the way it was defined by Henri Poincaré:

In their 1905 papers on electrodynamics, Henri Poincaré and Albert Einstein explained that with the Lorentz transformations the relativity principle holds perfectly. Einstein elevated the (special) principle of relativity to a postulate of the theory and derived the Lorentz transformations from this principle combined with the principle of the independence of the speed of light (in vacuum) from the motion of the source. These two principles were reconciled with each other by a re-examination of the fundamental meanings of space and time intervals.

The strength of special relativity lies in its use of simple, basic principles, including the invariance of the laws of physics under a shift of inertial reference frames and the invariance of the speed of light in vacuum. (See also: Lorentz covariance.)

It is possible to derive the form of the Lorentz transformations from the principle of relativity alone. Using only the isotropy of space and the symmetry implied by the principle of special relativity, one can show that the space-time transformations between inertial frames are either Galilean or Lorentzian. Whether the transformation is actually Galilean or Lorentzian must be determined with physical experiments. It is not possible to conclude that the speed of light &quot;c&quot; is invariant by mathematical logic alone. In the Lorentzian case, one can then obtain relativistic interval conservation and the constancy of the speed of light.

==General principle of relativity==
The general principle of relativity states:
That is, physical laws are the same in reference frames—inertial or non-inertial. An accelerated charged particle might emit synchrotron radiation, though a particle at rest does not. If we consider now the same accelerated charged particle in its non-inertial rest frame, it emits radiation at rest.

Physics in non-inertial reference frames was historically treated by a coordinate transformation, first, to an inertial reference frame, performing the necessary calculations therein, and using another to return to the non-inertial reference frame. In most such situations, the same laws of physics can be used if certain predictable fictitious forces are added into consideration; an example is a uniformly rotating reference frame, which can be treated as an inertial reference frame if one adds a fictitious centrifugal force and Coriolis force into consideration.

The problems involved are not always so trivial. Special relativity predicts that an observer in an inertial reference frame does not see objects he would describe as moving faster than the speed of light. However, in the non-inertial reference frame of Earth, treating a spot on the Earth as a fixed point, the stars are observed to move in the sky, circling once about the Earth per day. Since the stars are light years away, this observation means that, in the non-inertial reference frame of the Earth, anybody who looks at the stars is seeing objects which appear, to them, to be moving faster than the speed of light.

Since non-inertial reference frames do not abide by the special principle of relativity, such situations are not self-contradictory.

===General relativity===
General relativity was developed by Einstein in the years 1907 - 1915. General relativity postulates that the global Lorentz covariance of special relativity becomes a local Lorentz covariance in the presence of matter. The presence of matter &quot;curves&quot; spacetime, and this curvature affects the path of free particles (and even the path of light). General relativity uses the mathematics of differential geometry and tensors in order to describe gravitation as an effect of the geometry of spacetime. Einstein based this new theory on the general principle of relativity, and he named the theory after the underlying principle.

==See also==

*Background independence
*Conjugate diameters
*Cosmic microwave background radiation
*Equivalence principle
*Galilean relativity
*General relativity including Introduction to general relativity
*Invariant
*List of textbooks on relativity
*Newton&#x27;s Laws
*Preferred frame
*Principle of covariance
*Principle of locality
*Principle of uniformity
*Special relativity
==Notes and references==
==Further reading==
See the special relativity references and the general relativity references.

==External links==
* Wikibooks: Special Relativity
* Living Reviews in Relativity – An open access, peer-referred, solely online physics journal publishing invited reviews covering all areas of relativity research.
* MathPages – Reflections on Relativity – A complete online course on Relativity.
* Special Relativity Simulator
* A Relativity Tutorial at Caltech – A basic introduction to concepts of Special and General Relativity, as well as astrophysics.
* Relativity Gravity and Cosmology – A short course offered at MIT.
* Relativity in film clips and animations from the University of New South Wales.
*Animation clip visualizing the effects of special relativity on fast moving objects.
*Relativity Calculator – Learn Special Relativity Mathematics The mathematics of special relativity presented in as simple and comprehensive manner possible within philosophical and historical contexts.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q945995" start="16" end="39" title="Principle of relativity" label="principle of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="93" end="108" title="physical law" label="laws of physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="146" end="165" title="frames of reference" label="frames of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="201" end="219" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="225" end="242" title="Maxwell equations" label="Maxwell equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="269" end="297" title="inertial frame of reference" label="inertial frames of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="368" end="392" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein field equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="522" end="529" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="557" end="576" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="599" end="614" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="645" end="663" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="827" end="840" title="Physical law" label="law of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="1144" end="1152" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q578555" start="1286" end="1308" title="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q205805" start="1346" end="1362" title="Conservation law (physics)" label="conservation law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="1465" end="1471" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="1480" end="1489" title="conservation of energy" label="conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="1833" end="1860" title="inertial frame of reference" label="inertial frame of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="1942" end="1961" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="1980" end="1998" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="2046" end="2056" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q829564" start="2460" end="2488" title="non-inertial reference frame" label="non-inertial reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="2588" end="2605" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212126" start="2607" end="2624" title="fictitious forces" label="fictitious forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="2795" end="2810" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768303" start="2832" end="2879" title="Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems" label="Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911538" start="2909" end="2928" title="Galileo&amp;#x27;s ship" label="Galileo&amp;#x27;s ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19314" start="3068" end="3081" title="absolute time" label="absolute time"/>
<link wikidata="Q219207" start="3233" end="3256" title="Galilean transformation" label="Galilean transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q536500" start="3287" end="3300" title="Joseph Larmor" label="Joseph Larmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41688" start="3305" end="3320" title="Hendrik Lorentz" label="Hendrik Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="3337" end="3361" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3385" end="3401" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208702" start="3540" end="3559" title="luminiferous aether" label="luminiferous aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="3637" end="3651" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3678" end="3693" title="Annus Mirabilis Papers#Papers" label="electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3714" end="3729" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="3754" end="3777" title="Lorentz transformations" label="Lorentz transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="3881" end="3890" title="postulate" label="postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555165" start="4303" end="4313" title="covariance and contravariance of vectors" label="invariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="4354" end="4378" title="inertial reference frame" label="inertial reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093427" start="4443" end="4461" title="Lorentz covariance" label="Lorentz covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="5321" end="5342" title="synchrotron radiation" label="synchrotron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="5569" end="5594" title="coordinate transformation" label="coordinate transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212126" start="5832" end="5849" title="fictitious forces" label="fictitious forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310692" start="5906" end="5930" title="rotating reference frame" label="rotating reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="6009" end="6026" title="Centrifugal force (fictitious)" label="centrifugal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="6031" end="6045" title="Coriolis force" label="Coriolis force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="6321" end="6326" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q363948" start="6805" end="6823" title="contradiction" label="self-contradictory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6961" end="6967" title="Symmetry (physics)#Local and global" label="global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093427" start="6968" end="6986" title="Lorentz covariance" label="Lorentz covariance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7019" end="7024" title="Symmetry (physics)#Local and global" label="local"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="7087" end="7093" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="7113" end="7122" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="7133" end="7142" title="curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="7251" end="7272" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="7277" end="7283" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="7306" end="7317" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="7338" end="7346" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="7350" end="7359" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q429258" start="7504" end="7527" title="Background independence" label="Background independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q361892" start="7529" end="7548" title="Conjugate diameters" label="Conjugate diameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="7550" end="7587" title="Cosmic microwave background radiation" label="Cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="7589" end="7610" title="Equivalence principle" label="Equivalence principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481895" start="7612" end="7631" title="Galilean relativity" label="Galilean relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="7633" end="7651" title="General relativity" label="General relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743587" start="7662" end="7696" title="Introduction to general relativity" label="Introduction to general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370229" start="7698" end="7707" title="Invariant (physics)" label="Invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007923" start="7709" end="7740" title="List of textbooks on relativity" label="List of textbooks on relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="7742" end="7760" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s Laws" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239845" start="7762" end="7777" title="Preferred frame" label="Preferred frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245151" start="7779" end="7802" title="Principle of covariance" label="Principle of covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q629202" start="7804" end="7825" title="Principle of locality" label="Principle of locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q208650" start="7827" end="7850" title="Principle of uniformity" label="Principle of uniformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="7852" end="7870" title="Special relativity" label="Special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7924" end="7953" title="Special relativity#References" label="special relativity references"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7962" end="7991" title="General relativity#References" label="general relativity references"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74328" wikidata="Q208259" url="?curid=74328" title="Ameland">
<text>Ameland (; ) is a municipality and one of the West Frisian Islands off the north coast of the Netherlands. It consists mostly of sand dunes and is the third major island of the West Frisians. It neighbours islands Terschelling to the west and Schiermonnikoog to the east. This includes the small Engelsmanplaat and Rif sandbanks to the east.

Ameland is, counted from the west, the fourth inhabited Dutch Wadden island and belongs to the Friesland (&quot;Fryslân&quot;) province. The whole island falls under one municipality, which carries the same name. The Wadden islands form the border between the North Sea and the Wadden Sea, which lies on the south side of the island file. The municipality of Ameland had a population of in . The inhabitants are called Amelanders.

== Places ==
The island has four villages, and one small part-village.

There were two other villages: Oerd and Sier, but these were flooded and now lie in the sea. The name of these villages live on in MS &quot;Oerd&quot; and MS &quot;Sier&quot;, which are the names of the ferries to the island. From west to east:
* Hollum, the most populated village, located on the west coast, home to the island&#x27;s lighthouse
* Ballum, smallest village, location of the island&#x27;s airfield, Ameland Airport
* Nes, the second largest of the island, a vibrant tourist village with many hotels, also home to Burgemeester Waldaschool (the island&#x27;s secondary school), and ferry services from Holwert on the mainland
* Buren, located at the centre of the island, includes Ameland&#x27;s beach

== Population ==
The population of each village of the island :

== History ==
First mentioned as Ambla in the 8th century, it paid tribute to the county of Holland until in 1424 its lord, Ritske Jelmera, declared it a &quot;free lordship&quot; (&quot;vrijheerschap&quot;): the Lordship of Ameland.

Although Holland, Friesland and the Holy Roman Emperor contested this quasi-independent status, it remained a free lordship until the ruling family, Cammingha, died out in 1708. After that, the Frisian stadtholder John William Friso, Prince of Orange, became lord of Ameland and after him, his son the stadtholder of all the Netherlands, William IV, Prince of Orange, and his grandson, William V, Prince of Orange.

Only in the constitution of 1813 was the island finally integrated into the Netherlands into the province of Friesland. The monarchy of the Netherlands still maintain the title &quot;Vrijheer van Ameland&quot; today.

In 1871–72, a dike was built between Ameland and the mainland by a society for the reclamation of Frisian land from the sea. The dike ran from Holwert to Buren and was long. The province and the Dutch realm each paid 200,000 guilders. In the end, it was unsuccessful; the dike did not prove to be durable and in 1882, after heavy storms in the winter, repairs and maintenance of the dam were stopped. The dike can still be partially seen at low tide. The dam at Holwert is the beginning of this dike.

In 1940, German troops were ferried to the island and within hours Ameland was under the control of the German Army. Due to its limited military value, the Allies never invaded Ameland. The German forces on the island did not surrender until 2 June 1945, almost a full month after the defeat of Nazi Germany.

=== 2023 MV &quot;Fremantle Highway&quot; fire ===
In July 2023, a fire on the Panamanian flagged cargo ship MV &quot;Fremantle Highway&quot; carrying over 3,700 cars off the coast of Ameland left one sailor dead and 22 others injured.

== Nature ==
Like all West and East Frisian Islands, Ameland is a unique piece of nature. The profusion of different plants on the island is caused by the immense variety of landscapes. One of the scenic areas is the Oerd, a large complex of dunes which is still expanding by the year. Because of the differing landscapes and types of flora, over 60 different species of birds are sitting there every year. At the eastern part of the Oerd lies a beach plain called the Hon.
Besides dunes and beaches, Ameland has some woods, like the &quot;Nesser bos&quot; (&quot;Wood of Nes&quot;).

==Transport==
Most travelers reach the island by ferry from Holwert on the mainland of Friesland, but there is also an airport near Ballum (Ameland Airport). A bus service connects the ferries from Hollum/Ballum (route 130) and Buren/Nes (route 132). When the sea between Friesland and Ameland is at low tide, one can walk across (see mudflat hiking).

==Notable people==

The following people were born on Ameland:
* Ritske Jelmera (1383 in Ternaard – 1450) a Frisian chieftain who ruled the island of Ameland 
* , whaler
* Johannes de Jong (1885 in Nes – 1955), Archbishop of Utrecht 1936/1955
* Hannes de Boer (1899 in Hollum – 1982), long jumper, participated in the 1924 and 1928 Olympic Games
* Sjoerd Soeters (born 1947 in Nes), postmodern architect
* Pieter Mosterman (born 1967 in Nes), a research Scientist and academic in the USA 
* Jan Bruin (born 1969 in Hollum), retired Dutch soccer player.

== Gallery ==
==References==
== External links ==
*Official website
*The history of Ameland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208259" start="0" end="7" title="Ameland" label="Ameland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="18" end="30" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192" start="46" end="66" title="West Frisian Islands" label="West Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="94" end="105" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="129" end="139" title="sand dunes" label="sand dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204412" start="214" end="226" title="Terschelling" label="Terschelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q208011" start="243" end="258" title="Schiermonnikoog" label="Schiermonnikoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342240" start="296" end="310" title="Engelsmanplaat" label="Engelsmanplaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825429" start="315" end="318" title="Rif (sandbank)" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="438" end="447" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="603" end="612" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="621" end="631" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="878" end="882" title="Oerd" label="Oerd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="887" end="891" title="Sier, Ameland" label="Sier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000538" start="1094" end="1100" title="Hollum" label="Hollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549659" start="1183" end="1193" title="Bornrif" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q771118" start="1196" end="1202" title="Ballum" label="Ballum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719509" start="1262" end="1277" title="Ameland Airport" label="Ameland Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000685" start="1280" end="1283" title="Nes, Ameland" label="Nes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="1443" end="1448" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q611277" start="1463" end="1470" title="Holwert" label="Holwert"/>
<link wikidata="Q932618" start="1489" end="1494" title="Buren, Friesland" label="Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="1696" end="1703" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="1721" end="1728" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017137" start="1753" end="1767" title="Ritske Jelmera" label="Ritske Jelmera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1842" end="1861" title="Lordship of Ameland" label="Lordship of Ameland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1900" end="1918" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885784" start="2013" end="2022" title="Cammingha" label="Cammingha"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="2066" end="2077" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q62538" start="2078" end="2114" title="John William Friso, Prince of Orange" label="John William Friso, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="2202" end="2230" title="William IV, Prince of Orange" label="William IV, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q312215" start="2250" end="2277" title="William V, Prince of Orange" label="William V, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="2389" end="2398" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="2404" end="2431" title="monarchy of the Netherlands" label="monarchy of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="2512" end="2516" title="levee" label="dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="2723" end="2730" title="guilder" label="guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3295" end="3307" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q117028591" start="3419" end="3451" title="MV Fremantle Highway" label="MV &amp;quot;Fremantle Highway&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="4219" end="4228" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719509" start="4272" end="4287" title="Ameland Airport" label="Ameland Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="4432" end="4440" title="low tide" label="low tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688443" start="4467" end="4481" title="mudflat hiking" label="mudflat hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017137" start="4550" end="4564" title="Ritske Jelmera" label="Ritske Jelmera"/>
<link wikidata="Q944285" start="4657" end="4673" title="Johannes de Jong" label="Johannes de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q261716" start="4696" end="4717" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Utrecht" label="Archbishop of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543752" start="4730" end="4744" title="Hannes de Boer" label="Hannes de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8132" start="4803" end="4807" title="1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="4812" end="4830" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642174" start="4833" end="4847" title="Sjoerd Soeters" label="Sjoerd Soeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192809" start="4891" end="4907" title="Pieter Mosterman" label="Pieter Mosterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750930" start="4976" end="4985" title="Jan Bruin" label="Jan Bruin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74331" wikidata="Q2469" url="?curid=74331" title="Andromeda Galaxy">
<text>The Andromeda Galaxy is a barred spiral galaxy and is the nearest major galaxy to the Milky Way. It was originally named the Andromeda Nebula and is cataloged as Messier 31, M31, and NGC 224. Andromeda has a D25 isophotal diameter of about and is approximately from Earth. The galaxy&#x27;s name stems from the area of Earth&#x27;s sky in which it appears, the constellation of Andromeda, which itself is named after the princess who was the wife of Perseus in Greek mythology.

The virial mass of the Andromeda Galaxy is of the same order of magnitude as that of the Milky Way, at . The mass of either galaxy is difficult to estimate with any accuracy, but it was long thought that the Andromeda Galaxy was more massive than the Milky Way by a margin of some 25% to 50%. However, this has been called into question by early-21st-century studies indicating a possibly lower mass for the Andromeda Galaxy and a higher mass for the Milky Way. The Andromeda Galaxy has a diameter of about , making it the largest member of the Local Group of galaxies in terms of extension.

The Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies are expected to collide with each other in around 4–5 billion years, merging to potentially form a giant elliptical galaxy or a large lenticular galaxy.

With an apparent magnitude of 3.4, the Andromeda Galaxy is among the brightest of the Messier objects, and is visible to the naked eye from Earth on moonless nights, even when viewed from areas with moderate light pollution.

== Observation history ==
The Andromeda Galaxy is visible to the naked eye in dark skies. Around the year 964 CE, the Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi described the Andromeda Galaxy in his &quot;Book of Fixed Stars&quot; as a &quot;nebulous smear&quot; or &quot;small cloud&quot;. Star charts of that period labeled it as the &quot;Little Cloud&quot;. In 1612, the German astronomer Simon Marius gave an early description of the Andromeda Galaxy based on telescopic observations. Pierre Louis Maupertuis conjectured in 1745 that the blurry spot was an island universe. Charles Messier cataloged Andromeda as object M31 in 1764 and incorrectly credited Marius as the discoverer despite it being visible to the naked eye. In 1785, the astronomer William Herschel noted a faint reddish hue in the core region of Andromeda. He believed Andromeda to be the nearest of all the &quot;great nebulae&quot;, and based on the color and magnitude of the nebula, he incorrectly guessed that it was no more than 2,000 times the distance of Sirius, or roughly .

In 1850, William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse, made a drawing of Andromeda&#x27;s spiral structure.

In 1864, William Huggins noted that the spectrum of Andromeda differed from that of a gaseous nebula. The spectrum of Andromeda displays a of frequencies, superimposed with dark absorption lines that help identify the chemical composition of an object. Andromeda&#x27;s spectrum is very similar to the spectra of individual stars, and from this, it was deduced that Andromeda has a stellar nature. In 1885, a supernova (known as S Andromedae) was seen in Andromeda, the first and so far only one observed in that galaxy. At the time, it was called &quot;Nova 1885&quot;—the difference between &quot;novae&quot; in the modern sense and supernovae was not yet known. Andromeda was considered to be a nearby object, and it was not realized that the &quot;nova&quot; was much brighter than ordinary novae.
In 1888, Isaac Roberts took one of the first photographs of Andromeda, which was still commonly thought to be a nebula within our galaxy. Roberts mistook Andromeda and similar &quot;spiral nebulae&quot; as star systems being formed.

In 1912, Vesto Slipher used spectroscopy to measure the radial velocity of Andromeda with respect to the Solar System—the largest velocity yet measured, at .

=== &quot;Island universes&quot; hypothesis ===

As early as 1755, the German philosopher Immanuel Kant proposed the hypothesis that the Milky Way is only one of many galaxies in his book &quot;Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens&quot;. Arguing that a structure like the Milky Way would look like a circular nebula viewed from above and like an ellipsoid if viewed from an angle, he concluded that the observed elliptical nebulae like Andromeda, which could not be explained otherwise at the time, were indeed galaxies similar to the Milky Way, not nebulae, as Andromeda was commonly believed to be.

In 1917, Heber Curtis observed a nova within Andromeda. After searching the photographic record, 11 more novae were discovered. Curtis noticed that these novae were, on average, 10 magnitudes fainter than those that occurred elsewhere in the sky. As a result, he was able to come up with a distance estimate of . Although this estimate is about fivefold lower than the best estimates now available, it was the first known estimate of the distance to Andromeda that was correct to within an order of magnitude (i.e., to within a factor of ten of the current estimates, which place the distance around 2.5 million light-years). Curtis became a proponent of the so-called &quot;island universes&quot; hypothesis: that spiral nebulae were actually independent galaxies.

In 1920, the Great Debate between Harlow Shapley and Curtis took place concerning the nature of the Milky Way, spiral nebulae, and the dimensions of the universe. To support his claim that the Great Andromeda Nebula is, in fact, an external galaxy, Curtis also noted the appearance of dark lanes within Andromeda that resembled the dust clouds in our own galaxy, as well as historical observations of the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s significant Doppler shift. In 1922, Ernst Öpik presented a method to estimate the distance of Andromeda using the measured velocities of its stars. His result placed the Andromeda Nebula far outside our galaxy at a distance of about . Edwin Hubble settled the debate in 1925 when he identified extragalactic Cepheid variable stars for the first time on astronomical photos of Andromeda. These were made using the Hooker telescope, and they enabled the distance of the Great Andromeda Nebula to be determined. His measurement demonstrated conclusively that this feature was not a cluster of stars and gas within our own galaxy, but an entirely separate galaxy located a significant distance from the Milky Way.

In 1943, Walter Baade was the first person to resolve stars in the central region of the Andromeda Galaxy. Baade identified two distinct populations of stars based on their metallicity, naming the young, high-velocity stars in the disk Type I and the older, red stars in the bulge Type II. This nomenclature was subsequently adopted for stars within the Milky Way and elsewhere. (The existence of two distinct populations had been noted earlier by Jan Oort.) Baade also discovered that there were two types of Cepheid variable stars, which resulted in doubling the distance estimate to Andromeda, as well as the remainder of the universe.

In 1950, radio emissions from the Andromeda Galaxy were detected by Robert Hanbury Brown and Cyril Hazard at the Jodrell Bank Observatory. The first radio maps of the galaxy were made in the 1950s by John Baldwin and collaborators at the Cambridge Radio Astronomy Group. The core of the Andromeda Galaxy is called 2C 56 in the 2C radio astronomy catalog.

In 1959 rapid rotation of the semi-stellar nucleus of M31 was discovered by Andre Lallemand, M. Duschene and Merle Walker at the Lick Observatory, using the 120-inch telescope, coudé Spectrograph, and Lallemand electronographic camera. They estimated the mass of the nucleus to be about 1.3 x 107 solar masses. The second example of this phenomenon was found in 1961 in the nucleus of M32 by M.F Walker at the Lick Observatory, using the same equipment as used for the discovery of the nucleus of M31. He estimated the nuclear mass to be between 0.8 and 1 x 107 solar masses. Such rotation is now considered to be evidence of the existence of supermassive black holes in the nuclei of these galaxies.

=== 21st century ===

In 2009, an occurrence of microlensing—a phenomenon caused by the deflection of light by a massive object—may have led to the first discovery of a planet in the Andromeda Galaxy.

In 2020, observations of linearly polarized radio emission with the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope, the Effelsberg 100-m Radio Telescope, and the Very Large Array revealed ordered magnetic fields aligned along the &quot;10-kpc ring&quot; of gas and star formation.

In 2025, NASA published a huge mosaic made by the Hubble Space Telescope, assembled from approximately 600 separate overlapping fields of view taken over 10 years of Hubble observation. Hubble resolves an estimated 200 million stars that are hotter than our Sun, but still a fraction of the galaxy’s total estimated stellar population.

== General ==
The estimated distance of the Andromeda Galaxy from our own was doubled in 1953 when it was discovered that there is a second, dimmer type of Cepheid variable star. In the 1990s, measurements of both standard red giants as well as red clump stars from the &quot;Hipparcos&quot; satellite measurements were used to calibrate the Cepheid distances.

=== Formation and history ===
A major merger occurred 2 to 3 billion years ago at the Andromeda location, involving two galaxies with a mass ratio of approximately 4.

The discovery of a recent merger in the Andromeda galaxy was first based on interpreting its anomalous age-velocity dispersion relation, as well as the fact that 2 billion years ago, star formation throughout Andromeda&#x27;s disk was much more active than today.

Modeling of this violent collision shows that it has formed most of the galaxy&#x27;s (metal-rich) galactic halo, including the Giant Stream, and also the extended thick disk, the young age thin disk, and the static 10 kpc ring. During this epoch, its rate of star formation would have been very high, to the point of becoming a luminous infrared galaxy for roughly 100 million years. Modeling also recovers the bulge profile, the large bar, and the overall halo density profile.

Andromeda and the Triangulum Galaxy (M33) might have had a very close passage 2–4 billion years ago, but it seems unlikely from the last measurements from the Hubble Space Telescope.

=== Distance estimate ===

At least four distinct techniques have been used to estimate distances from Earth to the Andromeda Galaxy. In 2003, using the infrared surface brightness fluctuations (I-SBF) and adjusting for the new period-luminosity value and a metallicity correction of −0.2 mag dex−1 in (O/H), an estimate of was derived. A 2004 Cepheid variable method estimated the distance to be 2.51 ± 0.13 million light-years (770 ± 40 kpc).

In 2005, an eclipsing binary star was discovered in the Andromeda Galaxy. The binary is made up of two hot blue stars of types O and B. By studying the eclipses of the stars, astronomers were able to measure their sizes. Knowing the sizes and temperatures of the stars, they were able to measure their absolute magnitude. When the visual and absolute magnitudes are known, the distance to the star can be calculated. The stars lie at a distance of and the whole Andromeda Galaxy at about . This new value is in excellent agreement with the previous, independent Cepheid-based distance value. The TRGB method was also used in 2005 giving a distance of . Averaged together, these distance estimates give a value of .

=== Mass estimates ===
Until 2018, mass estimates for the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s halo (including dark matter) gave a value of approximately , compared to for the Milky Way. This contradicted even earlier measurements that seemed to indicate that the Andromeda Galaxy and Milky Way are almost equal in mass. In 2018, the earlier measurements for equality of mass were re-established by radio results as approximately . In 2006, the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s spheroid was determined to have a higher stellar density than that of the Milky Way, and its galactic stellar disk was estimated at twice the diameter of that of the Milky Way. The total mass of the Andromeda Galaxy is estimated to be between and . The stellar mass of M31 is , with 30% of that mass in the central bulge, 56% in the disk, and the remaining 14% in the stellar halo. The radio results (similar mass to the Milky Way Galaxy) should be taken as likeliest as of 2018, although clearly, this matter is still under active investigation by several research groups worldwide.

As of 2019, current calculations based on escape velocity and dynamical mass measurements put the Andromeda Galaxy at , which is only half of the Milky Way&#x27;s newer mass, calculated in 2019 at .

In addition to stars, the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s interstellar medium contains at least in the form of neutral hydrogen, at least as molecular hydrogen (within its innermost 10 kiloparsecs), and of dust.

The Andromeda Galaxy is surrounded by a massive halo of hot gas that is estimated to contain half the mass of the stars in the galaxy. The nearly invisible halo stretches about a million light-years from its host galaxy, halfway to our Milky Way Galaxy. Simulations of galaxies indicate the halo formed at the same time as the Andromeda Galaxy. The halo is enriched in elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, formed from supernovae, and its properties are those expected for a galaxy that lies in the &quot;green valley&quot; of the Galaxy color-magnitude diagram (see below). Supernovae erupt in the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s star-filled disk and eject these heavier elements into space. Over the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s lifetime, nearly half of the heavy elements made by its stars have been ejected far beyond the galaxy&#x27;s 200,000-light-year-diameter stellar disk.

=== Luminosity estimates ===
The estimated luminosity of the Andromeda Galaxy, , is about 25% higher than that of our own galaxy. However, the galaxy has a high inclination as seen from Earth, and its interstellar dust absorbs an unknown amount of light, so it is difficult to estimate its actual brightness and other authors have given other values for the luminosity of the Andromeda Galaxy (some authors even propose it is the second-brightest galaxy within a radius of 10 megaparsecs of the Milky Way, after the Sombrero Galaxy, with an absolute magnitude of around −22.21 or close).

An estimation done with the help of Spitzer Space Telescope published in 2010 suggests an absolute magnitude (in the blue) of −20.89 (that with a color index of +0.63 translates to an absolute visual magnitude of −21.52, compared to −20.9 for the Milky Way), and a total luminosity in that wavelength of .

The rate of star formation in the Milky Way is much higher, with the Andromeda Galaxy producing only about one solar mass per year compared to 3–5 solar masses for the Milky Way. The rate of novae in the Milky Way is also double that of the Andromeda Galaxy. This suggests that the latter once experienced a great star formation phase, but is now in a relative state of quiescence, whereas the Milky Way is experiencing more active star formation. Should this continue, the luminosity of the Milky Way may eventually overtake that of the Andromeda Galaxy.

According to recent studies, the Andromeda Galaxy lies in what is known in the galaxy color–magnitude diagram as the &quot;green valley&quot;, a region populated by galaxies like the Milky Way in transition from the &quot;blue cloud&quot; (galaxies actively forming new stars) to the &quot;red sequence&quot; (galaxies that lack star formation). Star formation activity in green valley galaxies is slowing as they run out of star-forming gas in the interstellar medium. In simulated galaxies with similar properties to the Andromeda Galaxy, star formation is expected to extinguish within about five billion years, even accounting for the expected, short-term increase in the rate of star formation due to the collision between the Andromeda Galaxy and the Milky Way.

== Structure ==
Based on its appearance in visible light, the Andromeda Galaxy is classified as an SA(s)b galaxy in the de Vaucouleurs–Sandage extended classification system of spiral galaxies. However, infrared data from the 2MASS survey and the Spitzer Space Telescope showed that Andromeda is actually a barred spiral galaxy, like the Milky Way, with Andromeda&#x27;s bar major axis oriented 55 degrees anti-clockwise from the disc major axis.

There are various methods used in astronomy in defining the size of a galaxy, and each method can yield different results concerning one another. The most commonly employed is the D25 standard, the isophote where the photometric brightness of a galaxy in the B-band (445 nm wavelength of light, in the blue part of the visible spectrum) reaches 25 mag/arcsec2. The Third Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies (RC3) used this standard for Andromeda in 1991, yielding an isophotal diameter of at a distance of 2.5 million light-years. An earlier estimate from 1981 gave a diameter for Andromeda at .

A study in 2005 by the Keck telescopes shows the existence of a tenuous sprinkle of stars, or galactic halo, extending outward from the galaxy. The stars in this halo behave differently from the ones in Andromeda&#x27;s main galactic disc, where they show rather disorganized orbital motions as opposed to the stars in the main disc having more orderly orbits and uniform velocities of 200 km/s. This diffuse halo extends outwards away from Andromeda&#x27;s main disc with the diameter of .

The galaxy is inclined an estimated 77° relative to Earth (where an angle of 90° would be edge-on). Analysis of the cross-sectional shape of the galaxy appears to demonstrate a pronounced, S-shaped warp, rather than just a flat disk. A possible cause of such a warp could be gravitational interaction with the satellite galaxies near the Andromeda Galaxy. The Galaxy M33 could be responsible for some warp in Andromeda&#x27;s arms, though more precise distances and radial velocities are required.

Spectroscopic studies have provided detailed measurements of the rotational velocity of the Andromeda Galaxy as a function of radial distance from the core. The rotational velocity has a maximum value of at from the core, and it has its minimum possibly as low as at from the core. Further out, rotational velocity rises out to a radius of , where it reaches a peak of . The velocities slowly decline beyond that distance, dropping to around at . These velocity measurements imply a concentrated mass of about in the nucleus. The total mass of the galaxy increases linearly out to , then more slowly beyond that radius.

The spiral arms of the Andromeda Galaxy are outlined by a series of HII regions, first studied in great detail by Walter Baade and described by him as resembling &quot;beads on a string&quot;. His studies show two spiral arms that appear to be tightly wound, although they are more widely spaced than in our galaxy. His descriptions of the spiral structure, as each arm crosses the major axis of the Andromeda Galaxy, are as follows§pp1062§pp92:

Since the Andromeda Galaxy is seen close to edge-on, it is difficult to study its spiral structure. Rectified images of the galaxy seem to show a fairly normal spiral galaxy, exhibiting two continuous trailing arms that are separated from each other by a minimum of about and that can be followed outward from a distance of roughly from the core. Alternative spiral structures have been proposed such as a single spiral arm or a flocculent pattern of long, filamentary, and thick spiral arms.

The most likely cause of the distortions of the spiral pattern is thought to be interaction with galaxy satellites M32 and M110. This can be seen by the displacement of the neutral hydrogen clouds from the stars.

In 1998, images from the European Space Agency&#x27;s Infrared Space Observatory demonstrated that the overall form of the Andromeda Galaxy may be transitioning into a ring galaxy. The gas and dust within the galaxy are generally formed into several overlapping rings, with a particularly prominent ring formed at a radius of from the core, nicknamed by some astronomers the &quot;ring of fire&quot;. This ring is hidden from visible light images of the galaxy because it is composed primarily of cold dust, and most of the star formation that is taking place in the Andromeda Galaxy is concentrated there.

Later studies with the help of the Spitzer Space Telescope showed how the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s spiral structure in the infrared appears to be composed of two spiral arms that emerge from a central bar and continue beyond the large ring mentioned above. Those arms, however, are not continuous and have a segmented structure.

Close examination of the inner region of the Andromeda Galaxy with the same telescope also showed a smaller dust ring that is believed to have been caused by the interaction with M32 more than 200 million years ago. Simulations show that the smaller galaxy passed through the disk of the Andromeda Galaxy along the latter&#x27;s polar axis. This collision stripped more than half the mass from the smaller M32 and created the ring structures in Andromeda.
It is the co-existence of the long-known large ring-like feature in the gas of Messier 31, together with this newly discovered inner ring-like structure, offset from the barycenter, that suggested a nearly head-on collision with the satellite M32, a milder version of the Cartwheel encounter.

Studies of the extended halo of the Andromeda Galaxy show that it is roughly comparable to that of the Milky Way, with stars in the halo being generally &quot;metal-poor&quot;, and increasingly so with greater distance. This evidence indicates that the two galaxies have followed similar evolutionary paths. They are likely to have accreted and assimilated about 100–200 low-mass galaxies during the past 12 billion years. The stars in the extended halos of the Andromeda Galaxy and the Milky Way may extend nearly one-third the distance separating the two galaxies.

=== Nucleus ===

The Andromeda Galaxy is known to harbor a dense and compact star cluster at its very center, similar to our own galaxy. A large telescope creates a visual impression of a star embedded in the more diffuse surrounding bulge. In 1991, the Hubble Space Telescope was used to image the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s inner nucleus. The nucleus consists of two concentrations separated by . The brighter concentration, designated as P1, is offset from the center of the galaxy. The dimmer concentration, P2, falls at the true center of the galaxy and contains an embedded star cluster, called P3, containing many UV-bright A-stars and the supermassive black hole, called M31*. The black hole is classified as a low-luminosity AGN (LLAGN) and it was detected only in radio wavelengths and in x-rays. It was quiescent in 2004–2005, but it was highly variable in 2006–2007. The mass of M31* was measured at 3–5 × 107 in 1993, and at 1.1–2.3 × 108 in 2005. The velocity dispersion of material around it is measured to be ≈ .

It has been proposed that the observed double nucleus could be explained if P1 is the projection of a disk of stars in an eccentric orbit around the central black hole. The eccentricity is such that stars linger at the orbital apocenter, creating a concentration of stars. It has been postulated that such an eccentric disk could have been formed from the result of a previous black hole merger, where the release of gravitational waves could have &quot;kicked&quot; the stars into their current eccentric distribution. P2 also contains a compact disk of hot, spectral-class A stars. The A stars are not evident in redder filters, but in blue and ultraviolet light they dominate the nucleus, causing P2 to appear more prominent than P1.

While at the initial time of its discovery it was hypothesized that the brighter portion of the double nucleus is the remnant of a small galaxy &quot;cannibalized&quot; by the Andromeda Galaxy, this is no longer considered a viable explanation, largely because such a nucleus would have an exceedingly short lifetime due to tidal disruption by the central black hole. While this could be partially resolved if P1 had its own black hole to stabilize it, the distribution of stars in P1 does not suggest that there is a black hole at its center.

== Discrete sources ==

Apparently, by late 1968, no X-rays had been detected from the Andromeda Galaxy. A balloon flight on 20 October 1970 set an upper limit for detectable hard X-rays from the Andromeda Galaxy. The Swift BAT all-sky survey successfully detected hard X-rays coming from a region centered 6 arcseconds away from the galaxy center. The emission above 25 keV was later found to be originating from a single source named 3XMM J004232.1+411314, and identified as a binary system where a compact object (a neutron star or a black hole) accretes matter from a star.

Multiple X-ray sources have since been detected in the Andromeda Galaxy, using observations from the European Space Agency&#x27;s (ESA) XMM-Newton orbiting observatory. Robin Barnard &quot;et al.&quot; hypothesized that these are candidate black holes or neutron stars, which are heating the incoming gas to millions of kelvins and emitting X-rays. Neutron stars and black holes can be distinguished mainly by measuring their masses. An observation campaign of NuSTAR space mission identified 40 objects of this kind in the galaxy.
In 2012, a microquasar, a radio burst emanating from a smaller black hole was detected in the Andromeda Galaxy. The progenitor black hole is located near the galactic center and has about 10 . It was discovered through data collected by the European Space Agency&#x27;s XMM-Newton probe and was subsequently observed by NASA&#x27;s Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission and Chandra X-Ray Observatory, the Very Large Array, and the Very Long Baseline Array. The microquasar was the first observed within the Andromeda Galaxy and the first outside of the Milky Way Galaxy.

== Globular clusters ==

There are approximately 460 globular clusters associated with the Andromeda Galaxy. The most massive of these clusters, identified as Mayall II, nicknamed Globular One, has a greater luminosity than any other known globular cluster in the Local Group of galaxies. It contains several million stars and is about twice as luminous as Omega Centauri, the brightest known globular cluster in the Milky Way. Globular One (or G1) has several stellar populations and a structure too massive for an ordinary globular. As a result, some consider G1 to be the remnant core of a dwarf galaxy that was consumed by Andromeda in the distant past. The cluster with the greatest apparent brightness is G76 which is located in the southwest arm&#x27;s eastern half.
Another massive globular cluster, named 037-B327 and discovered in 2006 as is heavily reddened by the Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s interstellar dust, was thought to be more massive than G1 and the largest cluster of the Local Group; however, other studies have shown it is actually similar in properties to G1.

Unlike the globular clusters of the Milky Way, which show a relatively low age dispersion, Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s globular clusters have a much larger range of ages: from systems as old as the galaxy itself to much younger systems, with ages between a few hundred million years to five billion years.

In 2005, astronomers discovered a completely new type of star cluster in the Andromeda Galaxy. The new-found clusters contain hundreds of thousands of stars, a similar number of stars that can be found in globular clusters. What distinguishes them from the globular clusters is that they are much larger—several hundred light-years across—and hundreds of times less dense. The distances between the stars are, therefore, much greater within the newly discovered extended clusters.

The most massive globular cluster in the Andromeda Galaxy, B023-G078, likely has a central intermediate black hole of almost 100,000 solar masses.

=== PA-99-N2 event and possible exoplanet in galaxy ===

PA-99-N2 was a microlensing event detected in the Andromeda Galaxy in 1999. One of the explanations for this is the gravitational lensing of a red giant by a star with a mass between 0.02 and 3.6 times that of the Sun, which suggested that the star is likely orbited by a planet. This possible exoplanet would have a mass 6.34 times that of Jupiter. If finally confirmed, it would be the first ever found extragalactic planet. However, anomalies in the event were later found.

== Nearby and satellite galaxies ==
Like the Milky Way, the Andromeda Galaxy has smaller satellite galaxies, consisting of over 20 known dwarf galaxies. The Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s dwarf galaxy population is very similar to the Milky Way&#x27;s, but the galaxies are much more numerous. The best-known and most readily observed satellite galaxies are M32 and M110. Based on current evidence, it appears that M32 underwent a close encounter with the Andromeda Galaxy in the past. M32 may once have been a larger galaxy that had its stellar disk removed by M31 and underwent a sharp increase of star formation in the core region, which lasted until the relatively recent past.

M110 also appears to be interacting with the Andromeda Galaxy, and astronomers have found in the halo of the latter a stream of metal-rich stars that appear to have been stripped from these satellite galaxies. M110 does contain a dusty lane, which may indicate recent or ongoing star formation. M32 has a young stellar population as well.

The Triangulum Galaxy is a non-dwarf galaxy that lies 750,000 light-years from Andromeda. It is currently unknown whether it is a satellite of Andromeda.

In 2006, it was discovered that nine of the satellite galaxies lie in a plane that intersects the core of the Andromeda Galaxy; they are not randomly arranged as would be expected from independent interactions. This may indicate a common tidal origin for the satellites.

== Collision with the Milky Way ==
The Andromeda Galaxy is approaching the Milky Way at about per second. It has been measured approaching relative to the Sun at around as the Sun orbits around the center of the galaxy at a speed of approximately . This makes the Andromeda Galaxy one of about 100 observable blueshifted galaxies. Andromeda Galaxy&#x27;s tangential or sideways velocity concerning the Milky Way is relatively much smaller than the approaching velocity and therefore it is expected to collide directly with the Milky Way in about 2.5–4 billion years. A likely outcome of the collision is that the galaxies will merge to form a giant elliptical galaxy or possibly large disc galaxy. Such events are frequent among the galaxies in galaxy groups. The fate of Earth and the Solar System in the event of a collision is currently unknown. Before the galaxies merge, there is a small chance that the Solar System could be ejected from the Milky Way or join the Andromeda Galaxy.

== Amateur observation==

Under most viewing conditions, the Andromeda Galaxy is one of the most distant objects that can be seen with the naked eye, due to its sheer size. (M33 and, for observers with exceptionally good vision, M81 can be seen under very dark skies.) The galaxy is commonly located in the sky about the constellations Cassiopeia and Pegasus. Andromeda is best seen during autumn nights in the Northern Hemisphere when it passes high overhead, reaching its highest point around midnight in October, and two hours earlier each successive month. In the early evening, it rises in the east in September and sets in the west in February. From the Southern Hemisphere the Andromeda Galaxy is visible between October and December, best viewed from as far north as possible. Binoculars can reveal some larger structures of the galaxy and its two brightest satellite galaxies, M32 and M110. An amateur telescope can reveal Andromeda&#x27;s disk, some of its brightest globular clusters, dark dust lanes, and the large star cloud NGC 206.

==See also==
* List of Messier objects
* List of galaxies
* &quot;New General Catalogue&quot;

== Notes ==

== References ==
== External links ==
* StarDate: M31 Fact Sheet
* Messier 31, SEDS Messier pages
* Astronomy Picture of the Day
** A Giant Globular Cluster in M31 1998 October 17.
** M31: The Andromeda Galaxy 2004 July 18.
** Andromeda Island Universe 2005 December 22.
** Andromeda Island Universe 2010 January 9.
** WISE Infrared Andromeda 2010 February 19.
** M31&#x27;s angular size compared with full Moon 2013 August 1.
* M31 and its central Nuclear Spiral
* Amateur photography – M31
* Globular Clusters in M31 at The Curdridge Observatory
* First direct distance to Andromeda − Astronomy magazine article
* Andromeda Galaxy at SolStation.com
* Andromeda Galaxy at The Encyclopedia of Astrobiology, Astronomy, &amp; Spaceflight
* M31, the Andromeda Galaxy at NightSkyInfo.com
* M31 (Apparent) Novae Page (IAU)
* Multi-wavelength composite
* Andromeda Project (crowd-source)
* Hubble&#x27;s High-Definition Panoramic View of the Andromeda Galaxy
* Infrared-Radio Image of the Andromeda Galaxy (M31)
* Creative Commons Astrophotography M31 Andromeda image download &amp; processing guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="4" end="20" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="26" end="46" title="barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="86" end="95" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="125" end="141" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="162" end="172" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Messier 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="174" end="177" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="M31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="183" end="190" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="NGC 224"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="208" end="230" title="Galaxy#Isophotal diameter" label="D25 isophotal diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256" start="361" end="387" title="constellation of Andromeda" label="constellation of Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q161582" start="417" end="429" title="Andromeda (mythology)" label="the princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="450" end="457" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="461" end="476" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934789" start="483" end="494" title="virial mass" label="virial mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="968" end="976" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="1024" end="1035" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q335988" start="1113" end="1148" title="Andromeda–Milky Way collision" label="expected to collide with each other"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="1214" end="1231" title="elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192078" start="1243" end="1260" title="lenticular galaxy" label="lenticular galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="1271" end="1289" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="1349" end="1363" title="Messier object" label="Messier object"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="1388" end="1397" title="naked eye" label="naked eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="1471" end="1486" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="1599" end="1601" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q25763" start="1607" end="1614" title="Greater Iran" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="1626" end="1647" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087785" start="1692" end="1711" title="Book of Fixed Stars" label="Book of Fixed Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q842617" start="1778" end="1788" title="Star chart" label="Star chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q76684" start="1880" end="1892" title="Simon Marius" label="Simon Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q164374" start="1977" end="2000" title="Pierre Louis Maupertuis" label="Pierre Louis Maupertuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="2066" end="2081" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="2241" end="2257" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="2380" end="2386" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="2439" end="2445" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="2523" end="2529" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q310121" start="2554" end="2588" title="William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse" label="William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2625" end="2641" title="Spiral galaxy#Structure" label="spiral structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="2653" end="2668" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="2684" end="2692" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="2786" end="2797" title="frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="2822" end="2838" title="spectral line" label="absorption lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="3053" end="3062" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q546708" start="3073" end="3085" title="SN 1885A" label="S Andromedae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="3243" end="3248" title="novae" label="novae"/>
<link wikidata="Q934428" start="3455" end="3468" title="Isaac Roberts" label="Isaac Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q505781" start="3652" end="3677" title="protoplanetary disc" label="star systems being formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="3689" end="3702" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="3708" end="3720" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="3736" end="3751" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="3785" end="3797" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="3929" end="3942" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q354217" start="4033" end="4084" title="Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens" label="Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="4200" end="4209" title="Elliptical galaxy" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q349821" start="4465" end="4477" title="Heber Doust Curtis" label="Heber Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="4489" end="4493" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="4637" end="4647" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitudes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5171" end="5185" title="Spiral galaxy#Spiral nebula" label="spiral nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="5236" end="5248" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="5257" end="5271" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="5376" end="5384" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="5664" end="5677" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q318126" start="5688" end="5698" title="Ernst Öpik" label="Ernst Öpik"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="5887" end="5899" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="5960" end="5981" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="6065" end="6081" title="Hooker telescope" label="Hooker telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="6372" end="6384" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="6536" end="6547" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="6599" end="6605" title="Type-A star" label="Type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="6811" end="6819" title="Jan Oort" label="Jan Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="7018" end="7027" title="Emission spectrum" label="emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932238" start="7071" end="7091" title="Robert Hanbury Brown" label="Robert Hanbury Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738150" start="7096" end="7108" title="Cyril Hazard" label="Cyril Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="7116" end="7140" title="Jodrell Bank Observatory" label="Jodrell Bank Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="7152" end="7162" title="radio astronomy" label="radio maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q952538" start="7203" end="7215" title="John E. Baldwin" label="John Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055012" start="7241" end="7272" title="Cavendish Astrophysics Group" label="Cambridge Radio Astronomy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330862" start="7330" end="7332" title="Second Cambridge Catalogue of Radio Sources" label="2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848084" start="7435" end="7450" title="Andre Lallemand" label="Andre Lallemand"/>
<link wikidata="Q461613" start="7488" end="7504" title="Lick Observatory" label="Lick Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461613" start="7769" end="7785" title="Lick Observatory" label="Lick Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028022" start="8109" end="8121" title="microlensing" label="microlensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556501" start="8331" end="8367" title="Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope" label="Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q705139" start="8373" end="8405" title="Effelsberg 100-m Radio Telescope" label="Effelsberg 100-m Radio Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="8415" end="8431" title="Very Large Array" label="Very Large Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="9028" end="9049" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="9095" end="9104" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358411" start="9117" end="9126" title="red clump" label="red clump"/>
<link wikidata="Q555846" start="9148" end="9157" title="Hipparcos" label="Hipparcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518150" start="9272" end="9278" title="Galaxy merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q631379" start="9766" end="9779" title="galactic halo" label="galactic halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="9927" end="9941" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q726611" start="9958" end="9967" title="Starburst galaxy" label="very high"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565388" start="9996" end="10020" title="luminous infrared galaxy" label="luminous infrared galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="10166" end="10183" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="Triangulum Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999487" start="10494" end="10524" title="surface brightness fluctuation" label="surface brightness fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="10800" end="10811" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="10899" end="10904" title="stellar classification" label="types"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="11080" end="11098" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="11109" end="11115" title="apparent magnitude" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q374911" start="11374" end="11378" title="tip of the red-giant branch" label="TRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="11592" end="11603" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11950" end="11958" title="Spiral galaxy#Galactic spheroid" label="spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q854155" start="12265" end="12270" title="Bulge (astronomy)" label="bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150541" start="12283" end="12287" title="Disc (galaxy)" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12318" end="12330" title="Spiral galaxy#Galactic spheroid" label="stellar halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="12785" end="12804" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="12838" end="12854" title="neutral hydrogen" label="neutral hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="12878" end="12886" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="12933" end="12937" title="interstellar dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="13364" end="13373" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025899" start="13476" end="13506" title="Galaxy color–magnitude diagram" label="Galaxy color-magnitude diagram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13512" end="13517" title="#Luminosity estimates" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="13858" end="13868" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="13976" end="13987" title="Orbital inclination" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="14016" end="14033" title="Cosmic dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="14291" end="14301" title="megaparsec" label="megaparsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q91461627" start="14331" end="14346" title="Sombrero Galaxy" label="Sombrero Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="14440" end="14463" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="14494" end="14512" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="14550" end="14561" title="color index" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="14694" end="14704" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="14902" end="14906" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025899" start="15347" end="15377" title="galaxy color–magnitude diagram" label="galaxy color–magnitude diagram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16157" end="16210" title="Galaxy morphological classification#De Vaucouleurs system" label="de Vaucouleurs–Sandage extended classification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454942" start="16263" end="16268" title="2MASS" label="2MASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="16284" end="16307" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="16344" end="16364" title="barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32948031" start="16683" end="16691" title="isophote" label="isophote"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="16804" end="16820" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="17108" end="17123" title="Keck telescopes" label="Keck telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q631379" start="17179" end="17192" title="galactic halo" label="galactic halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="17944" end="17947" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="M33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475614" start="18141" end="18184" title="Galaxy rotation curve" label="rotational velocity of the Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="18593" end="18600" title="Galaxy nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753188" start="18641" end="18649" title="linearity" label="linearly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18701" end="18712" title="Spiral galaxy#Spiral arms" label="spiral arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="18765" end="18776" title="H II region" label="HII regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="18811" end="18823" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272595" start="19573" end="19583" title="flocculent spiral galaxy" label="flocculent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13720" start="19753" end="19756" title="Messier 32" label="M32"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662" start="19761" end="19765" title="Messier 110" label="M110"/>
<link wikidata="Q528404" start="19811" end="19834" title="H I region" label="neutral hydrogen clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="19877" end="19898" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q779547" start="19906" end="19932" title="Infrared Space Observatory" label="Infrared Space Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q752374" start="20020" end="20031" title="ring galaxy" label="ring galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="20495" end="20518" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="21415" end="21425" title="barycenter" label="barycenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208155" start="21517" end="21536" title="Cartwheel Galaxy" label="Cartwheel encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="21698" end="21708" title="Metallicity" label="metal-poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="22228" end="22242" title="Milky Way" label="our own galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="22361" end="22383" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="22725" end="22727" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q471805" start="22735" end="22742" title="A-type main-sequence star" label="A-stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="22751" end="22774" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22783" end="22787" title="M31*" label="M31*"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="22838" end="22841" title="Active galactic nucleus" label="AGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="22878" end="22895" title="Radio astronomy" label="radio wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852" start="22903" end="22909" title="X-ray astronomy" label="x-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q637450" start="23069" end="23088" title="velocity dispersion" label="velocity dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="23256" end="23271" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="23361" end="23370" title="apsis" label="apocenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="23694" end="23708" title="stellar classification" label="spectral-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="24196" end="24212" title="tidal force" label="tidal disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="24470" end="24475" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q837488" start="24635" end="24640" title="Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory" label="Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q56737561" start="24853" end="24874" title="3XMM J004232.1+411314" label="3XMM J004232.1+411314"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="24936" end="24948" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="25097" end="25118" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q693861" start="25132" end="25142" title="XMM-Newton" label="XMM-Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="25251" end="25263" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="25316" end="25322" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163922" start="25457" end="25463" title="NuSTAR" label="NuSTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140232" start="25539" end="25550" title="microquasar" label="microquasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="25769" end="25790" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q693861" start="25798" end="25808" title="XMM-Newton" label="XMM-Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="25848" end="25852" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q837488" start="25860" end="25889" title="Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory" label="Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q49002" start="25894" end="25919" title="Chandra X-Ray Observatory" label="Chandra X-Ray Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="25925" end="25941" title="Very Large Array" label="Very Large Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147559" start="25951" end="25975" title="Very Long Baseline Array" label="Very Long Baseline Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="26145" end="26161" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535451" start="26251" end="26260" title="Mayall II" label="Mayall II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="26356" end="26367" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q14275" start="26449" end="26463" title="Omega Centauri" label="Omega Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q190438" start="26685" end="26697" title="dwarf galaxy" label="dwarf galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="26992" end="27009" title="Cosmic dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="28377" end="28380" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578855" start="28568" end="28588" title="extragalactic planet" label="extragalactic planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495" start="28730" end="28748" title="satellite galaxy" label="satellite galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q190438" start="28778" end="28792" title="dwarf galaxy" label="dwarf galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13720" start="28992" end="28995" title="Elliptical Galaxy M32" label="M32"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662" start="29000" end="29004" title="Elliptical Galaxy M110" label="M110"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="29234" end="29248" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="29661" end="29678" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="Triangulum Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="30393" end="30402" title="blueshift" label="blueshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518150" start="30697" end="30716" title="Galaxy merger" label="galaxies will merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="30733" end="30750" title="elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371025" start="30769" end="30780" title="disc galaxy" label="disc galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491746" start="30829" end="30841" title="galaxy group" label="galaxy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="30870" end="30882" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="31212" end="31221" title="naked eye" label="naked eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="31247" end="31250" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="M33"/>
<link wikidata="Q81102410" start="31302" end="31305" title="Messier 81" label="M81"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722595" start="31324" end="31333" title="Bortle scale" label="very dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464" start="31409" end="31419" title="Cassiopeia (constellation)" label="Cassiopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8864" start="31424" end="31431" title="Pegasus (constellation)" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="31484" end="31503" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="31547" end="31560" title="zenith" label="highest point"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="31733" end="31752" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="31858" end="31868" title="Binoculars" label="Binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495" start="31939" end="31957" title="Satellite galaxy" label="satellite galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13720" start="31959" end="31962" title="Messier 32" label="M32"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662" start="31967" end="31971" title="Messier 110" label="M110"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="31976" end="31993" title="Amateur astronomy" label="amateur telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q570576" start="32111" end="32118" title="NGC 206" label="NGC 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="32136" end="32159" title="List of Messier objects" label="List of Messier objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q829956" start="32162" end="32178" title="List of galaxies" label="List of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="32187" end="32208" title="New General Catalogue" label="New General Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q752071" start="32329" end="32357" title="Astronomy Picture of the Day" label="Astronomy Picture of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232273" start="32816" end="32834" title="Astronomy (magazine)" label="Astronomy magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74332" wikidata="Q247722" url="?curid=74332" title="M31">
<text>M31 may refer to:
==Roadways==
* M31 motorway, a planned but unbuilt motorway in England
* M-31 (Michigan highway), a former state highway in Michigan
* Hume Highway in Australia, designated &quot;M31&quot;
* M31 motorway (Hungary), a short motorway section near Budapest, Hungary
* M31 (Cape Town), a Metropolitan Route in Cape Town, South Africa
* M31 (Johannesburg), a Metropolitan Route in Johannesburg, South Africa
* M31 (Pretoria), a Metropolitan Route in Pretoria, South Africa
* M31 (Durban), a Metropolitan Route in Durban, South Africa

== Military ==
* Suomi M-31 SMG, a Finnish WWII-era submachine gun
* M31 HEAT rifle grenade
* M31 Recovery Vehicle based on the M3 Lee tank
* M31 rocket, an alternate designation for the MGR-1 Honest John, a United States military rocket
* M31 (missile), for a multiple-launch rocket system (MLRS)
* M31 is the pennant number for HMS &quot;Cattistock&quot;, a Hunt-class mine countermeasures vessel

==Other==
* M31 = 0x7FFFFFFF = 2147483647, the eighth Mersenne prime number
* M31 (New York City bus), a New York City Bus route in Manhattan
* &quot;M31: A Family Romance&quot;, a novel by writer Stephen Wright
* Messier 31 (M31), a spiral galaxy also called the Andromeda Galaxy
* Samsung Galaxy M31, an Android based smartphone
* Remington Model 31, a pump-action shotgun made by Remington Arms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247722" start="0" end="3" title="M31" label="M31"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713745" start="33" end="45" title="M31 motorway" label="M31 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352857" start="91" end="114" title="M-31 (Michigan highway)" label="M-31 (Michigan highway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="153" end="165" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q789464" start="209" end="231" title="M31 motorway (Hungary)" label="M31 motorway (Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24234074" start="283" end="298" title="M31 (Cape Town)" label="M31 (Cape Town)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96391174" start="350" end="368" title="M31 (Johannesburg)" label="M31 (Johannesburg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113126835" start="423" end="437" title="M31 (Pretoria)" label="M31 (Pretoria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223237" start="488" end="500" title="M31 (Durban)" label="M31 (Durban)"/>
<link wikidata="Q753845" start="565" end="579" title="Suomi M-31 SMG" label="Suomi M-31 SMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713747" start="617" end="639" title="M31 HEAT rifle grenade" label="M31 HEAT rifle grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q223184" start="676" end="682" title="M3 Lee" label="M3 Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300186" start="735" end="752" title="MGR-1 Honest John" label="MGR-1 Honest John"/>
<link wikidata="Q328978" start="788" end="801" title="M31 (missile)" label="M31 (missile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631812" start="878" end="904" title="HMS Cattistock (M31)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Cattistock&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q773522" start="979" end="989" title="2,147,483,647" label="2147483647"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950107" start="1026" end="1049" title="M31 (New York City bus)" label="M31 (New York City bus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610892" start="1138" end="1159" title="Stephen Wright (writer)" label="writer Stephen Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="1162" end="1172" title="Messier 31" label="Messier 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q97349752" start="1231" end="1249" title="Samsung Galaxy M31" label="Samsung Galaxy M31"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311843" start="1281" end="1299" title="Remington Model 31" label="Remington Model 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122504" start="1331" end="1345" title="Remington Arms" label="Remington Arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74333" wikidata="Q387707" url="?curid=74333" title="Real World Studios">
<text>Real World Studios is a residential recording studio complex founded by Peter Gabriel and situated in the old Box Mill building in the village of Box, Wiltshire, England, near to the city of Bath. It is closely associated with the Real World Records record label, Real World Publishing, and the WOMAD Festival, whose offices are also based at the complex.

==Destinations==
Its aim is to provide excellent working opportunities for many musicians, as well as the wider dissemination of world music. It is intended to serve as a springboard for musicians from all over the world to bring their music to areas and cultures they cannot tap into themselves, especially in the USA where music from Africa, Asia and Latin America is rarely broadcast on mainstream stations.
The Real World music label has introduced musicians such as Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Papa Wemba and Youssou N&#x27;Dour to Western culture. Peter Gabriel has released all his own albums under this label since 1989, and its influence helps sell other artists&#x27; world music. Especially his album Passion: Music for The Last Temptation of Christ has helped world music to enter pop music. Besides Peter Gabriel, the studio has been most commercially successful with the band Afro Celt Sound System, which fuses African and Celtic rhythms and melodies.

==Facility==
The largest recording space, appropriately referred to as the Big Room, is a 2,000 square foot combination live room and control room with a custom wraparound 72-channel SSL 9000 XL K Series mixing console at its centre, with large windows offering expansive views of the adjacent millpond and gardens. Although the Big Room has a separate machine room and two isolation booths, it is designed as one large collaborative recording space with no dividing walls. Alternately, the Big Room also functions as a Dolby Surround 7.1-certified film mixing room.

Adjoining the Big Room and within the former mill building is the Wood Room. This room utilizes a 24-channel SSL AWS 924 console, and features a more lively acoustic character, mezzanine floor and movable acoustic screens, as well as its own isolation booth. The Big Room and The Wood Room can be booked together for a larger recording space, or individually for smaller or lower-budget projects. Also available is the Rehearsal Room—a 49 foot by 16 foot space for rehearsals or pre-production.

The Red Room is a dedicated mixing and production room well-suited for post-production, ADR recording, and mixing for television and film, while a Foley stage facilitates recording Foley.

The studio also has the Writing Room and the Work Room, which are Gabriel&#x27;s own private workspaces.

A residential studio complex designed as an artist&#x27;s retreat, Real World offers living accommodations. The House offers six double bedrooms, a living room, dining room, and laundry facilities. The Cottage is a separate building with living room, bedroom, bathroom, and mobile recording rig. Real World&#x27;s kitchen offers continental breakfast, lunch, and two-course evening dinner prepared by an in-house chef.

==History==
In 1986, following the success of his album &quot;So&quot;, Peter Gabriel decided to pursue a permanent recording facility. Knowing that he wanted to remain in the same area as the Ashcombe House that he had been renting, and that he wanted the new location to be close to running water, Gabriel looked at several sites, mostly old mills, near Bath. A 13-acre site in the village of Box featured the By Brook and several existing buildings, including Box Mill, a 200-year-old water mill that had been converted to offices in the 1950s. Gabriel purchased the site and its buildings from Spafax in 1987.

Gabriel&#x27;s vision for the new studio was a unified space where everyone could work together, where musicians aren&#x27;t separated from the engineer or producer. Additionally, he wanted these creative spaces to have elements of light, air, and water. Working with architectural design firm FCBStudios, the existing buildings were converted and a new building (&#x27;The Big Room&#x27;) was added. The new complex provided both recording studio facilities and residential accommodations.

==Clients==
Notable clients of Real World Studios include A-ha, Alicia Keys, Amy Winehouse, Beyoncé, Björk, Black Grape, Blue October, Bonnie Raitt, Chris de Burgh, Coldplay, Daniel Lanois, Deep Purple, Foals, Goldfrapp, Harry Styles, Idles, Indigo Girls, James, James Morrison, Jay-Z, Joseph Arthur, Kanye West, Kasabian, Katie Melua, King Crimson, Kylie Minogue, Laura Marling, Loreena McKennitt, Maggie Rogers, Marillion, Melanie C, Mumford &amp; Sons, Natalie Duncan, New Order, Paloma Faith, Paolo Nutini, Papa Wemba, Paul Simon, Pixies, Placebo, The Pretenders, Rag&#x27;n&#x27;Bone Man, Reef, Robert Plant, Roger Waters, Sade, Seal, Sia, Squid, Stereophonics, Suzi Quatro, Take That, Therapy?, Tom Jones, Toto, Ultravox, Van Morrison, The Vamps, Wet Wet Wet, and The 1975.

Real World Studios has been host to film and TV projects including &quot;Quantum of Solace&quot;, &quot;The Golden Compass&quot;, &quot;Green Zone&quot; and &quot;The No. 1 Ladies&#x27; Detective Agency.&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* (retrieved on 25 March 2023)
*Real World Records (retrieved on 25 March 2023)
*Video Feature: SOS visits Real World Studios (retrieved on 25 March 2023)
*FeildenCleggBradleyStudios – Real World Studios (retrieved on 25 March 2023)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q387707" start="0" end="18" title="Real World Studios" label="Real World Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="36" end="52" title="recording studio" label="recording studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="72" end="85" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="114" end="118" title="Mill (grinding)" label="Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q895512" start="146" end="149" title="Box, Wiltshire" label="Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="151" end="160" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="162" end="169" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="191" end="195" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q325866" start="231" end="249" title="Real World Records" label="Real World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="250" end="262" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q585056" start="295" end="309" title="World of Music, Arts and Dance" label="WOMAD Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="486" end="497" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="672" end="675" title="United States" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="693" end="699" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="701" end="705" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="710" end="723" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q299073" start="828" end="849" title="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q736274" start="851" end="861" title="Papa Wemba" label="Papa Wemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q210734" start="866" end="885" title="Youssou N&amp;#x27;Dour" label="Youssou N&amp;#x27;Dour"/>
<link wikidata="Q662635" start="1064" end="1112" title="Passion (Peter Gabriel album)" label="Passion: Music for The Last Temptation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="1145" end="1154" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q325111" start="1242" end="1264" title="Afro Celt Sound System" label="Afro Celt Sound System"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="1278" end="1285" title="Music of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="1290" end="1317" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic rhythms and melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139836" start="1503" end="1506" title="Solid State Logic" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="1524" end="1538" title="mixing console" label="mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288891" start="1840" end="1858" title="Dolby Surround 7.1" label="Dolby Surround 7.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="2455" end="2470" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="2472" end="2485" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="ADR recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="2531" end="2536" title="Foley (filmmaking)" label="Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q657185" start="3161" end="3163" title="So (album)" label="So"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="3171" end="3184" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804743" start="3292" end="3306" title="Ashcombe House, Somerset" label="Ashcombe House"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="3455" end="3459" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q895512" start="3494" end="3497" title="Box, Wiltshire" label="Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003963" start="3511" end="3519" title="Bybrook River" label="By Brook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3562" end="3570" title="Bybrook River#Mills" label="Box Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572801" start="3697" end="3703" title="Spafax" label="Spafax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441547" start="4008" end="4018" title="Feilden Clegg Bradley Studios" label="FCBStudios"/>
<link wikidata="Q156305" start="4264" end="4268" title="A-ha" label="A-ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="4270" end="4281" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897" start="4283" end="4296" title="Amy Winehouse" label="Amy Winehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="4298" end="4305" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="4307" end="4312" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500994" start="4314" end="4325" title="Black Grape" label="Black Grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q885829" start="4327" end="4339" title="Blue October" label="Blue October"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="4341" end="4353" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q178237" start="4355" end="4369" title="Chris de Burgh" label="Chris de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="4371" end="4379" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q935369" start="4381" end="4394" title="Daniel Lanois" label="Daniel Lanois"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="4396" end="4407" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q728958" start="4409" end="4414" title="Foals (band)" label="Foals"/>
<link wikidata="Q606250" start="4416" end="4425" title="Goldfrapp" label="Goldfrapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626966" start="4427" end="4439" title="Harry Styles" label="Harry Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070668" start="4441" end="4446" title="Idles" label="Idles"/>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="4448" end="4460" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q316301" start="4469" end="4483" title="James Morrison (singer)" label="James Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="4485" end="4490" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415155" start="4492" end="4505" title="Joseph Arthur" label="Joseph Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="4507" end="4517" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q272517" start="4519" end="4527" title="Kasabian" label="Kasabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156322" start="4529" end="4540" title="Katie Melua" label="Katie Melua"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="4542" end="4554" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="4556" end="4569" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q236735" start="4571" end="4584" title="Laura Marling" label="Laura Marling"/>
<link wikidata="Q274562" start="4586" end="4603" title="Loreena McKennitt" label="Loreena McKennitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28769131" start="4605" end="4618" title="Maggie Rogers" label="Maggie Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q678410" start="4620" end="4629" title="Marillion" label="Marillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151830" start="4631" end="4640" title="Melanie C" label="Melanie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q953918" start="4642" end="4660" title="Mumford &amp;amp; Sons" label="Mumford &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968157" start="4662" end="4676" title="Natalie Duncan" label="Natalie Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="4678" end="4687" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q240324" start="4689" end="4701" title="Paloma Faith" label="Paloma Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q313704" start="4703" end="4715" title="Paolo Nutini" label="Paolo Nutini"/>
<link wikidata="Q736274" start="4717" end="4727" title="Papa Wemba" label="Papa Wemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="4729" end="4739" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="4741" end="4747" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="4749" end="4756" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="4758" end="4772" title="The Pretenders" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q26834366" start="4774" end="4798" title="Rag&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Bone Man" label="Rag&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Bone Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q652420" start="4800" end="4804" title="Reef (band)" label="Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="4806" end="4818" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="4820" end="4832" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="4834" end="4838" title="Sade Adu" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="4840" end="4844" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181484" start="4846" end="4849" title="Sia" label="Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42886947" start="4851" end="4856" title="Squid (band)" label="Squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963" start="4858" end="4871" title="Stereophonics" label="Stereophonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q234750" start="4873" end="4884" title="Suzi Quatro" label="Suzi Quatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="4886" end="4895" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130493" start="4897" end="4905" title="Therapy?" label="Therapy?"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="4907" end="4916" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="4918" end="4922" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q316485" start="4924" end="4932" title="Ultravox" label="Ultravox"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="4934" end="4946" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042553" start="4948" end="4957" title="The Vamps (British band)" label="The Vamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q49871" start="4959" end="4970" title="Wet Wet Wet" label="Wet Wet Wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811247" start="4976" end="4984" title="The 1975" label="The 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q181540" start="5060" end="5077" title="Quantum of Solace" label="Quantum of Solace"/>
<link wikidata="Q637021" start="5091" end="5109" title="The Golden Compass (film)" label="The Golden Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q632328" start="5123" end="5133" title="Green Zone (film)" label="Green Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q481349" start="5150" end="5189" title="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency (TV series)" label="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74334" wikidata="Q194138" url="?curid=74334" title="Chinon">
<text>Chinon () is a commune in the Indre-et-Loire department, Centre-Val de Loire, France.

The traditional province around Chinon, Touraine, became a favorite resort of French kings and their nobles beginning in the late 15th and early 16th centuries. The Renaissance châteaux which they built new or erected on the foundations of old fortresses earned this part of the Loire Valley the nickname &quot;The Garden of France.&quot; Chinon played an important and strategic role during the Middle Ages, serving both French and English kings.

Chinon is known for its wine, castle, and historic town. Its part of the Loire Valley has been registered as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 2000.

==History==
The historic town of Chinon is on the banks of the river Vienne about from where it joins the Loire. Settlement in Chinon dates from prehistoric times, with a pronounced importance for both French and English history in the Middle Ages. At this period rivers were the main trade routes, and the Vienne joins both the fertile regions of the Poitou and the city of Limoges, and is a tributary of the Loire, which acted as a traffic thoroughfare. The site was fortified early on, and by the 5th century a Gallo-Roman &quot;castrum&quot; had been established there.

Towards the mid 5th century, a disciple of St Martin, St Mexme, established first a hermitage, and then a monastery to the east of the town. This religious foundation bearing his name flourished in the medieval period, being rebuilt and extended four times. The eventual complex contained a large and highly decorated church and a square of canons&#x27; residences. Closure and partial demolition during and after the Revolution of 1789 have damaged this once very important church. The imposing second façade still stands, with its nave dating from the year 1000 AD. Its important remains have been restored as historical monument and a cultural centre.

During the Middle Ages, Chinon further developed, especially under Henry II (Henry Plantagenêt, Count of Anjou, and crowned King of England in 1154). The castle was rebuilt and extended, becoming his administrative center and a favourite residence. It was where court was frequently held during the Angevin Empire.

On Henry&#x27;s death at the castle in 1189, Chinon first passed to his eldest surviving son from his marriage with Eleanor of Aquitaine, Richard I the Lionheart. On Richard&#x27;s death in 1199, it then passed to the youngest of their children, John Lackland. King John would lose the castle in a siege in 1205 to the French king Philip II Augustus, from which date it was included in the French royal estates as the royal duchy of Touraine.

The castle in Chinon served as a prison for a time when Philip IV the Fair ordered the Knights Templar arrested in 1307. Jacques de Molay, Grand Master, and a few other dignitaries of the Order of the Temple were incarcerated there prior to trial and eventual execution.

Chinon again played a significant role in the struggle for the throne between the French and the English during the Hundred Years&#x27; War (1337–1453) when the heir apparent, the future Charles VII of France sought refuge and installed his court there in 1425. The province remained faithful to him and he made lengthy stays with his court there. In 1429, the 17-year-old Joan of Arc came to Chinon to meet and to acknowledge him as the rightful heir to the throne. After interrogation to prove she had been sent on a mission from God and with the men and arms then accorded to her, she would go on to break the siege of Orléans in June and open the way for Charles to be crowned at Reims in July 1429. The meetings in Chinon with the future Charles VII of France and his acceptance of her constituted the turning point of the war, helping to establish both firmer national boundaries and sentiment.

Chinon also served Louis XII as he waited for the papal legate Cesare Borgia to bring the annulment papers from Jeanne de France, enabling him to marry Anne of Brittany in 1498, and thus solidifying an even more coherent French territory.

In 1490, the commune of Chinon was the birthplace of the writer, humanist, humorist, philosopher and satirist François Rabelais, author of &quot;Gargantua and Pantagruel&quot; amongst other works, which figure in the canon of great world literature. The region is the scene of these fantastic, critical and observant adventures.

From the 16th century, Chinon was no longer a royal residence, and in 1631 it became part of the estates of the Duke of Richelieu, who neglected the fortress. Apart from townhouses and convents that were built, the city changed little up to the Revolution. In the 1820s, however, the fortifications were pulled down and the banks of the river Vienne were opened up to the outside.

In the late 19th and 20th centuries, Chinon grew to the east, towards the railway station, and to the north on the hill. The historic centre was registered as a conservation area in 1968, and since that time has been undergoing restoration in order to preserve its historic, natural and architectural identity.

==Geography==
Chinon is located in the heart of the &quot;Val de Loire&quot;, 47 km (29 miles) southwest of Tours and 305 km (189 miles) south west of Paris. It extends on both the banks of the Vienne, with the historic town mainly on the northern bank, at the foot of the medieval castle.

Chinon&#x27;s importance derives in great part from its geographical position, located on the Vienne just before it joins the Loire. From prehistoric times, rivers acted as the principal trade routes, and the Vienne not only joins the fertile southern plains of the Poitou and the city of Limoges, but joining the Loire, gives access to both the seaport in Nantes and the Île-de-France Paris region, thus providing not only a natural protective barrier, but a source of wealth.

The natural rocky outcrop that dominates the northern bank provides not only a natural fort and defensive position; it also acts as protection from flooding.

==Population==
==Wine==

Carved into the banks of the Vienne River are the &quot;caves&quot;, or wine cellars, for Chinon&#x27;s well-known Cabernet Franc-based red wines.

== Monuments ==
=== The historic town ===
The historic town of Chinon presents an interesting architectural ensemble, from the Middle Ages and the beginning of the Renaissance when the Loire Valley was the seat of the king&#x27;s court.

Topography has played a major role: the formerly fortified town was developed at the foot of the castle on the rocky outcrop, protecting the northern side, with the Vienne River in the south. Apart from the natural defensive protection on both sides, this fact makes a long narrow urban space, with the main streets running parallel to the river.

The town was developed on both sides of the river: the fortified town at the base of the castle; the canons&#x27; quarter to the east; and on the other bank a suburb on the way to the southern regions of the Poitou, important to the 12th century Plantagenets.

The former fortified town at the foot of the castle contains a significant collection of old houses and narrow streets, including some half timber houses dating from the end of the 14th or the 15th centuries. The majority of the houses line the main street of this quarter, the rue Voltaire that then becomes the rue Haute Saint Maurice, originally Gallo-Roman, and also presents a number of &quot;hôtels particuliers&quot;, or town manor houses, some with graceful turrets, winding staircase towers, and decorative elements form the end of the 15th or the beginning of the 16th century. Others, more sober and classical, date from the following periods, with some fine examples from the 17th and 18th centuries.

This street continues on past the church of Saint Maurice to its end where it was formerly enclosed by the fortifications. It also, at the main crossroads of the &quot;Grand Carroi&quot;, offered the only access to the castle from within the town, and is the street that Joan of Arc took to go up and meet the future Charles VII in 1429.

The stone houses are made of the local tufa stone, a soft luminous limestone, easy to carve and lending itself to the often ornate sculpted decorations of the late Gothic and early Renaissance period. The roofs are of slate, another particular regional architectural element.

The quarter to the east was enclosed as well. It too lost these elements in the 1820s in an effort to open the town up to circulation and commerce. In this quarter one finds the parish church of Saint Etienne, and further the canons&#x27; quarter of the collegiate church of Saint Mexme. Here the houses are often larger, some presenting courtyards and gardens, dating from the late 15th century and on, a few fine examples of which were the canons&#x27; residences. To the south one can join the promenade along the river, or go up the rocky slope north east to the Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde.

The quarters of the former fortified town and that of Saint Etienne-Saint Mexme are divided by what was the only open space during the Middle Ages which was developed in the 18th and 19th centuries, and the architectural elements date from this period. It now presents a square sheltered by trees with outdoor restaurants tables.

The town of Chinon also offers an unusual variety of perspectives, allowing one to take its measure in several ways: from the bank opposite the castle, or river by boat, from which one can fully see the architectural presence and importance of its castle and town; from the interior of the historic town itself; and from the rocky outcrop, either from the castle itself, or along the high narrow roads along it that lead past semi-troglodytic homes and caves to the chapel of Saint Radegonde, giving a panoramic view of the historic town and the valley that opens up on the other side of the river.

Chinon is also a participant in the Loire Valley cycling tourism circuit.

=== Collegiate church of Saint-Mexme ===

Saint Mexme is the patron saint of Chinon, credited with having saved the town and its inhabitants in the 5th century from dying of thirst during a siege with a massive rain and thunder storm. This moment is depicted in one of the stained glass windows of the apse in the church of Saint Etienne in Chinon by the atelier Lobin in the 19th century.

The hermitage, then monastery founded by Saint Mexme was destroyed in the 10th century, thus requiring reconstruction around the year 1000 AD. It is at this date that it became a collegiate church. Its importance was confirmed not only by its architecture, but that it was subject directly to the Holy See in Rome.

The collegiate church of Saint Mexme was the main religious edifice of the town until the Revolution when it was deconsecrated. A lack of necessary upkeep would lead to its partial collapse in 1817. The remaining largely Romanesque church retains its first façade, now found in the interior, and its nave, both from the year 1000 AD. The nave is characterized by its horizontal lines: rows of large arcades and a series of high windows topped by a string course and a timber ceiling. Remains of richly painted decoration from the period subsist around the upper windows and in the northern arcade. It is now a Historical Monument, and since 2002 it has housed a small wooden frame theatre used for musical and theatrical events.
The imposing façade, or west front, actually the second one built, dates from 1050 AD. It has a central portion, once richly decorated with carved stones depicting figuratives scenes that were largely mutilated during the Revolution, flanked by two side towers partially rebuilt in the 15th century. Some decorative interlacing and plant motifs can still be seen. This second façade was most likely architecturally influential in the region at the time. It forms, with the first façade from the year 1000 AD conserved in the interior, a narthex with a large barrel-vault with semicircular arches; the walls present blind arcades. Visible in the south chapel are some 15th-century paintings that have been conserved, notably a &quot;Last Judgement&quot;, and a rare &quot;Fountain of Pity&quot;. A very fine 18th-century open-newel winding stone staircase leads from the narthex to the upper floor. The upper gallery contains mural paintings from the 13th century, and a rare and imposing crucifixion carved in stone near the top of the first façade also dating from the 1st millennium. In 2006, the window openings were embellished with stained glass, following the designs of the painter Olivier Debré. They provide an unbroken view of the surrounding landscape.

Around the collegiate church are several former canonical residences, dating from the Ancien Régime.

=== Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde ===

The Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde is half built into the rock face on the eastern outer limits of the town. During Antiquity, a natural underground spring at the back of the actual chapel was a site used for pagan worship. The site was Christianized in the 6th century when Queen Radegonde, later named a Saint, supposedly came to visit the hermit John who lived there. The name of the sanctuary comes from this event.
Two naves were created, starting in the 12th century. One is carved directly into the rock and the second made adjacent to it at a later date. The chapel conserves some mural paintings, notably the &quot;Royal Hunt&quot;, made towards the end of the 12th century, the time of the power and residence of the Plantagenet family in Chinon. The fresco figures 5 riders, two of whom are crowned, and another with a bird of prey on his wrist. It has been presumed that it depicts members of the Plantagenet family in Chinon, the two crowned figures possibly being Henry II and Eleanor of Aquitaine, or their son Henry the Younger, crowned during his father&#x27;s lifetime in 1170. In addition to its subject matter, this painting is of outstanding quality in its execution, its vivacity and the variety of colours.

Other paintings, depicting the story of Saint Radegonde and Saint John, were made during the 17th century.

The chapel was deconsecrated following the Revolution and used as dwelling places. In 1878, it was bought and restored as a sanctuary by a benefactress of Chinon, Madame Charre.

=== Church of Saint Maurice ===

The church of Saint Maurice is the parish church of the town, going thru several architectural evolutions. The oldest portion, the bell tower, is Romanesque, dating from the beginning of the 12th century. The nave and the choir both date from the end of the 12th century or beginning of the 13th, with Angevin Gothic style vaults. This style can be found in the Angevin territories, but not restricted to them. The vault is fairly bulbous in form, marked by very ornate sculptured and painted vault bosses, at the junction of the ribs and the capitols at the rib springs. A chapel from the 15th and a side aisle from the early 16th century mark the transition from Flamboyant Gothic to Renaissance architecture. The church was repainted in the 19th century, inspired by the restoration of the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, and received new stained glass windows commissioned from the Atelier Lobin in Tours.

The church of Saint Maurice is the most likely location of Joan of Arc&#x27;s prayer, while in Chinon in 1429.

=== Church of Saint Étienne ===

The church of Saint Etienne, or Saint Stephen in English, is the parish church of the eastern quarter, not far from the collegiate church of Saint Mexme. It was completely reconstructed in the Flamboyant Gothic style, with the exception of the lower portion of the bell tower, in the 15th century. It has a large single aisle covered by ribbed vaults. The apse contains stained glass windows depicting scenes of religious importance in Chinon and the surrounding regions: the meeting of Queen and future Saint Radegonde and Saint John of Chinon in the 6th century; the miracle of Saint Mexme saving Chinon from a siege with a rain and thunder storm in the 5th century; the death of Martin of Tours in Candes-Saint-Martin in 397; and the meeting of Joan of Arc and the future Charles VII in 1429. They were produced on commission by the Atelier Lobin in Tours in the 19th century. It also houses the first statue of Joan of Arc in a church, placed there in 1900, two decades before her canonization.

==Notable people==
* Radegonde of Valois (c. 1425–1445), a French princess, eldest daughter of King Charles VII of France and Marie of Anjou. She was betrothed to Sigismund, Archduke of Austria.
* François Rabelais (ca.1493–1553), was a major French Renaissance writer, doctor, Renaissance humanist, monk and Greek scholar.
* René Ouvrard (1624–1694), a French priest, writer and composer.
* Jules Pierre Rambur (1801–1870), a French entomologist.
* Jean-Philippe Grand (born 1953), racing driver

==See also==
* Loire Valley (wine)
* The Chinon Parchment is a historical document, published by Étienne Baluze in &quot;Vitae Paparum Avenionensis&quot; (&quot;Lives of the Popes of Avignon&quot;), Paris, 1693.
* List of castles in France
* Samson of Chinon
* Chapelle Sainte Radegonde (Chinon)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194138" start="0" end="6" title="Chinon" label="Chinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="15" end="22" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12556" start="30" end="44" title="Indre-et-Loire" label="Indre-et-Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="45" end="55" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q13947" start="57" end="76" title="Centre-Val de Loire" label="Centre-Val de Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q605051" start="127" end="135" title="Touraine" label="Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="366" end="378" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963789" start="556" end="564" title="Chinon AOC" label="its wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q912447" start="566" end="572" title="Château de Chinon" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="647" end="653" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="654" end="673" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q659546" start="756" end="762" title="Vienne (river)" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="793" end="798" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="1039" end="1045" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="1062" end="1069" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="1201" end="1212" title="Gallo-Roman" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="1219" end="1226" title="castrum" label="castrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133704" start="1305" end="1314" title="Martin of Tours" label="St Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1680" end="1698" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="1985" end="1993" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="2001" end="2012" title="House of Plantagenet" label="Plantagenêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="2014" end="2028" title="Count of Anjou" label="Count of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="2217" end="2231" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="2350" end="2370" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="2372" end="2395" title="Richard I the Lionheart" label="Richard I the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="2480" end="2493" title="John Lackland" label="John Lackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="2565" end="2583" title="Philip II Augustus" label="Philip II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605051" start="2667" end="2675" title="Touraine" label="Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="2734" end="2752" title="Philip IV the Fair" label="Philip IV the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="2765" end="2780" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208215" start="2799" end="2815" title="Jacques de Molay" label="Jacques de Molay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="2866" end="2885" title="Order of the Temple" label="Order of the Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="3066" end="3089" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="3137" end="3158" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="3323" end="3334" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="3572" end="3579" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="3634" end="3639" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="3693" end="3714" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="3871" end="3880" title="Louis XII" label="Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q187998" start="3915" end="3928" title="Cesare Borgia" label="Cesare Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236220" start="3964" end="3980" title="Joan of France, Duchess of Berry" label="Jeanne de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q201143" start="4004" end="4020" title="Anne of Brittany" label="Anne of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="4202" end="4219" title="François Rabelais" label="François Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q822290" start="4237" end="4261" title="Gargantua and Pantagruel" label="Gargantua and Pantagruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663290" start="4534" end="4551" title="Duke of Richelieu" label="Duke of Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4667" end="4677" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="5174" end="5186" title="Val de Loire" label="Val de Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="5224" end="5229" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5267" end="5272" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q659546" start="5310" end="5316" title="Vienne (river)" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="5533" end="5538" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="5673" end="5679" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="5696" end="5703" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="5779" end="5792" title="Île-de-France" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q63591" start="6185" end="6199" title="Cabernet Franc" label="Cabernet Franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6345" end="6356" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="6382" end="6393" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="7012" end="7018" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="7050" end="7061" title="Plantagenet" label="Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365179" start="7463" end="7482" title="hôtels particuliers" label="hôtels particuliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="8050" end="8061" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="8157" end="8161" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559756" start="8962" end="8987" title="Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde" label="Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="10407" end="10416" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="10566" end="10583" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="10684" end="10692" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="10707" end="10724" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="10924" end="10934" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="10960" end="10966" title="façade" label="façade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="11003" end="11007" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q208576" start="11969" end="11976" title="narthex" label="narthex"/>
<link wikidata="Q917098" start="11990" end="12002" title="barrel-vault" label="barrel-vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637632" start="12621" end="12634" title="Olivier Debré" label="Olivier Debré"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559756" start="12838" end="12863" title="Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde" label="Chapelle Sainte-Radegonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q236974" start="13110" end="13119" title="Radegonde" label="Radegonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="13556" end="13567" title="Plantagenet" label="Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="13807" end="13815" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="13820" end="13840" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316599" start="14394" end="14407" title="Saint Maurice" label="Saint Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="14526" end="14536" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="14589" end="14593" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="14602" end="14607" title="choir (architecture)" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="14690" end="14696" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351624" start="15045" end="15062" title="Flamboyant Gothic" label="Flamboyant Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="15066" end="15090" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q193193" start="15173" end="15188" title="Sainte-Chapelle" label="Sainte-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="15277" end="15282" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="15344" end="15355" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="15462" end="15475" title="Saint Stephen" label="Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351624" start="15623" end="15640" title="Flamboyant Gothic" label="Flamboyant Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007996" start="15750" end="15755" title="aisle" label="aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="15786" end="15790" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q236974" start="15940" end="15949" title="Radegonde" label="Radegonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q476848" start="16131" end="16150" title="Candes-Saint-Martin" label="Candes-Saint-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="16178" end="16189" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="16205" end="16216" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416401" start="16451" end="16470" title="Radegonde of Valois" label="Radegonde of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="16525" end="16551" title="King Charles VII of France" label="King Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231453" start="16556" end="16570" title="Marie of Anjou" label="Marie of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q438375" start="16593" end="16623" title="Sigismund, Archduke of Austria" label="Sigismund, Archduke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="16627" end="16644" title="François Rabelais" label="François Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349908" start="16673" end="16691" title="French Renaissance" label="French Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="16708" end="16728" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q676595" start="16756" end="16768" title="René Ouvrard" label="René Ouvrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q494428" start="16822" end="16841" title="Jules Pierre Rambur" label="Jules Pierre Rambur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168806" start="16880" end="16899" title="Jean-Philippe Grand" label="Jean-Philippe Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954580" start="16943" end="16962" title="Loire Valley (wine)" label="Loire Valley (wine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q738157" start="16969" end="16985" title="Chinon Parchment" label="Chinon Parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q289351" start="17025" end="17039" title="Étienne Baluze" label="Étienne Baluze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863239" start="17142" end="17167" title="List of castles in France" label="List of castles in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410415" start="17170" end="17186" title="Samson of Chinon" label="Samson of Chinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559756" start="17189" end="17223" title="Chapelle Sainte Radegonde (Chinon)" label="Chapelle Sainte Radegonde (Chinon)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74335" wikidata="Q312215" url="?curid=74335" title="William V, Prince of Orange">
<text>William V (Willem Batavus; 8 March 1748 – 9 April 1806) was Prince of Orange and the last Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic. He went into exile to London in 1795. He was furthermore ruler of the Principality of Orange-Nassau until his death in 1806. In that capacity, he was succeeded by his son William.

==Early life==
William Batavus was born in The Hague on 8 March 1748, the only son of William IV, who had the year before been restored as stadtholder of the United Provinces. He was only three years old when his father died in 1751, and a long regency began. His regents were:

*Dowager Princess Anne, his mother, from 1751 to her death in 1759;
*Dowager Princess Marie Louise, his grandmother, from 1759 to her death in 1765;
*Duke Louis Ernest of Brunswick-Lüneburg, from 1759 to 1766, and kept on as a privy counsellor, in accordance with the &quot;Acte van Consulentschap&quot;, until October 1784;
*Princess Carolina, his sister (who at the time was an adult aged 22, while he was still a minor at 17), from 1765 to William&#x27;s majority in 1766.

William was made the 568th Knight of the Order of the Garter in 1752.

==Stadtholder==
William V assumed the position of stadtholder and Captain-General of the Dutch States Army on his majority in 1766. However, he allowed the Duke of Brunswick to retain a large influence on the government with the secret &quot;Acte van Consulentschap&quot;. On 4 October 1767 in Berlin, Prince William married Princess Wilhelmina of Prussia, the daughter of Augustus William of Prussia, niece of Frederick the Great and a cousin of George III. (He himself was George III&#x27;s first cousin). He became an art collector and in 1774 his &quot;Galerij Prins Willem V&quot; was opened to the public.

The position of the Dutch during the American War of Independence was one of neutrality. William V, leading the pro-British faction within the government, blocked attempts by pro-American, and later pro-French, elements to drag the government to war in support of the Franco-American alliance. However, things came to a head with the Dutch attempt to join the Russian-led League of Armed Neutrality, leading to the outbreak of the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War in 1780. In spite of the fact that Britain was engaged in fighting on several fronts, the war went badly for the poorly prepared Dutch, leading to the loss of Sint Eustatius and Nagapattinam. Scandals like the Brest Affair undermined belief in the Dutch navy. The stadtholderian regime and the Duke of Brunswick were suspected of treason in the matter of the loss of the Barrier fortresses. The deterioration of the prestige of the regime made minds ripe for agitation for political reform, like the pamphlet Aan het Volk van Nederland, published in 1781 by Joan van der Capellen tot den Pol.

After the signing of the Treaty of Paris (1783), there was growing restlessness in the United Provinces with William&#x27;s rule. A coalition of old Dutch States Party &quot;regenten&quot; and democrats, called Patriots, was challenging his authority more and more. Mid September 1785 William left The Hague and removed his court to Het Loo Palace in Gelderland, a province remote from the political center. In September 1786 he sent States-Army troops to Hattem and Elburg to overthrow the cities&#x27; Patriot vroedschap, despite the defense by Patriot Free Corps, organised by Herman Willem Daendels. This provoked the Patriot-dominated States of Holland to deprive him of his office of Captain-General of the Army. (His function was given to Rhinegrave Salm.) In June 1787 his energetic wife Wilhelmina tried to travel to The Hague to foment an Orangist rising in that city. Outside Schoonhoven, she was stopped by the Gouda Free Corps, taken to a farm near Goejanverwellesluis and after a short detention made to return to Nijmegen.

To Wilhelmina and her brother, Frederick William II of Prussia, this was both an insult and an excuse to intervene militarily. Frederick launched the Prussian invasion of Holland in September 1787 to suppress the Patriots. Many Patriots fled to the North of France, around Saint-Omer, in an area where Dutch was spoken. Until his overthrow they were supported by King Louis XVI of France.

==Exile in Great Britain and Ireland==
William V joined the First Coalition against Republican France in 1793 with the coming of the French Revolution. His troops fought in the Flanders Campaign, but in 1794 the military situation deteriorated and the Dutch Republic was threatened by invading armies. The year 1795 was a disastrous one for the &quot;ancien régime&quot; of the Netherlands. Supported by the French Army, the revolutionaries returned from Paris to fight in the Netherlands, and in 1795 William V went into exile in England. A few days later the Batavian Revolution occurred, and the Dutch Republic was replaced with the Batavian Republic. 

Directly after his arrival in England, the Prince wrote a number of letters (known as the Kew Letters) from his new residence in Kew to the governors of the Dutch colonies, instructing them to hand over their colonies to the British as long as France continued to occupy the &quot;mother country&quot;. Only a number complied, while those that demurred from doing so became confused and demoralised. Almost all Dutch colonies were eventually captured by the British, who in the end returned most, but not all (South Africa and Ceylon), first at the Treaty of Amiens and later with the Convention of London signed in 1814.

In 1799 the Hereditary Prince took an active part in the Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland, engineering the capture of a Batavian naval squadron in the Vlieter Incident. The surrender of the ships (that had been paid for by the Batavian Republic) was formally accepted in the name of William V as stadtholder, who was later allowed to sell them to the Royal Navy (for an appreciable amount). But that was his only success, as the troops suffered from choleric diseases, and civilians at that time were unwilling to re-instate the old regime. The arrogance of the tone in his proclamation, demanding the restoration of the stadtholderate, may not have been helpful, according to Simon Schama.

After the Treaty of Amiens in 1802, in which Great Britain recognised the Batavian Republic, an additional Franco-Prussian Convention of 23 May 1802 declared that the House of Orange would be ceded in perpetuity the domains of Dortmund, Weingarten, Fulda and Corvey in lieu of its Dutch estates and revenues (this became the Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda). As far as Napoleon was concerned, this cession was conditional on the liquidation of the stadtholderate and other hereditary offices of the Prince. William V, however, had no interest in towns, territories and abbeys confiscated from other rulers, including alternatives as Würzburg and Bamberg, but wanted what was his due: his arrears in salaries and other financial perquisites since 1795, or a lump sum of 4 million guilders. The foreign minister of the Batavian Republic, Maarten van der Goes, was willing to secretly try to persuade the &quot;Staatsbewind&quot; of the Batavian Republic to grant this additional indemnity, but Napoleon put a stop to it, when he got wind of the affair.

The last of the Dutch stadtholders, William V died in exile at his daughter&#x27;s palace in Brunswick, now in Germany. His body was moved to the Dutch Royal Family crypt in the Nieuwe Kerk in Delft on 29 April 1958.

In 1813, his son, William VI returned to the Netherlands and proclaimed himself king, thus becoming the first Dutch monarch from the House of Orange.

==Issue==
William V and Wilhelmina of Prussia were parents to five children:

*An unnamed son (23–24 March 1769).
*Princess Frederika Luise Wilhelmina of Orange-Nassau (The Hague, 28 November 1770 – The Hague, 15 October 1819), married in The Hague on 14 October 1790 Karl, Hereditary Prince of Braunschweig (London, 8 February 1766 – Antoinettenruh, 20 September 1806), a son of Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg and Princess Augusta of Great Britain, without issue.
*An unnamed son (born and deceased on 6 August 1771).
*Willem Frederik, Hereditary Prince of Orange-Nassau (The Hague, 25 August 1772 – 12 December 1843), who became the first King of the Netherlands as William I .
*Prince Willem Georg &quot;Frederik&quot;, Prince of Orange-Nassau (The Hague, 15 February 1774 – Padua, 6 January 1799), unmarried and without legitimate issue.

==Ancestry==
==Appreciation==
During his life and afterward, William V was a controversial person, in himself, and because he was the unwilling center of a political firestorm that others had caused. Many historians and contemporaries have written short appreciations of him that were often acerbic. Phillip Charles, Count of Alvensleben, who was the Prussian envoy to the Hague from 1787 (so not someone who must be suspected to be prejudiced against William) may be taken as an example. He wrote:
 His great-great-granddaughter Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands was less kind. She simply called him a &quot;sufferd&quot; (dummy).

==Legacy==
* Orange County, North Carolina was named for William V of Orange
* Orange County, Indiana was named after the North Carolina county.
* The Orange River, the longest river in South Africa was named in honour of William V of Orange.

==See also==
* House of Orange-Nassau

== References ==
== External links ==

|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312215" start="0" end="9" title="William V, Prince of Orange" label="William V"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="60" end="76" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="90" end="101" title="Stadtholder" label="Stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="109" end="123" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="195" end="224" title="Principality of Orange-Nassau" label="Principality of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="296" end="303" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="349" end="358" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="392" end="402" title="William IV, Prince of Orange" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q239487" start="586" end="607" title="Anne, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange" label="Dowager Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q62593" start="654" end="683" title="Landgravine Marie Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Dowager Princess Marie Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q72431" start="735" end="774" title="Duke Louis Ernest of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Duke Louis Ernest of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256899" start="859" end="882" title="Acte van Consulentschap" label="Acte van Consulentschap"/>
<link wikidata="Q256638" start="911" end="928" title="Carolina of Orange-Nassau" label="Princess Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="1089" end="1095" title="Knight" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="1103" end="1122" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="1183" end="1194" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240425" start="1222" end="1239" title="Dutch States Army" label="Dutch States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256899" start="1375" end="1398" title="Acte van Consulentschap" label="Acte van Consulentschap"/>
<link wikidata="Q58003" start="1458" end="1488" title="Wilhelmina of Prussia, Princess of Orange" label="Princess Wilhelmina of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213658" start="1506" end="1533" title="Prince Augustus William of Prussia" label="Augustus William of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="1544" end="1563" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="1580" end="1590" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805178" start="1690" end="1712" title="Galerij Prins Willem V" label="Galerij Prins Willem V"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1783" end="1811" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="1823" end="1833" title="Neutrality (international relations)" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146014" start="2118" end="2144" title="First League of Armed Neutrality" label="League of Armed Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q576292" start="2177" end="2199" title="Fourth Anglo-Dutch War" label="Fourth Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188867" start="2359" end="2373" title="Capture of Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510266" start="2378" end="2390" title="Siege of Negapatam" label="Nagapattinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605899" start="2410" end="2422" title="Brest Affair" label="Brest Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q808927" start="2571" end="2578" title="Barrier Treaty" label="Barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450132" start="2709" end="2735" title="Aan het Volk van Nederland" label="Aan het Volk van Nederland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411995" start="2758" end="2791" title="Joan van der Capellen tot den Pol" label="Joan van der Capellen tot den Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="2819" end="2841" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris (1783)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196963" start="2943" end="2961" title="Dutch States Party" label="Dutch States Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699184" start="2968" end="2976" title="regenten" label="regenten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898124" start="3005" end="3013" title="Patriottentijd" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q692381" start="3127" end="3141" title="Het Loo Palace" label="Het Loo Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q775" start="3145" end="3155" title="Gelderland" label="Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q58797" start="3250" end="3256" title="Hattem" label="Hattem"/>
<link wikidata="Q165662" start="3261" end="3267" title="Elburg" label="Elburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862230" start="3306" end="3316" title="vroedschap" label="vroedschap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056790" start="3349" end="3359" title="Exercitiegenootschap" label="Free Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741772" start="3374" end="3396" title="Herman Willem Daendels" label="Herman Willem Daendels"/>
<link wikidata="Q769041" start="3434" end="3451" title="States of Holland and West Friesland" label="States of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3540" end="3555" title="Johann Friedrich von Salm-Grumbachg" label="Rhinegrave Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="3620" end="3629" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353695" start="3643" end="3651" title="Orangism (Dutch Republic)" label="Orangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q478036" start="3681" end="3692" title="Schoonhoven" label="Schoonhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554279" start="3756" end="3775" title="Goejanverwellesluis" label="Goejanverwellesluis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="3822" end="3830" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152229" start="3864" end="3895" title="Frederick William II of Prussia" label="Frederick William II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109300" start="3983" end="4011" title="Prussian invasion of Holland" label="Prussian invasion of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208793" start="4106" end="4116" title="Saint-Omer" label="Saint-Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="4201" end="4220" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="4283" end="4298" title="First Coalition" label="First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4356" end="4373" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457361" start="4400" end="4417" title="Low Countries theatre of the War of the First Coalition" label="Flanders Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603206" start="4784" end="4803" title="Batavian Revolution" label="Batavian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4822" end="4836" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="4859" end="4876" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q586286" start="4970" end="4981" title="Kew Letters" label="Kew Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740301" start="5009" end="5012" title="Kew" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="5390" end="5402" title="Cape Colony" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841483" start="5407" end="5413" title="Dutch Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="5429" end="5445" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q617263" start="5465" end="5485" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814" label="Convention of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="5515" end="5532" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="Hereditary Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141642" start="5560" end="5593" title="Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland" label="Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297380" start="5655" end="5671" title="Vlieter Incident" label="Vlieter Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q472272" start="6181" end="6193" title="Simon Schama" label="Simon Schama"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="6206" end="6222" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="6241" end="6254" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="6423" end="6431" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q334353" start="6433" end="6443" title="Weingarten Abbey" label="Weingarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963" start="6445" end="6450" title="Fulda" label="Fulda"/>
<link wikidata="Q56004" start="6455" end="6461" title="Corvey Abbey" label="Corvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403552" start="6521" end="6556" title="Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda" label="Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6569" end="6577" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="6833" end="6841" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="6846" end="6853" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128852" start="7036" end="7056" title="Maarten van der Goes van Dirxland" label="Maarten van der Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190240" start="7108" end="7120" title="Staatsbewind" label="Staatsbewind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="7345" end="7354" title="Braunschweig (city)" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q678611" start="7430" end="7441" title="Nieuwe Kerk (Delft)" label="Nieuwe Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="7445" end="7450" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="7488" end="7498" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="7580" end="7593" title="Dutch monarchy" label="Dutch monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423476" start="7736" end="7788" title="Princess Louise of Orange-Nassau" label="Princess Frederika Luise Wilhelmina of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="7790" end="7799" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="7820" end="7829" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="7860" end="7869" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129510" start="7889" end="7928" title="Karl Georg August, Hereditary Prince of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel" label="Karl, Hereditary Prince of Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7956" end="7970" title="Antoinettenruh" label="Antoinettenruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q58773" start="8001" end="8051" title="Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg" label="Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q238458" start="8056" end="8089" title="Princess Augusta of Great Britain" label="Princess Augusta of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="8161" end="8212" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="Willem Frederik, Hereditary Prince of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="8214" end="8223" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q316076" start="8322" end="8387" title="Prince Frederick of Orange-Nassau" label="Prince Willem Georg &amp;quot;Frederik&amp;quot;, Prince of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="8389" end="8398" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="8419" end="8424" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8784" end="8821" title="Phillip Charles, Count of Alvensleben" label="Phillip Charles, Count of Alvensleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="8835" end="8843" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="9020" end="9049" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q507957" start="9132" end="9161" title="Orange County, North Carolina" label="Orange County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q513092" start="9198" end="9220" title="Orange County, Indiana" label="Orange County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="9270" end="9282" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="9378" end="9400" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74337" wikidata="Q220665" url="?curid=74337" title="Space Invaders">
<text>is a 1978 shoot &#x27;em up video game developed and published by Taito for arcades. It was released in Japan in April 1978, with the game being released by Midway Manufacturing overseas. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was the first fixed shooter and the first video game with endless gameplay (meaning there was no final level or endscreen) and set the template for the genre. The goal is to defeat wave after wave of descending aliens with a horizontally moving laser cannon to earn as many points as possible.

Designer Tomohiro Nishikado drew inspiration from North American target shooting games like &quot;Breakout&quot; (1976) and &quot;Gun Fight&quot; (1975), as well as science fiction narratives such as the novel &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1897), the anime &quot;Space Battleship Yamato&quot; (1974), and the film &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977). To complete development, he had to design custom hardware and development tools. Upon release, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was an immediate commercial success; by 1982, it had grossed $3.8 billion ($ billion in -adjusted terms), with a net profit of $450 million ($ billion in terms). This made it the best-selling video game and highest-grossing entertainment product at the time, and the highest-grossing video game of all time.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; is considered one of the most influential and greatest video games of all time, having ushered in the golden age of arcade video games. It was the inspiration for numerous video games and game designers across different genres, and has been ported and re-released in various forms. The 1980 Atari VCS version quadrupled sales of the Atari VCS, thereby becoming the first killer app for video game consoles. More broadly, the pixelated enemy alien has become a pop culture icon, often representing video games as a whole.

==Gameplay==
&quot;Space Invaders&quot; is a fixed shooter in which the player moves a laser cannon horizontally across the bottom of the screen and fires at aliens overhead. The aliens begin as five rows of eleven that move left and right as a group, shifting downward (advancing on the shooter) each time they reach a screen edge. The goal is to eliminate all of the aliens by shooting them. While the player has three lives, the game ends immediately if the invaders reach the bottom of the screen. The aliens attempt to destroy the player&#x27;s cannon by firing projectiles. The laser cannon is partially protected by stationary defense bunkers which are gradually destroyed from the top by the aliens and, if the player fires when beneath one, the bottom gets destroyed.

As aliens are defeated, their movement and the music both speed up. Defeating all the aliens brings another wave which starts lower, a loop which can continue endlessly. A special &quot;mystery ship&quot; will occasionally move across the top of the screen and award bonus points if destroyed.

==Development==
&quot;Space Invaders&quot; was developed by Japanese designer Tomohiro Nishikado, who spent a year designing it and developing the necessary hardware to produce it. The game was a response to Atari&#x27;s arcade game &quot;Breakout&quot; (1976). Nishikado wanted to adapt the same sense of achievement and tension from destroying targets one at a time, combining it with elements of target shooting games. The game uses a similar layout to that of &quot;Breakout&quot; but with different game mechanics; rather than bounce a ball to attack static objects, players are given the ability to fire projectiles at moving enemies.

Nishikado added several interactive elements that he found lacking in earlier video games, such as the ability for enemies to react to the player&#x27;s movement and fire back, and a game over triggered by the enemies killing the player (either by getting hit or enemies reaching the bottom of the screen) rather than simply a timer running out. He replaced the timer, typical of arcade games at the time, with descending aliens who effectively served a similar function, where the closer they came, the less time the player had left.

Early enemy designs included tanks, combat planes, and battleships. Nishikado, however, was not satisfied with the enemy movements; technical limitations made it difficult to simulate flying. Humans would have been easier to simulate, but the designer considered shooting them immoral. After seeing the release of the 1974 anime &quot;Space Battleship Yamato&quot; in Japan, and seeing a magazine feature about &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977), he thought of using a space theme. Nishikado drew inspiration for the aliens from a novel by H. G. Wells, &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;, and created initial bitmap images after the octopus-like aliens. Other alien designs were modeled after squids and crabs. The game was originally titled &quot;Space Monsters&quot; after a popular song in Japan at the time, &quot;Monster&quot;, but was changed to &quot;Space Invaders&quot; by the designer&#x27;s superiors.

===Hardware===
Nishikado designed his own custom hardware and development tools for &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. It uses an Intel 8080 central processing unit (CPU), displays raster graphics on a CRT monitor using a bitmapped framebuffer, and uses monaural sound hosted by a combination of analog circuitry and a Texas Instruments SN76477 sound chip. The adoption of a microprocessor was inspired by &quot;Gun Fight&quot; (1975), Midway&#x27;s microprocessor adaptation of Nishikado&#x27;s earlier discrete logic game &quot;Western Gun&quot;, after the designer was impressed by the improved graphics and smoother animation of Midway&#x27;s version. &quot; Space Invaders&quot; also adopted the multi-chip barrel shifter circuit first developed by Midway for &quot;Gun Fight&quot;, which had been a key part of that game&#x27;s smoother animation. This circuit allowed the 8080 CPU to shift pictures in the graphics framebuffer faster than it could using only its own native instructions.

Despite the specially developed hardware, Nishikado was unable to program the game as he wanted—the Control Program board was not powerful enough to display the graphics in color or move the enemies faster—and considered the development of the hardware the most difficult part of the process. While programming, Nishikado discovered that the processor was able to render each frame of the alien&#x27;s animation graphics faster when there were fewer aliens on the screen. Since the alien&#x27;s positions updated after each frame, this caused the aliens to move across the screen at an increasing speed as more and more were destroyed. Rather than design a compensation for the speed increase, he decided that it was a feature, not a bug, and kept it as a challenging gameplay mechanism.

Taito released &quot;Space Invaders&quot; in July 1978. They released both an upright arcade cabinet and a so-called &quot;cocktail-table&quot; cabinet; following its usual practice, Taito named the cocktail version &quot;T.T. Space Invaders&quot; (&quot;T.T.&quot; for &quot;table-top&quot;). Midway released its upright version a few months later and its cocktail version several months after that. The cabinet artwork featured large humanoid monsters not present in the game; Nishikado attributes this to the artist basing the designs on the original title of &quot;Space Monsters&quot;, rather than referring to the actual in-game graphics. In the upright cabinets, the graphics are generated on a hidden CRT monitor and reflected toward the player using a semi-transparent mirror, behind which is mounted a plastic cutout of a moon bolted against a painted starry background. The backdrop is visible through the mirror and thus appears &quot;behind&quot; the graphics. Both Taito&#x27;s and Midway&#x27;s first Space Invaders versions had black-and-white graphics with a transparent colored overlay using strips of orange and green cellophane over certain portions of the screen to add color to the image. Later Japanese releases used a rainbow-colored cellophane overlay, and these were eventually followed by versions with a color monitor and an electronically generated color overlay.

===Music===

Despite its simplicity, the music to &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was revolutionary for the gaming industry of the time. Video game scholar Andrew Schartmann identifies three aspects of the music that had a significant impact on the development of game music:
# Whereas video game music prior to &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was restricted to the extremities (i.e., a short introductory theme with game-over counterpart), the alien-inspired hit featured &quot;continuous music&quot;the well-known four-note loop, consisting of the first four notes of the descending D minor natural scalethroughout, uninterrupted by sound effects: &quot;It was thus the first time that sound effects and music were superimposed to form a rich sonic landscape. Not only do players receive feedback related directly to their actions through sound effects; they also receive stimulus in a more subtle, non-interactive fashion through music.&quot;
# The music interacts with on-screen animation to influence the emotions of the player: &quot;That seemingly pedestrian four-note loop might stir us in the most primitive of ways, but that it stirs us at all is worthy of note. By demonstrating that game sound could be more than a simple tune to fill the silence, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; moved video game music closer to the realm of art.&quot;
# The music for &quot;Space Invaders&quot; popularized the notion of variability—the idea that music can change in accordance with the ongoing on-screen narrative. The variable in &quot;Space Invaders&quot;, the tempo, is admittedly simple, but its implications are not to be underestimated. &quot;Over the years, analogous strategies of variation would be applied to pitch, rhythm, dynamics, form, and a host of other parameters, all with the goal of accommodating the nonlinear aspect of video games.&quot;
&quot;Next Generation&quot; editor Neil West also cited the &quot;Space Invaders&quot; music as an example of great video game art, commenting on how the simple melody&#x27;s increasing tempo and synchronization with the enemies&#x27; movement chills and excites the player.

==Reception and versions==
===Arcade version===
&quot;Space Invaders&quot; initially received mixed responses from within Taito and amusement arcade owners. Nishikado&#x27;s colleagues praised it, applauding his achievement while queuing up to play, whereas his bosses predicted low sales as games often ended more quickly than other timer-based arcade games at the time. A number of amusement arcade owners initially rejected it, but some pachinko parlors and bowling alleys adopted it; it quickly caught on, with many parlors and alleys clearing space for more &quot;Space Invaders&quot; cabinets. In the first few months following its release in Japan, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; became popular, and specialty video arcades opened with nothing but &quot;Space Invaders&quot; cabinets.

By the end of 1978, Taito had installed over 100,000 machines and grossed ( adjusted for inflation) in Japan alone. By June 1979, Taito had manufactured about 200,000–300,000 &quot;Space Invaders&quot; machines in Japan, with each unit earning an average of or in 100 yen coins per day. However, this was not enough to meet the high demand, leading to Taito increasing production to 25,000–30,000 units per month and raising projections to 400,000 manufactured in Japan by the end of 1979. In order to cope with the demand, Taito licensed the overseas rights to Midway for distribution outside of Japan. By the end of 1979, an estimated 750,000 &quot;Space Invaders&quot; machines were installed worldwide, including 400,000 in Japan, 85,000 in the United Kingdom, and 60,000 within a year in the United States (where prices ranged from $2,000 to $3,000 for each machine); the game eventually sold 72,000 units in the United States by 1982. By 1979, it had become the arcade game industry&#x27;s all-time best-seller.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; had about daily players in Japan, with daily revenue peaking at or . &quot;Space Invaders&quot; machines had grossed more than four billion US quarters ( at the time, or adjusted for inflation) by 1979. It remained the top arcade game for three years through 1980. In 1981, several years after its release, it still had weekly earnings of in the United States, second only to &quot;Pac-Man&quot;. By 1982, it had crossed $2 billion in quarters (equivalent to $ adjusted for inflation), with a net profit of $450 million (equivalent to $ adjusted for inflation). This made it the best-selling video game and highest-grossing &quot;entertainment product&quot; of its time, with comparisons made to the then highest-grossing film &quot;Star Wars&quot;, which had grossed $486 million, with a net profit of $175 million. By 1982, it had grossed , equivalent to over as of 2016. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; earned Taito profits of over .

===Home versions===

The 1980 Atari VCS (Atari 2600) version was the first official licensing of an arcade game for consoles and became the first &quot;killer app&quot; for video game consoles after quadrupling the system&#x27;s sales. It sold over one million units in its first year on sale as a home console game, then over copies by the end of 1981, and over by 1982; it was the best-selling Atari 2600 game up until the Atari version of &quot;Pac-Man&quot; (1982). &quot;Space Invaders&quot; for the Atari 2600 had sold cartridges by 1983, and a further between 1986 and 1990, for a total of over cartridges sold by 1990.

Other official conversions were released for the Atari 8-bit computers and Atari 5200 console, while Taito later released it for the Nintendo Famicom in 1985, but only in Japan. By 1982, versions of &quot;Space Invaders&quot; were available for handheld electronic game devices, tabletop dedicated consoles, home computers, watches and pocket calculators. The Atari VCS conversion was programmed by Richard Maurer, while the Atari 5200 conversion was programmed by Eric Manghise and animated by Marilyn Churchill.

More than a hundred &quot;Space Invaders&quot; video game clones were released for various platforms, such as the popular computer games &quot;Super Invader&quot; (1979) and &quot;TI Invaders&quot; (1981); the latter was the top-selling game for the TI-99/4A through at least 1982.

== Legacy ==
As one of the earliest shooting games, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; set precedents and helped pave the way for future games and for the shooting genre. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; popularized a more interactive style of gameplay, with the enemies responding to the player-controlled cannon&#x27;s movement, and was the first video game to popularize the concept of achieving a high score, being the first to save the player&#x27;s score. While earlier shooting games allowed the player to shoot at targets, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was the first in which multiple enemies could fire back at the player, and in contrast to earlier arcade games which often had a timer, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; introduced the &quot;concept of going round after round.&quot; It was also the first game where players were given multiple lives, had to repel hordes of enemies, could take cover from enemy fire, and use destructible barriers, in addition to being the first game to use a continuous background soundtrack, with four simple diatonic descending bass notes repeating in a loop, which was dynamic and changed pace during stages, like a heartbeat sound that increases pace as enemies approached.

An urban legend states that &quot;Space Invaders&quot;&#x27; popularity led to a shortage of 100-yen coins in Japan. However, Nishikado himself was skeptical of the story. In reality, 100-yen coin production was lower in 1978 and 1979 than in previous or subsequent years. Additionally, arcade operators would have regularly emptied their machines and taken the coins to the bank, thus keeping them in circulation. Reports from those living in Japan at the time indicate &quot;nothing out of the ordinary ... during the height of the &quot;Space Invaders&quot; invasion&quot;.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; was inducted into the World Video Game Hall of Fame in 2016. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; cabinets have become collector&#x27;s items, with the cocktail and cabaret versions being the rarest.

=== Impact ===
Game developers including Shigeru Miyamoto (creator of the franchises &quot;Donkey Kong&quot;, &quot;Mario&quot;, and &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot;), Hideo Kojima (&quot;Metal Gear&quot;), Satoshi Tajiri (&quot;Pokémon&quot;), and John Romero and John Carmack (both &quot;Doom)&quot; have cited &quot;Space Invaders&quot; as their introduction to video games. Miyamoto said &quot;Space Invaders&quot; had revolutionized the video game industry. According to Alexander Smith, by &quot;allowing targets to attack the player and eliminating the timer, Nishikado created a new paradigm in video games.&quot; It also inspired Eugene Jarvis (&quot;Defender&quot;, &quot;&quot;) to become a video game designer, stating it &quot;laid the groundwork for a whole generation&quot; of video games with the &quot;animated characters, the story, this amazing crescendo of action and climax&quot; and that many games &quot;still rely on the multiple life, progressively difficult level paradigm&quot; of &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. &quot;Deus Ex&quot; creator Warren Spector said: &quot;&quot;Space Invaders&quot; and games like it represent the roots of everything we see today in gaming. It represents the birth of a new art form, one that literally changed the world. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; is important as an historical artefact, no less than the silent films of the early twentieth century or early printed books.&quot;

&quot;Edge&quot; attributed the shift of games from bars and amusement arcades to more mainstream locations, such as restaurants and department stores, to &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. Its popularity was such that it was the first game where an arcade machine&#x27;s owner could earn back the cost of the machine in under one month, or in some places within one week.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; helped action games become the dominant genre in arcades and on consoles. &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; considered &quot;Space Invaders&quot; one of the most successful arcade shooting games by 2008. In describing it as a &quot;seminal arcade classic&quot;, IGN listed it as the number eight &quot;classic shoot &#x27;em up&quot;. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; set the template for the shoot &#x27;em up genre. Its worldwide success created a demand for a wide variety of science fiction games, inspiring the development of arcade games, such as Atari&#x27;s &quot;Asteroids&quot;, Williams Electronics&#x27; &quot;Defender&quot;, and Namco&#x27;s &quot;Galaxian&quot; and &quot;Galaga&quot;, which were modeled after &quot;Space Invaders&quot;″ gameplay and design. This influence could be said to extend to most shooting games released to the present day, including first-person shooters (FPS) such as &quot;Wolfenstein&quot;, &quot;Doom&quot;, &quot;Halo&quot; and &quot;Call of Duty&quot;. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; also influenced other genres, including maze games such as Sega/Gremlin&#x27;s &quot;Head On&quot; (1979) which adopted the concept of &quot;going round after round&quot; instead of a timer, and early computer dungeon crawl games such as &quot;Dungeons of Daggorath&quot;, which used similar heartbeat sounds to indicate player health.

The technology journalist Jason Whittaker credited &quot;Space Invaders&quot; with ending the video game crash of 1977, caused by &quot;Pong&quot; clones flooding the market, and beginning the golden age of video arcade games (1978–1980s). According to &quot;The Observer&quot;, home console versions of &quot;Space Invaders&quot; were popular and encouraged users to learn to program; many became industry leaders. 1UP.com stated that &quot;Space Invaders&quot; showed that video games could compete against the major entertainment media at the time: films, music, and television. &quot;IGN&quot; attributed the launch of the &quot;arcade phenomenon&quot; in North America in part to &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. &quot;Electronic Games&quot; said it was the impetus behind video gaming becoming a rapidly growing hobby, and as &quot;the single most popular coin-operated attraction of all time.&quot; &quot;Game Informer&quot; considered it, along with &quot;Pac-Man&quot;, one of the most popular arcade games; it tapped into popular culture and generated excitement during the golden age of arcades.

=== Rankings ===
In 1995, &quot;Flux&quot; magazine ranked Space Invaders #1 on their &quot;Top 100 Video Games&quot;. In 1996, &quot;Next Generation&quot; magazine put &quot;Space Invaders&quot; at number 97 on their list of the &quot;Top 100 Games of All Time&quot;, saying that it &quot;provides an elegance and simplicity not found in later games like &quot;Phoenix&quot; [1980].&quot; IGN listed it as one of the &quot;Top 10 Most Influential Games&quot; in 2007, citing it as a source of inspiration to video game designers and the impact it had on the shooting genre. &quot;The Times&quot; ranked it No. 1 on its list of &quot;The ten most influential video games ever&quot; in 2007. 1UP ranked it at No. 3 on its list of &quot;The 60 Most Influential Games of All Time&quot;, stating that, in contrast to earlier arcade games which &quot;were attempts to simulate already-existing things,&quot; &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was &quot;the first video game as a video game, instead of merely a playable electronic representation of something else.&quot;

In 2008, &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; listed it as the top-rated arcade game in technical, creative, and cultural impact. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; named &quot;Space Invaders&quot; one of the top ten games for the Atari 2600 home console in 2013. In 2018, it was ranked 87th in Video Game Canon&#x27;s statistical meta-analysis of 48 &quot;top games&quot; lists published between 1995 and 2017. The list aggregator site Playthatgame currently ranks Space Invaders as the 57th top game of all time, game of the year, and game of the 1970s. In 2021, &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed it as the third-greatest video game of the 1970s, just below &quot;Galaxian&quot; and &quot;Asteroids&quot;.

===Remakes and sequels===

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; has been remade on numerous platforms and spawned many sequels. Re-releases include ported and updated versions of the original arcade game. Ported versions generally feature different graphics and additional gameplay options—for example, &quot;moving&quot; defense bunkers, zigzag shots, invisible aliens, and two-player cooperative gameplay. Ports on earlier systems like the Atari home consoles featured simplified graphics, while later systems such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and PlayStation featured updated graphics. Later games include several modes of gameplay and integrate new elements into the original design. For example, &quot;Space Invaders Extreme&quot;, released on the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable, integrated musical elements into the standard gameplay. A 2008 spin-off for WiiWare, &quot;Space Invaders Get Even&quot;, allows players to control the aliens instead of the laser cannon in a reversal of roles.

In 1980, Bally released a pinball version. However, few elements from the original game are included, and the aliens instead resemble the xenomorphs from the film &quot;Alien&quot;; Bally was later sued over the resemblance to the designs by H. R. Giger. It became the third highest-grossing pinball machine of 1980 in the United States.

Ports have received mixed reviews; the Atari 2600 version was successful, while the Famicom version was poorly received.

Taito has released several arcade sequels. The first was &quot;Space Invaders Part II&quot; in 1979; it featured color graphics, an attract mode, new gameplay elements, and added an intermission between gameplay. According to the &quot;Killer List of Videogames&quot;, this was the first video game to include an intermission. The game also allowed the player with the top score to sign their name, which would appear at the top of the screen for as long as the game was powered on. This version was released in the United States as &quot;Deluxe Space Invaders&quot; (also known as &quot;Space Invaders Deluxe&quot;), but it featured a different graphical color scheme and a lunar-city background. Another arcade sequel, &quot;Space Invaders II&quot;, was released exclusively in the United States. It was in a cocktail-table format with very fast alien firing and a competitive two-player mode. During the summer of 1985, &quot;Return of the Invaders&quot; was released with updated color graphics and more complex movements and attack patterns for the aliens. Subsequent arcade sequels included &quot;Super Space Invaders &#x27;91&quot;, &quot;Space Invaders DX&quot;, and &quot;Space Invaders ″95&quot;. Each game introduced minor gameplay additions to the original design. Like the original game, several of the arcade sequels have become collector&#x27;s items, though some are considered rarer. In 2002, Taito released &quot;Space Raiders&quot;, a third-person shooter reminiscent of &quot;Space Invaders&quot;.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; and its related games have been included in video game compilations. &quot;Space Invaders Anniversary&quot; was released in 2003 for the PlayStation 2 and included nine &quot;Space Invader&quot; variants. A similar game for the PlayStation Portable, &quot;Space Invaders Pocket&quot;, was released in 2005. &quot;Space Invaders&quot;, &quot;Space Invaders Part II&quot; and &quot;Return of the Invaders&quot; are included in &quot;Taito Legends&quot;, a compilation of Taito&#x27;s classic arcade games released in 2005 on the PlayStation 2, Xbox, and PC. &quot;Super Space Invaders &#x27;91&quot;, &quot;Space Invaders DX&quot;, and &quot;Space Invaders ″95&quot; were included in &quot;Taito Legends 2&quot;, a sequel compilation released in 2006.

A stand-alone version was released by Super Impulse as part of its &quot;Tiny Arcade&quot; series, along with the Namco games &quot;Pac-Man&quot;, &quot;Ms. Pac-Man&quot;, and &quot;Galaxian&quot;.

A &quot;Space Invaders&quot; game for the Atari Jaguar was worked on by Virtuality Entertainment, which would have featured support for the unreleased Jaguar VR peripheral; however, the project never entered full development beyond reaching pre-production stages, with the only remaining proof of its existence being a game design document.

===In popular culture===
Many publications and websites use the pixelated alien graphic as an icon for video games in general, including the video game magazine &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot;, technology website Ars Technica, and concert event Video Games Live. There has also been &quot;Space Invaders-&quot;themed merchandising, including necklaces and puzzles. The trend continues to this day, with handmade sites like Etsy and Pinterest showcasing thousands of handmade items featuring &quot;Space Invaders&quot; characters.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; has appeared in numerous facets of popular culture. Soon after its release, hundreds of favorable articles and stories about the emerging video game medium as popularized by &quot;Space Invaders&quot; aired on television and were printed in newspapers and magazines. The Space Invaders Tournament, held by Atari in 1980 and won by Rebecca Heineman, was the first electronic sports (eSports) event, and attracted more than 10,000 participants, establishing video gaming as a mainstream hobby. The Arcade Awards ceremony was created that same year to honor the best video games, with &quot;Space Invaders&quot; winning the first Game of the Year (GoTY) award. The impact of &quot;Space Invaders&quot; on the video game industry has been compared to that of The Beatles in the pop music industry. Considered &quot;the first &#x27;blockbuster&#x27; video game&quot;, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; became synonymous with video games worldwide for some time.

Within a year of its release, the Japanese PTA unsuccessfully attempted to ban &quot;Space Invaders&quot; for allegedly inspiring truancy. In North America, doctors identified a condition called &quot;&quot;Space Invaders&quot; elbow&quot; as a complaint, while a physician in &quot;The New England Journal of Medicine&quot; named a similar ailment the &quot;&quot;Space Invaders&quot; Wrist&quot;. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was also the first game to attract political controversy when a 1981 Private Member&#x27;s Bill known as the &quot;Control of Space Invaders (and other Electronic Games) Bill&quot;, drafted by British Labour Member of Parliament (MP) George Foulkes, attempted to allow local councils to restrict the game and those like it by licensing for its &quot;addictive properties&quot; and for causing &quot;deviancy&quot;. Conservative MP Michael Brown defended it as &quot;innocent and harmless pleasure&quot;, which he himself had enjoyed that day, and criticized the bill as an example of &quot;Socialist beliefs in restriction and control&quot;. A motion to bring the bill before Parliament was defeated by 114 votes to 94 votes; the bill itself was never considered by Parliament. Similarly in the United States, in Westchester County, New York, there was a controversial political debate in 1981 over a resolution to place age restrictions on &quot;Space Invaders&quot; and other arcade games, following complaints that schoolchildren wasted time and lunch money, and went to school late; the resolution drew national attention.

====Music====
Musicians have drawn inspiration for their music from &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. The pioneering Japanese synthpop group Yellow Magic Orchestra reproduced &quot;Space Invaders&quot; sounds in its 1978 self-titled album and hit single &quot;Computer Game&quot;, the latter selling over 400,000 copies in the United States. Other pop songs based on &quot;Space Invaders&quot; soon followed, including disco records such as &quot;Disco Space Invaders&quot; (1979) by Funny Stuff, and the hit songs &quot;Space Invader&quot; (1980) by The Pretenders, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; (1980) by Uncle Vic, and the Australian hit &quot;Space Invaders&quot; (1979) by Player One (known in the US as &quot;Playback&quot;), which in turn provided the bassline for Jesse Saunders&#x27; &quot;On and On&quot; (1984), the first Chicago house music track. The Clash sampled &quot;Space Invaders&quot; sound effects on the song &quot;Ivan Meets G.I. Joe&quot; from its 4th studio album, &quot;Sandinista!&quot;

Video Games Live performed audio from &quot;Space Invaders&quot; as part of a special retro &quot;Classic Arcade Medley&quot; in 2007. In honor of the game&#x27;s 30th anniversary, Taito produced an album, &quot;Space Invaders 2008&quot;. It was released by Avex Trax and features music inspired by the game. Six songs were originally used in the PSP version of &quot;Space Invaders Extreme&quot;. Taito&#x27;s store, Taito Station, also unveiled a &quot;Space Invaders&quot;-themed music video.

====Television and film====
In the 1982 pilot of the series &quot;The Powers of Matthew Star&quot;, David Star uses his powers to cheat the game. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; is shown with a colored backdrop of the moon. Multiple television series have aired episodes that either reference or parody &quot;Space Invaders&quot;; for example, &quot;Danger Mouse&quot;, &quot;That &#x27;70s Show&quot;, &quot;Scrubs&quot;, &quot;Chuck&quot;, &quot;Robot Chicken&quot;, &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; and &quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&quot;. Elements are prominently featured in the &quot;Raiders of the Lost Arcade&quot; segment of &quot;Anthology of Interest II&quot;, an episode of &quot;Futurama&quot;.

&quot;Space Invaders&quot; also appears in the films &quot;Cherry 2000&quot; (1987), &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day&quot; (1991) and &quot;Pixels&quot; (2015), while its &quot;Deluxe&quot; game made an appearance in &quot;Fast Times At Ridgemont High&quot; (1982). It also appears in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Wreck-It Ralph&quot; (2012). A film adaptation is in the works by Warner Bros. Pictures with Akiva Goldsman producing. On February 13, 2015, Daniel Kunka was set to write the script for the film. On July 12, 2019, Greg Russo was set to write the script for the film, with Goldsman still producing alongside Safehouse Pictures partners Joby Harold and Tory Tunnell.

====Books====

Various books have been published about &quot;Space Invaders&quot;, including &quot;Invasion of the Space Invaders: An Addict&#x27;s Guide to Battle Tactics, Big Scores and the Best Machines&quot; (1982) by Martin Amis, &quot;Tomb Raiders and Space Invaders: Videogame forms and Contexts&quot; (2006) by Geoff King and Tanya Krzywinska, and &quot;Space Invaders&quot; (1980) by Mark Roeder and Julian Wolanski.

====Miscellaneous====
In the mid-1990s, the athletics company Puma released a T-shirt with a stamp having references to &quot;Space Invaders&quot;, i.e. a spaceship aiming at the company&#x27;s logo (see picture on the right).

In 2006, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was one of several video game-related media selected to represent Japan as part of a project compiled by Japan&#x27;s Agency for Cultural Affairs. That same year, &quot;Space Invaders&quot; was included in the London Science Museum&#x27;s Game On exhibition, meant to showcase the various aspects of video game history, development, and culture. &quot;Space Invaders&quot; is a part of the Barbican Centre&#x27;s traveling Game On exhibition.

At the Belluard Bollwerk International 2006 festival in Fribourg, Switzerland, Guillaume Reymond created a three-minute video recreation of a game of &quot;Space Invaders&quot; as part of the &quot;Gameover&quot; project using humans as pixels. The GH ART exhibit at the 2008 Games Convention in Leipzig, Germany, included an art game, &quot;Invaders!&quot;, based on &quot;Space Invaders&quot;″s gameplay. The creator later asked for it to be removed from the exhibit following criticism of elements based on the September 11 attacks in the United States.

A bridge in Cáceres, Spain, projected by engineers Pedro Plasencia and Hadrián Arias, features a pavement design based on &quot;Space Invaders.&quot; The laser cannon, some shots, and several figures can be seen on the deck. A French street artist, Invader, made a name for himself by creating mosaic artwork of &quot;Space Invader&quot; aliens around the world.

In 2014, two Brazilian zoologists (Kury &amp; Barros) described a new species of arachnid as &quot;Taito spaceinvaders.&quot; They were inspired by the resemblance of a fleck in the dorsal scutum of the animal to a typical alien in &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. The genus &quot;Taito&quot; is named for the company that produces &quot;Space Invaders&quot;.

In 2018, Highways England launched a campaign titled &quot;Don&#x27;t be a Space Invader, Stay Safe, Stay Back&quot; to raise awareness on the dangers of tailgating. People were also able to order free car bumper stickers to raise awareness of the campaign.

Although it is not explicitly defined as such, the &quot;Alien Monster&quot; emoji (Unicode character U+1F47E) is commonly represented as a pixelated sprite inspired by the aliens from Space Invaders, and it is frequently used in reference to video games and gaming culture. The association is so strong that some platforms, such as GitHub and Discord, use the short code codice_1 to allow users to easily enter the character.

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* Game manual, for arcade game, stored at the Internet Archive
* Game manual for Atari 2600 game, stored at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="10" end="27" title="shoot &amp;#x27;em up" label="shoot &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="28" end="38" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054844" start="66" end="71" title="Taito" label="Taito"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="76" end="83" title="Arcade video game" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q149947" start="157" end="177" title="Midway Manufacturing" label="Midway Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="229" end="242" title="fixed shooter" label="fixed shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q983176" start="519" end="537" title="Tomohiro Nishikado" label="Tomohiro Nishikado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282636" start="582" end="596" title="shooting games" label="shooting games"/>
<link wikidata="Q177491" start="608" end="616" title="Breakout (video game)" label="Breakout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432978" start="640" end="649" title="Gun Fight" label="Gun Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="675" end="690" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="726" end="747" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292" start="778" end="801" title="Space Battleship Yamato" label="Space Battleship Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="835" end="844" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077784" start="921" end="938" title="development tools" label="development tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="1034" end="1041" title="Gross revenue" label="grossed"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="1094" end="1104" title="net profit" label="net profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q468558" start="1160" end="1183" title="best-selling video game" label="best-selling video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="1188" end="1204" title="List of highest-grossing arcade games" label="highest-grossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="1363" end="1395" title="List of video games considered the best" label="greatest video games of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421269" start="1419" end="1451" title="golden age of arcade video games" label="golden age of arcade video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="1489" end="1499" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q858057" start="1505" end="1518" title="game designer" label="game designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="1558" end="1564" title="Porting of video games" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q124618554" start="1608" end="1625" title="Space Invaders (Atari 2600 video game)" label="Atari VCS version"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="1650" end="1659" title="Atari VCS" label="Atari VCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047507" start="1688" end="1698" title="killer app" label="killer app"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="1703" end="1722" title="video game consoles" label="video game consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006273" start="1742" end="1751" title="Pixelation" label="pixelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="1777" end="1788" title="pop culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="1884" end="1897" title="fixed shooter" label="fixed shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074906" start="1926" end="1938" title="laser cannon" label="laser cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="2481" end="2487" title="bunker" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q983176" start="2990" end="3008" title="Tomohiro Nishikado" label="Tomohiro Nishikado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="3069" end="3077" title="Computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="3120" end="3125" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q177491" start="3151" end="3159" title="Breakout (video game)" label="Breakout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282636" start="3318" end="3332" title="shooting games" label="shooting games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="3416" end="3430" title="game mechanics" label="game mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q513471" start="3737" end="3746" title="game over" label="game over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="4413" end="4418" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292" start="4425" end="4448" title="Space Battleship Yamato" label="Space Battleship Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="4507" end="4516" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="4624" end="4635" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="4643" end="4664" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="4692" end="4698" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="5120" end="5130" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="5131" end="5154" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="5171" end="5186" title="raster graphics" label="raster graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="5192" end="5203" title="CRT monitor" label="CRT monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="5212" end="5218" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163900" start="5222" end="5233" title="framebuffer" label="framebuffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="5244" end="5258" title="monaural sound" label="monaural sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q174925" start="5286" end="5302" title="analog circuitry" label="analog circuitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q221916" start="5309" end="5334" title="Texas Instruments SN76477" label="Texas Instruments SN76477"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418253" start="5335" end="5345" title="sound chip" label="sound chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432978" start="5402" end="5411" title="Gun Fight" label="Gun Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q149947" start="5426" end="5439" title="Midway Games" label="Midway&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="5494" end="5508" title="discrete logic" label="discrete logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432978" start="5520" end="5531" title="Western Gun" label="Western Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q808850" start="5702" end="5716" title="barrel shifter" label="barrel shifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="6350" end="6356" title="Rendering (computer graphics)" label="render"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316107" start="6705" end="6723" title="feature, not a bug" label="feature, not a bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="6754" end="6762" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6853" end="6875" title="Arcade cabinet#Upright cabinets" label="upright arcade cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6892" end="6926" title="Arcade cabinet#Cocktail cabinets" label="&amp;quot;cocktail-table&amp;quot; cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="7211" end="7219" title="humanoid" label="humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="7220" end="7227" title="monster" label="monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309670" start="7536" end="7559" title="semi-transparent mirror" label="semi-transparent mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="7607" end="7611" title="Natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193841" start="7912" end="7922" title="cellophane" label="cellophane"/>
<link wikidata="Q184567" start="8746" end="8765" title="Natural minor scale" label="minor natural scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="9715" end="9720" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="10018" end="10033" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="10420" end="10436" title="amusement arcade" label="amusement arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="10672" end="10688" title="amusement arcade" label="amusement arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q836661" start="10728" end="10736" title="pachinko" label="pachinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106471" start="10749" end="10762" title="bowling alley" label="bowling alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="11001" end="11013" title="video arcade" label="video arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054844" start="11097" end="11102" title="Taito" label="Taito"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546220" start="11341" end="11353" title="100 yen coin" label="100 yen coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="12045" end="12056" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q56446417" start="12133" end="12146" title="Active users" label="daily players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150083" start="12263" end="12274" title="US quarters" label="US quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="12505" end="12512" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="12616" end="12626" title="net profit" label="net profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q468558" start="12702" end="12725" title="best-selling video game" label="best-selling video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="12730" end="12746" title="List of highest-grossing arcade games" label="highest-grossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="12828" end="12849" title="highest-grossing film" label="highest-grossing film"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="12856" end="12865" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="12956" end="12963" title="Gross revenue" label="grossed"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="13086" end="13095" title="Atari VCS" label="Atari VCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="13140" end="13149" title="licensing" label="licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047507" start="13208" end="13218" title="killer app" label="killer app"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="13229" end="13247" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561427" start="13359" end="13371" title="console game" label="console game"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915616" start="13439" end="13467" title="List of best-selling Atari 2600 video games" label="best-selling Atari 2600 game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626874" start="13481" end="13517" title="Pac-Man (Atari 2600 video game)" label="Atari version of &amp;quot;Pac-Man&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927911" start="13699" end="13710" title="Video game conversion" label="conversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="13733" end="13754" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q743222" start="13759" end="13769" title="Atari 5200" label="Atari 5200"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="13817" end="13833" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="13929" end="13953" title="handheld electronic game" label="handheld electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249798" start="13972" end="13989" title="dedicated console" label="dedicated console"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="13992" end="14005" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="14008" end="14013" title="watch" label="watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="14020" end="14037" title="pocket calculator" label="pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288281" start="14246" end="14262" title="video game clone" label="video game clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="14321" end="14335" title="PC game" label="computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642466" start="14342" end="14355" title="Super Invader" label="Super Invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670477" start="14379" end="14390" title="TI Invaders" label="TI Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273483" start="14424" end="14440" title="List of best-selling PC games" label="top-selling game"/>
<link wikidata="Q454390" start="14449" end="14457" title="TI-99/4A" label="TI-99/4A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282636" start="14518" end="14532" title="shooting games" label="shooting games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="14712" end="14720" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q522344" start="14869" end="14879" title="high score" label="high score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565379" start="14900" end="14904" title="Saved game" label="save"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="15227" end="15232" title="Level (video games)" label="round"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557866" start="15313" end="15318" title="Life (video games)" label="lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179202" start="15358" end="15368" title="Cover system" label="take cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388746" start="15394" end="15406" title="Destructible environment" label="destructible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="15473" end="15494" title="Video game music" label="background soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="15513" end="15521" title="diatonic" label="diatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q638833" start="15533" end="15542" title="bass note" label="bass note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="15559" end="15563" title="Loop (music)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318994" start="15575" end="15582" title="Dynamic music" label="dynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="15587" end="15599" title="Tempo" label="changed pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q967103" start="15622" end="15637" title="Heart sounds" label="heartbeat sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="15685" end="15697" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546220" start="15775" end="15788" title="100 yen coin" label="100-yen coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="15870" end="15873" title="yen" label="yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121688" start="16084" end="16095" title="Currency in circulation" label="circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20487122" start="16309" end="16338" title="World Video Game Hall of Fame" label="World Video Game Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="16396" end="16418" title="collector&amp;#x27;s items" label="collector&amp;#x27;s items"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349717" start="16429" end="16437" title="Cocktail arcade cabinet" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16442" end="16449" title="Arcade cabinet#Mini or cabaret cabinets" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="16493" end="16508" title="Video game developer" label="Game developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12382" start="16519" end="16535" title="Shigeru Miyamoto" label="Shigeru Miyamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q662004" start="16569" end="16580" title="Donkey Kong" label="Donkey Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803535" start="16594" end="16599" title="Mario (franchise)" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="16617" end="16636" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q315577" start="16645" end="16657" title="Hideo Kojima" label="Hideo Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q216655" start="16665" end="16675" title="Metal Gear" label="Metal Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q295218" start="16684" end="16698" title="Satoshi Tajiri" label="Satoshi Tajiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q864" start="16706" end="16713" title="Pokémon" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q280045" start="16726" end="16737" title="John Romero" label="John Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q92605" start="16742" end="16754" title="John Carmack" label="John Carmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q655219" start="16767" end="16771" title="Doom (franchise)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="16919" end="16938" title="video game industry" label="video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q707250" start="17116" end="17129" title="Eugene Jarvis" label="Eugene Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182593" start="17137" end="17145" title="Defender (video game)" label="Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557866" start="17431" end="17435" title="Life (video games)" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="17461" end="17466" title="Level (video games)" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q746459" start="17519" end="17526" title="Deus Ex" label="Deus Ex"/>
<link wikidata="Q964255" start="17541" end="17555" title="Warren Spector" label="Warren Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q793975" start="17911" end="17927" title="Edge (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Edge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="17963" end="17966" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="17972" end="17988" title="amusement arcade" label="amusement arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="18044" end="18060" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349717" start="18154" end="18168" title="arcade machine" label="arcade machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q659563" start="18345" end="18350" title="Video game genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="18779" end="18794" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="18853" end="18865" title="Atari" label="Atari&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q748890" start="18872" end="18881" title="Asteroids (video game)" label="Asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403157" start="18889" end="18909" title="Williams Electronics" label="Williams Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182593" start="18922" end="18930" title="Defender (video game)" label="Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q309996" start="18942" end="18947" title="Namco" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192514" start="18961" end="18969" title="Galaxian" label="Galaxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043534" start="18986" end="18992" title="Galaga" label="Galaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="19175" end="19195" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357563" start="19217" end="19228" title="Wolfenstein" label="Wolfenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q655219" start="19242" end="19246" title="Doom (series)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="19260" end="19264" title="Halo (series)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="19281" end="19293" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q390129" start="19368" end="19378" title="maze games" label="maze games"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="19387" end="19391" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607341" start="19392" end="19399" title="Gremlin Industries" label="Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592239" start="19413" end="19420" title="Head On (video game)" label="Head On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265717" start="19538" end="19551" title="dungeon crawl" label="dungeon crawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315191" start="19572" end="19593" title="Dungeons of Daggorath" label="Dungeons of Daggorath"/>
<link wikidata="Q967103" start="19620" end="19636" title="Heart sounds" label="heartbeat sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="19656" end="19662" title="Health (gaming)" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155573" start="19669" end="19690" title="technology journalist" label="technology journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q129781" start="19759" end="19783" title="video game crash of 1977" label="video game crash of 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q216293" start="19801" end="19805" title="Pong" label="Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421269" start="19858" end="19890" title="golden age of video arcade games" label="golden age of video arcade games"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="19924" end="19936" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595902" start="20081" end="20088" title="1UP.com" label="1UP.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="20253" end="20256" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037983" start="20384" end="20400" title="Electronic Games" label="Electronic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q27197" start="20572" end="20585" title="Game Informer" label="Game Informer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="20624" end="20631" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463010" start="20794" end="20810" title="Flux (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Flux&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="20896" end="20932" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Next Generation&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q517640" start="21130" end="21137" title="Phoenix (1980 video game)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282636" start="21327" end="21341" title="Shooter game" label="shooting genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="21349" end="21358" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610017" start="21631" end="21639" title="Simulation video game" label="simulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="21842" end="21864" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="21961" end="21981" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="22054" end="22064" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="22154" end="22167" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="22394" end="22406" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126664" start="22445" end="22468" title="1970s in video games" label="video game of the 1970s"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="22668" end="22674" title="ported" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="22793" end="22801" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="23044" end="23079" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="23084" end="23095" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460286" start="23241" end="23263" title="Space Invaders Extreme" label="Space Invaders Extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="23287" end="23298" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="23303" end="23323" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="23388" end="23396" title="Spin-off game" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014637" start="23401" end="23408" title="WiiWare" label="WiiWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572389" start="23416" end="23439" title="Space Invaders Get Even" label="Space Invaders Get Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851974" start="23546" end="23551" title="Bally Manufacturing" label="Bally"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="23563" end="23570" title="pinball" label="pinball"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="23675" end="23684" title="xenomorph" label="xenomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="23706" end="23711" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="23779" end="23790" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="23915" end="23925" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="23960" end="23967" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054844" start="23998" end="24003" title="Taito" label="Taito"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="24032" end="24039" title="Video game sequel" label="sequels"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377021" start="24061" end="24083" title="Space Invaders Part II" label="Space Invaders Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="24130" end="24142" title="attract mode" label="attract mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q245056" start="24180" end="24209" title="Cut scene" label="intermission between gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741369" start="24234" end="24259" title="Killer List of Videogames" label="Killer List of Videogames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642833" start="24311" end="24323" title="intermission" label="intermission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492585" start="24725" end="24742" title="Space Invaders II" label="Space Invaders II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349717" start="24809" end="24830" title="Cocktail arcade cabinet" label="cocktail-table format"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858742" start="24877" end="24892" title="Two-player game" label="two-player mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492585" start="24927" end="24949" title="Return of the Invaders" label="Return of the Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492585" start="25101" end="25130" title="Super Space Invaders &amp;#x27;91" label="Super Space Invaders &amp;#x27;91"/>
<link wikidata="Q21573964" start="25144" end="25161" title="Space Invaders DX" label="Space Invaders DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11257624" start="25179" end="25197" title="Space Invaders &amp;#x27;95" label="Space Invaders ″95"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965809" start="25429" end="25442" title="Space Raiders (video game)" label="Space Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q380266" start="25452" end="25472" title="third-person shooter" label="third-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070115" start="25588" end="25610" title="video game compilation" label="video game compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492585" start="25619" end="25645" title="Space Invaders Anniversary" label="Space Invaders Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="25681" end="25694" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492585" start="25800" end="25821" title="Space Invaders Pocket" label="Space Invaders Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646889" start="25975" end="25988" title="Taito Legends" label="Taito Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676485" start="26232" end="26247" title="Taito Legends 2" label="Taito Legends 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194689" start="26409" end="26414" title="Bandai Namco Entertainment" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="26427" end="26434" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141683" start="26448" end="26459" title="Ms. Pac-Man" label="Ms. Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192514" start="26477" end="26485" title="Galaxian" label="Galaxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="26536" end="26548" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Atari Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148949" start="26566" end="26590" title="Virtuality Entertainment" label="Virtuality Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="26645" end="26654" title="Jaguar VR" label="Jaguar VR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26655" end="26665" title="Video game accessory#Add-ons/peripherals" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010535" start="26813" end="26833" title="game design document" label="game design document"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006273" start="26900" end="26909" title="Pixelation" label="pixelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927914" start="26916" end="26923" title="Video game graphics" label="graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="26930" end="26934" title="Mascot" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="27003" end="27028" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q584152" start="27055" end="27067" title="Ars Technica" label="Ars Technica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715209" start="27087" end="27103" title="Video Games Live" label="Video Games Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="27159" end="27172" title="merchandising" label="merchandising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353939" start="27265" end="27269" title="Etsy" label="Etsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255381" start="27274" end="27283" title="Pinterest" label="Pinterest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="27435" end="27450" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301768" start="27731" end="27747" title="Rebecca Heineman" label="Rebecca Heineman"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="27763" end="27780" title="electronic sports" label="electronic sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927912" start="27856" end="27868" title="Video game culture" label="video gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037983" start="27896" end="27909" title="Electronic Games" label="Arcade Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q541142" start="28027" end="28043" title="List of Game of the Year awards" label="Game of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="28106" end="28125" title="video game industry" label="video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="28155" end="28166" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="28227" end="28238" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q706242" start="28394" end="28397" title="Parent-Teacher Association" label="PTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545700" start="28481" end="28488" title="truancy" label="truancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q582728" start="28634" end="28669" title="The New England Journal of Medicine" label="The New England Journal of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412362" start="28812" end="28833" title="Video game controversy" label="political controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="28846" end="28872" title="Private Member&amp;#x27;s Bill" label="Private Member&amp;#x27;s Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="28970" end="28984" title="British Labour" label="British Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="28985" end="29005" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507362" start="29011" end="29025" title="George Foulkes, Baron Foulkes of Cumnock" label="George Foulkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="29046" end="29060" title="City council" label="local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="29103" end="29112" title="licensing" label="licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058933" start="29127" end="29147" title="Video game addiction" label="addictive properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="29176" end="29184" title="deviancy" label="deviancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="29192" end="29204" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828858" start="29208" end="29221" title="Michael Brown (British politician)" label="Michael Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="29367" end="29376" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="29453" end="29463" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="29590" end="29618" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="30016" end="30024" title="J-pop" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="30025" end="30033" title="synthpop" label="synthpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q854590" start="30040" end="30062" title="Yellow Magic Orchestra" label="Yellow Magic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051764" start="30120" end="30137" title="Yellow Magic Orchestra (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="30318" end="30323" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q755468" start="30420" end="30433" title="Pretenders (album)" label="Space Invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="30450" end="30464" title="The Pretenders" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572387" start="30543" end="30557" title="Space Invaders (Player One song)" label="Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572387" start="30574" end="30584" title="Player One (band)" label="Player One"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="30655" end="30663" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q527564" start="30668" end="30682" title="Jesse Saunders" label="Jesse Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071961" start="30729" end="30736" title="Chicago house" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="30737" end="30748" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="30756" end="30765" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142897" start="30892" end="30903" title="Sandinista!" label="Sandinista!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715209" start="30911" end="30927" title="Video Games Live" label="Video Games Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125949" start="30997" end="31002" title="Retrogaming" label="retro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054844" start="31092" end="31097" title="Taito" label="Taito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988428" start="31169" end="31178" title="Avex Trax" label="Avex Trax"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="31258" end="31261" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460286" start="31279" end="31301" title="Space Invaders Extreme" label="Space Invaders Extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="31394" end="31405" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795315" start="31474" end="31500" title="The Powers of Matthew Star" label="The Powers of Matthew Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260993" start="31538" end="31552" title="Cheating in video games" label="cheat the game"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="31636" end="31653" title="television series" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159583" start="31753" end="31765" title="Danger Mouse (1981 TV series)" label="Danger Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q208072" start="31779" end="31798" title="That &amp;#x27;70s Show" label="That &amp;#x27;70s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q485668" start="31812" end="31818" title="Scrubs (TV series)" label="Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293" start="31832" end="31837" title="Chuck (TV series)" label="Chuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="31851" end="31864" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q158869" start="31878" end="31906" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003 TV series)" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q906186" start="31923" end="31951" title="The Amazing World of Gumball" label="The Amazing World of Gumball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32056" end="32080" title="Anthology of Interest II" label="Anthology of Interest II"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="32108" end="32116" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070350" start="32184" end="32195" title="Cherry 2000" label="Cherry 2000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32216" end="32242" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182905" start="32266" end="32272" title="Pixels (2015 film)" label="Pixels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302846" start="32349" end="32377" title="Fast Times At Ridgemont High" label="Fast Times At Ridgemont High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="32411" end="32417" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q28891" start="32431" end="32445" title="Wreck-It Ralph" label="Wreck-It Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="32497" end="32518" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q419454" start="32524" end="32538" title="Akiva Goldsman" label="Akiva Goldsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q110716642" start="32645" end="32655" title="Greg Russo" label="Greg Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21064033" start="32738" end="32756" title="Safehouse Pictures" label="Safehouse Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206888" start="32766" end="32777" title="Joby Harold" label="Joby Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q21064033" start="32782" end="32794" title="Tory Tunnell" label="Tory Tunnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16569883" start="32896" end="33002" title="Invasion of the Space Invaders" label="Invasion of the Space Invaders: An Addict&amp;#x27;s Guide to Battle Tactics, Big Scores and the Best Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q310176" start="33019" end="33030" title="Martin Amis" label="Martin Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189478" start="33190" end="33201" title="Mark Roeder" label="Mark Roeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="33286" end="33290" title="Puma (brand)" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="33593" end="33605" title="Culture of Japan" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009519" start="33606" end="33633" title="Agency for Cultural Affairs" label="Agency for Cultural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="33705" end="33719" title="Science Museum (London)" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q745465" start="33727" end="33745" title="Game On exhibition" label="Game On exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q918316" start="33788" end="33806" title="video game history" label="video game history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061635" start="33808" end="33819" title="Video game development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927912" start="33825" end="33832" title="Video game culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="33878" end="33893" title="Barbican Centre" label="Barbican Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q745465" start="33911" end="33929" title="Game On exhibition" label="Game On exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36378" start="33988" end="33996" title="Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q608482" start="34208" end="34224" title="Games Convention" label="Games Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="34228" end="34235" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739535" start="34258" end="34266" title="art game" label="art game"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="34446" end="34466" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678" start="34502" end="34516" title="Cáceres, Spain" label="Cáceres, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914170" start="34724" end="34737" title="street artist" label="street artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671666" start="34739" end="34746" title="Invader (artist)" label="Invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="34784" end="34798" title="Mosaic" label="mosaic artwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q512458" start="34877" end="34887" title="zoologists" label="zoologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="34935" end="34943" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365510" start="35043" end="35049" title="Scute" label="scutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320572" start="35130" end="35135" title="Taito (genus)" label="Taito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760006" start="35219" end="35235" title="Highways England" label="Highways England"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="35247" end="35255" title="Political campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030694" start="35364" end="35374" title="tailgating" label="tailgating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296351" start="35416" end="35430" title="bumper sticker" label="bumper sticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="35546" end="35551" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="36011" end="36027" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74338" wikidata="Q5473707" url="?curid=74338" title="Foster Hewitt">
<text>Foster William Hewitt, (November 21, 1902–April 21, 1985) was a Canadian radio broadcaster most famous for his play-by-play calls for &quot;Hockey Night in Canada&quot;. He was the son of W. A. Hewitt, and the father of Bill Hewitt.

==Early life and early career==
Born in Toronto, Ontario, Hewitt attended Upper Canada College and the University of Toronto where he was a member of the Toronto chapter of the Beta Theta Pi fraternity. He was a champion boxer in his student years, winning the intercollegiate title at 112 pounds.

Hewitt developed an early interest in the radio and as a teenager accompanied his father, W. A. Hewitt, on a trip to Detroit, Michigan, to see a demonstration of radio technology sponsored by General Electric.

He took a job with Independent Telephone Company, which manufactured radios, and left that job and university when his father—the sports editor of the &quot;Toronto Daily Star&quot;—told him that the &quot;Star&quot; was going to start its own radio station. Hewitt became a reporter at the paper, and was ready to go on the air when CFCA was launched. CFCA&#x27;s first hockey broadcast was on February 8, 1923, although it was colleague Norman Albert who performed the play-by-play. Hewitt&#x27;s first broadcast likely was February 16, of a game between the Toronto Argonaut Rowing Club and the Kitchener Greenshirts. Hewitt recalled the date as being March 22 in his own book, although there was no game scheduled for that night at the Arena Gardens. Hewitt&#x27;s book also mentioned his first broadcast as being of a game between Parkdale and Kitchener, and the Argonaut Club was based in Parkdale, a neighbourhood of Toronto. He also mentioned that game as going into overtime which the Argonaut-Kitchener game did.

On May 24, 1925, Hewitt and his father made what was said to be the world&#x27;s first broadcast of a horse race.

In 1927, he was invited as guest announcer to broadcast the first game from the new Detroit Olympia.

Hewitt was part of the opening night ceremonies for Maple Leaf Gardens on November 12, 1931, and the specially designed broadcast &quot;gondola&quot; where Hewitt would broadcast from was brought into the plans with his input, and the blessings of then Toronto Maple Leafs owner Conn Smythe.

==&quot;Hockey Night in Canada&quot;==
For forty years, Hewitt was Canada&#x27;s premier hockey play-by-play broadcaster for the General Motors (Canada), then later Imperial Oil Limited, Hockey Broadcast on Saturday nights. As the show was aired on Canadian national radio, Hewitt became notable for the phrase &quot;He shoots, he scores!&quot; as well as his sign-on at the beginning of each broadcast, &quot;Hello, Canada, and hockey fans in the United States and Newfoundland.&quot;
&quot;Hockey Night in Canada&quot; broadcasts from Toronto (aired on local station CFRB as well as successively CNR Radio, the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission, and ultimately the CBC Radio) were simulcast on CBC Television from 1952 until 1963, with Hewitt handling the play-by-play until October 11, 1958, when he handed the duties over to his son, Bill Hewitt. In the process, he provided colour commentary of the Saturday night games after that, while continuing radio play-by-play of weeknight games. After 1963, Foster was solely on radio while Bill worked on television.

In 1951, he started his own radio station in Toronto, CKFH, initially at 1400 kHz, until moving to 1430 in 1959. The station carried Maple Leafs games until losing the rights in 1978. In 1981, the station was sold to Telemedia and was renamed CJCL. He made a bid at purchasing CHIN in 1970.

==Later life==
 Hewitt had retired from television in 1963, but he continued to broadcast Leafs games on radio until 1968. In 1965, he became one of a group of owners of the WHL Vancouver Canucks, a minor professional hockey team. The following year, he and co-owner Cyrus McLean made a presentation to the National Hockey League asking the league to award them an NHL franchise, but their bid was rejected.

Hewitt came out of retirement to broadcast the 1972 Summit Series (with colour commentator Brian Conacher). Hewitt was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame as a builder in 1965. In 1972, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada. The Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame is named after him, as is the media gondola at the nearby Scotiabank Arena. Hewitt&#x27;s original gondola from Maple Leaf Gardens was dismantled, then dumped into an incinerator in August 1979 to make room for private boxes, under the MLG leadership of Harold Ballard.

Foster Hewitt was posthumously inducted into the Canadian Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in 1989 and the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 1996.

==Personal life==
He and his wife Elizabeth Kathleen How had a son, Bill Hewitt, and a daughter, Elizabeth Ann Somerville. Hewitt died from a combination of alzheimer&#x27;s disease, kidney failure, and throat cancer on April 21, 1985, at the age of 82, at Providence Villa Nursing Home in Scarborough, Ontario.

==In popular culture==
A Canadian-style pub and grill restaurant was established in his name in Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

==See also==
*Notable families in the NHL

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* Numerous reprints, 
* 
;Notes
== External links ==
* CBC Digital Archives - The Voice of Hockey: Foster Hewitt
* Foster Hewitt, History by the Minute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5473707" start="0" end="21" title="Foster Hewitt" label="Foster William Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="64" end="72" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="73" end="78" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="140" end="162" title="Hockey Night in Canada" label="Hockey Night in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502692" start="188" end="200" title="W. A. Hewitt" label="W. A. Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909416" start="220" end="231" title="Bill Hewitt (sportscaster)" label="Bill Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="274" end="281" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="283" end="290" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542352" start="308" end="328" title="Upper Canada College" label="Upper Canada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="337" end="358" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897282" start="411" end="424" title="Beta Theta Pi" label="Beta Theta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="455" end="460" title="boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502692" start="623" end="635" title="W. A. Hewitt" label="W. A. Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="650" end="667" title="Detroit" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="725" end="741" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="901" end="919" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="988" end="1001" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q33268972" start="1078" end="1082" title="CFCA (AM)" label="CFCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051902" start="1183" end="1196" title="Norman Albert" label="Norman Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="1215" end="1227" title="play-by-play" label="play-by-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789669" start="1313" end="1333" title="Argonaut Rowing Club" label="Argonaut Rowing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116147" start="1342" end="1363" title="Kitchener Greenshirts" label="Kitchener Greenshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331013" start="1484" end="1497" title="Arena Gardens" label="Arena Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365446" start="1639" end="1647" title="Parkdale, Toronto" label="Parkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="1870" end="1880" title="horse racing" label="horse race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201545" start="1967" end="1982" title="Detroit Olympia" label="Detroit Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814534" start="2037" end="2055" title="Maple Leaf Gardens" label="Maple Leaf Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="2238" end="2257" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126138" start="2264" end="2275" title="Conn Smythe" label="Conn Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="2367" end="2373" title="Ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="2770" end="2792" title="Hockey Night in Canada" label="Hockey Night in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010781" start="2847" end="2851" title="CFRB" label="CFRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013172" start="2876" end="2885" title="CNR Radio" label="CNR Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030518" start="2891" end="2929" title="Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission" label="Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13940" start="2950" end="2959" title="CBC Radio" label="CBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="2979" end="2993" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909416" start="3121" end="3132" title="Bill Hewitt (sportscaster)" label="Bill Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931571" start="3403" end="3407" title="CKFH" label="CKFH"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="3427" end="3430" title="Hertz" label="kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517315" start="3566" end="3575" title="Telemedia" label="Telemedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931571" start="3592" end="3596" title="CJCL" label="CJCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011166" start="3626" end="3630" title="CHIN (AM)" label="CHIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q976512" start="3815" end="3818" title="Western Hockey League (1952–1974)" label="WHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914129" start="3819" end="3836" title="Vancouver Canucks (WHL)" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q46615" start="4097" end="4115" title="Summit Series" label="1972 Summit Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="4122" end="4140" title="Color commentator" label="colour commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q912015" start="4141" end="4155" title="Brian Conacher" label="Brian Conacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="4187" end="4206" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="4268" end="4283" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473705" start="4289" end="4317" title="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award" label="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q406972" start="4405" end="4421" title="Scotiabank Arena" label="Scotiabank Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q852359" start="4558" end="4571" title="Luxury box" label="private boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127574" start="4601" end="4615" title="Harold Ballard" label="Harold Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029719" start="4667" end="4703" title="Canadian Association of Broadcasters" label="Canadian Association of Broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128982" start="4733" end="4760" title="Ontario Sports Hall of Fame" label="Ontario Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909416" start="4839" end="4850" title="Bill Hewitt (sportscaster)" label="Bill Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="4928" end="4952" title="alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="4954" end="4968" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="4974" end="4987" title="Head and neck cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252433" start="5028" end="5057" title="Providence Healthcare (Toronto)" label="Providence Villa Nursing Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619206" start="5214" end="5241" title="Notable families in the NHL" label="Notable families in the NHL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74339" wikidata="Q1278200" url="?curid=74339" title="Second Variety">
<text>&quot;Second Variety&quot; is a science fiction novelette by American writer Philip K. Dick, first published in &quot;Space Science Fiction&quot; magazine, in May 1953. Set in a world where war between the Soviet Union and United Nations has reduced most of the world to a barren wasteland, the story concerns the discovery, by the few remaining soldiers left, that self-replicating robots originally built to assassinate Soviet agents have gained sentience and are now plotting against both sides. It is one of many stories by Dick examining the implications of nuclear war, particularly after it has destroyed much or all of the planet.

The story was adapted into the movie &quot;Screamers&quot; in 1995. The short story &quot;Jon&#x27;s World&quot;, written in 1954, serves as a sequel.

==Plot==
&quot;Second Variety&quot; occurs in the aftermath of an extensive nuclear war between the Soviet Union (sometimes referred to as Russia) and the United Nations. Early Soviet victories forced the North American government and production to flee to a Moon base, leaving the majority of their troops behind. To counter the almost complete Soviet victory, U.N. technicians develop robots, nicknamed &quot;claws&quot; —the basic models are &quot;a churning sphere of blades and metal&quot; that ambush their unsuspecting victims &quot;spinning, creeping, shaking themselves up suddenly from the gray ash and darting toward… [any warm body].&quot; U.N. forces are protected from the claws by a special radiation-emitting wrist tab. Within six years, the sophisticated and independent claws have destroyed the Soviet forces, repairing and redesigning themselves in underground automated factories run without any human oversight.

The U.N. forces receive a message from the Soviets asking for a policy-level officer to go to them for a gravely urgent conference. The U.N. victory was costlier than they had expected. Major Joseph Hendricks is sent to negotiate with the Soviets. En route to the rendezvous, he meets a small boy named David who asks to accompany Hendricks. When they near the Soviet bunker, soldiers immediately kill the boy, revealing him to be an android. The claws&#x27; development program has evolved to develop sophisticated robots, indistinguishable from humans, designed to infiltrate and kill. The three Soviets met by Major Hendricks—soldiers Klaus, Rudi, and a young woman named Tasso—reveal that the entire Soviet army and command structure collapsed under the onslaught of the new robots - they are all that are left in the command center.

From salvaged internal metal identification plates, two varieties are identified: I-V, a wounded soldier, and III-V, David. II-V—the &quot;second variety&quot;—remains unknown. The different models are produced independently of each other in different factories. The Soviets also reveal that the U.N. protective tabs are ineffective against the new robots. Hendricks attempts to transmit a warning to his headquarters bunker, but is unable to do so.

During the night, Klaus claims Rudi is the II-V and kills him, only for human organs to be revealed. The next morning, Hendricks and the two remaining Soviets return to the U.N. lines. When they reach the bunker, they discover it overrun: a crowd of David and Wounded Soldier robots attack, but Tasso destroys them with a very powerful hand grenade, stating that it was designed to destroy the robots. Hendricks and Tasso flee, leaving Klaus to the old-style claws. However, Klaus survives both the claws and the bomb blast only to be shot by Tasso, sending &quot;gears and wheels&quot; flying. Tasso tells Hendricks that Klaus must have been the II-V robot.

Hendricks, now suffering from a wounded arm and internal injuries, hopes to escape to the Moon Base. He and Tasso search for a hidden escape rocket, which is found to be a single-seat spacecraft. Hendricks attempts to leave, but Tasso convinces him to let her leave and send back help. In his injured state, he has no choice but to agree. Hendricks provides Tasso with the signal code needed to find the Moon Base.

Alone and armed with Tasso&#x27;s pistol, Hendricks returns to Klaus&#x27; remains and discovers from the parts that the robot was not a II-V, but a IV-V. A group of robots then attack Hendricks, including Davids, Wounded Soldiers, and several Tasso models—the true II-V. Hendricks recognizes that he has doomed the Moon Base by sending a robot to them, and that he cannot withstand the onslaught of robots attacking him. Noticing the bombs carried by all the Tasso models, Hendricks&#x27; final thought is that the robots are already producing weapons designed for killing each other.

==Reception==
&quot;Strange Horizons&quot; called the story one of &quot;Dick&#x27;s most compelling works&quot;, and stated that it is &quot;often singled out as one of the early stories that most anticipates Dick&#x27;s preoccupations in his more famous novels&quot;.

In 2004, the story was a finalist for the 1954 Retro-Hugo Award for Best Novelette.

==Publication history==
&quot;Second Variety&quot; was first published in the May 1953 issue of &quot;Space Science Fiction&quot; magazine. It has since been republished in the following collections:

* &quot;The Variable Man&quot; (1956)
* &quot;The Best of Philip K. Dick&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick&quot;: Volume II (1987)
* &quot;Second Variety&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Second Variety&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Philip K. Dick Reader&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Best Military Science Fiction of the 20th Century&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Minority Report&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Adjustment Team: The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick, Volume 2&quot; (2011)

==Adaptations==
A Canadian film based on &quot;Second Variety&quot;, titled &quot;Screamers&quot;, was made in 1995, featuring Peter Weller. Produced after the fall of the Soviet Union, the film employs a new backstory involving a proxy war between disgruntled miners and mercenaries over working conditions on a hostile planet. Jason P. Vest, in &quot;Future Imperfect: Philip K. Dick at the Movies&quot;, writes that the film is more faithful than most other adaptations, but it received a mixed critical reception and failed at the box office.

Sheldon Wilson directed a sequel titled &quot;&quot; in 2009.

An audio-drama mini-series based on &quot;Second Variety&quot; was made in 2020 as part of the Curious Matter Anthology podcast.

==References==

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1278200" start="6" end="20" title="Second Variety" label="Second Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="32" end="47" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48" end="57" title="Novella#Versus novelette" label="novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="77" end="91" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q110542812" start="118" end="139" title="Space Science Fiction" label="Space Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="206" end="218" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="223" end="237" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q691243" start="366" end="389" title="self-replicating robots" label="self-replicating robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="563" end="574" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q555995" start="683" end="692" title="Screamers (1995 film)" label="Screamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="868" end="879" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="892" end="904" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="947" end="961" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063795" start="1672" end="1691" title="automatic factory" label="automated factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="2160" end="2167" title="android (robot)" label="android"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621409" start="4699" end="4715" title="Strange Horizons" label="Strange Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056265" start="4997" end="5032" title="Hugo Award for Best Novelette" label="Retro-Hugo Award for Best Novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772066" start="5244" end="5260" title="The Variable Man (collection)" label="The Variable Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182043" start="5282" end="5308" title="The Best of Philip K. Dick" label="The Best of Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353462" start="5330" end="5371" title="Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities" label="Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828994" start="5393" end="5432" title="The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick" label="The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443625" start="5465" end="5479" title="Second Variety (1989 collection)" label="Second Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031765" start="5501" end="5515" title="Second Variety (1991 collection)" label="Second Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756908" start="5537" end="5562" title="The Philip K. Dick Reader" label="The Philip K. Dick Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126497" start="5655" end="5670" title="Minority Report (2002 collection)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447707" start="5692" end="5726" title="Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick" label="Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q555995" start="5915" end="5924" title="Screamers (1995 film)" label="Screamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q360477" start="5960" end="5972" title="Peter Weller" label="Peter Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="6064" end="6073" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q27910260" start="6381" end="6395" title="Sheldon Wilson" label="Sheldon Wilson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74341" wikidata="Q5310013" url="?curid=74341" title="DuPont Manual High School">
<text>duPont Manual High School is a public magnet high school located in the Old Louisville neighborhood of Louisville, Kentucky, United States. It serves students in grades 9–12. It is a part of the Jefferson County Public School District. DuPont Manual is recognized by the United States Department of Education as a Blue Ribbon School.

Manual, funded by Mr. A.V duPont, opened in 1892 as an all-male manual training school. It was the second public high school in Louisville. Manual merged with its rival, Male High School, into a consolidated school from 1915 to 1919. Manual permanently merged with the Louisville Girls High School in 1950 and moved into their Gothic-style three-story building, built in 1934. In 2004, after conducting a poll, Louisville&#x27;s &quot;Courier-Journal&quot; newspaper listed Manual as one of Louisville residents&#x27; ten favorite buildings. Manual experienced a decline in discipline and test scores in the 1970s. In 1984, Manual became a magnet school, allowing students from throughout the district to apply to five specialized programs of study, or magnets.

Manual and Male High School have the oldest football rivalry in the state, dating back to 1893. Manual&#x27;s football team has won five state titles and claims two national championships. In the 1980s and 1990s Manual became a prominent academic school and has been included several times in lists of America&#x27;s top high schools in &quot;Redbook&quot; and &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazines. The high school has been recognized as a Perennial Top Academic School in Kentucky and holds the most national merit semi-finalists among all JCPS High Schools.

==History==

===duPont Manual Training High School===
In 1892, Louisville factory owner Alfred Victor du Pont donated $150,000 to the board of Louisville Public Schools to establish a training school to teach young men industrial arts (&quot;manual&quot;) skills that would fit them for their duties in life. The Victorian building was built on the corner of Brook and Oak Streets by the firm of Clark and Loomis, which also designed the Speed Art Museum and Waverly Hills Sanatorium. After Manual moved out of the building it was used as a Middle School until 1974 when it was converted to apartments. Manual&#x27;s first principal, Henry Kleinschmid, was a favorite of du Pont but was unpopular with the school board, which conspired to replace him in 1895. Despite a summer of controversy and protest from the du Pont family, Manual&#x27;s first two graduating classes and the four major local newspapers, the board replaced him with Harry Brownell on July 2.
Manual was initially a three-year school with some general academic classes and an emphasis on mechanical and industrial training. Although graduates recall the school being viewed as blue-collar and academically inferior to Male High School in its early days, numerous early graduates went on to become medical doctors, and students published a literary magazine called &quot;The Crimson&quot; from 1899 to 1955. In order to accommodate newly added French and Latin classes, Manual was expanded to a four-year school in 1901. In 1911, Manual became the first school in Kentucky to serve lunches to students.

In 1913, Louisville Public Schools announced a plan to merge Manual and its rival Male High School into Louisville Boys High so that the two schools could share a new $300,000 facility. The plan took effect in 1915. Industrial training classes continued at the old Manual building. Parents objected to their children having to travel between the two buildings and the consolidation did not save the school board any money, so they voted to end the experiment in 1919. The new building became Male&#x27;s home for the next 70 years and Manual returned to its old building at Brook and Oak. In 1923 an expansion added new laboratories, a cafeteria, and the largest gym ever built in Louisville at the time. The addition eventually burned and had to be destroyed in 1991.

Manual&#x27;s enrollment numbers, which had hovered around 400 since the 1890s, soared from 429 in 1919 to 1,039 in 1925. The Manual Crimsons football team, which had also been consolidated with Male&#x27;s from 1915 to 1918, had great success in the 1920s, beating Male two years in a row for the first time in its history. Manual shared athletic facilities with Male for many years, but in the early 1920s alumni raised funds to construct Manual Stadium. The stadium opened in 1924 with 14,021 permanent seats. It was one of the largest high school stadiums in America at the time. The original structure was condemned and closed in 1952 after years of heavy use and minimal upkeep, and was reopened after being rebuilt in 1954. Its modern capacity is 11,463.
===Louisville Girls High School===
The Louisville Girls High School opened as Female High School in 1856 at what became the intersection of Armory Place and Muhammad Ali Boulevard. It was the female counterpart to Male High School, also opened in 1856, and they were the first two public high schools in Louisville. Female High School moved to a location on First Street north of Chestnut in 1864 and remained there until 1899 when it moved to a location at Fifth and Hill Streets. It changed its name to Louisville Girls High School in 1911.

In 1934, the school moved into Reuben Post Halleck Hall, which had just been completed. The building was initially home to the Girls High School on the second and third floors, and Louisville Junior High School on the first. Over 12,000 women graduated from the school in its 94 years of operation.

===Merger===
By the 1940s, budget concerns and national trends made it clear that Louisville Girls High School and duPont Manual would merge into one coeducational school. They finally did so in September 1950 and remained in the old Louisville Girls High School building. This fusion of institutions resulted in the birth of the modern duPont Manual High School – dropping &#x27;Training&#x27; from its previous name. The same school building remains in use today, although two major additions have since been made. The middle school located on the building&#x27;s first floor became Manly Junior High and moved to Manual&#x27;s old building at Brook and Oak.

The merged school began developing traditions such as Homecoming in 1951, and Red and White Day in 1953. Red and White Day eventually became a full week of school spirit related activities preceding the annual Male-Manual football game. Two traditions of the sexually segregated past, sororities and the all-male Mitre Club, persisted into the 1950s as unofficial organizations but gradually faded away. Students began publishing a newspaper, &quot;The Crimson Record&quot;, in 1955.

Following the &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; Supreme Court decision, Manual became racially integrated without controversy in 1956 and graduated its first two black students in 1958. Starting in the 1960s, Manual began to face problems associated with inner city schools in the United States as economically advantaged families moved towards Louisville&#x27;s suburbs. Manual was exempt from court-ordered busing in the 1970s because its racial makeup already met federal guidelines.

On November 11, 1976, what school board members referred to as a race-related riot occurred on campus, injuring 16 and leading to six arrests and 60 suspensions. Students and school administrators agreed that there was an atmosphere of racial tension brewing at Manual in the 1970s that led to the riot. In his 2005 book on the history of Manual, Mike McDaniel wrote that November 11, 1976 was &quot;quite probably the worst day in the history of Manual.&quot;

The late 1960s and 1970s were a time of major change at Manual. A new wing featuring a gym with a seating capacity of 2,566 opened in 1971. The school had as many as 3,360 students in the 1971–72 school year, necessitating 17 portable classrooms in the front and rear courtyards. Manual still had grades seven through twelve at this time, and overcrowding gradually began to improve after Manual dropped the seventh and eight grades when Noe Middle School opened in 1974. Throughout the decade the administration gradually dropped the last vestiges of its manual training emphasis as the number of shop classes dwindled from 16 in 1971 to three in 1979. The Youth Performing Arts School, actually a magnet school within Manual, opened in 1978 and, along with the changing curriculum, presaged Manual&#x27;s transition to an academically intensive magnet school in the 1980s.

===Magnet school===
Manual became a magnet school in 1984, creating specialty programs and allowing students from around the district to apply to attend. The change initially met with a mixed reaction, especially as most freshmen and sophomores were to be transferred to other schools. One critic in the black community called the plan &quot;one-way busing&quot;. A few days after the proposal was announced, about 300 students walked out of class at Manual and marched to Central High School, where most of them were being transferred, in protest. The protest succeeded in persuading the school board to modify the proposal to exclude sophomores from being transferred.

The magnet programs succeeded in attracting applicants and by the mid-1990s only about a third of students who applied were accepted. In the midst of the transition to magnet school, Manual underwent a $1.9 million building improvement plan which added computer and science labs. Also in 1991, the United States Department of Education recognized Manual as a Blue Ribbon School, the highest honor the department can bestow on a school. The school earned a Blue Ribbon award again in 2020.

Many interior shots of the 1999 film &quot;The Insider&quot; were filmed at Manual. Dr. Jeffrey Wigand, the subject of the film, taught science and Japanese at Manual after he was fired by tobacco company Brown &amp; Williamson in 1993.

==Building and campus==
Manual classrooms and offices are located in three buildings spread over two city blocks. The main building was originally called Reuben Post Halleck Hall and was home to the Louisville Girls High School before it merged with Manual. The Gothic-style building was completed in 1934 at a cost of $1.1 million. The tract it was built on had previously been the site of the old Masonic Widows and Orphans Home.

In 1967 an urban renewal program demolished a residential block east of the main building to create a running track and various athletic fields. The project doubled Manual&#x27;s campus to its modern size of . This was a part of a larger city-funded effort which created Noe Middle School north of Manual and increased the size of the University of Louisville campus, which was originally touted as a plan to create a continuous chain of schools over many blocks. Manual even became a home for two of the university&#x27;s women&#x27;s athletic teams. In the 1980s, the U of L women&#x27;s basketball team used Manual&#x27;s gym as a part-time home, playing a total of 40 games in eight seasons there. The U of L volleyball team used the Manual gym as its primary home from 1977 through 1990, after which the team moved into the newly built Cardinal Arena on its own campus. In 1992, Manual began a $3.5 million renovation of the main building which included a new roof and a glass-enclosed cafeteria for juniors and seniors.

The Youth Performing Arts School has its own building a half-block from Manual&#x27;s main building. It was completed in 1978 at a cost of $1.5 million as the final stage of the same plan that expanded Manual&#x27;s campus and built Noe. Noe had been built without an auditorium in anticipation of a theater-oriented school being built on site. The YPAS building includes production facilities, a costume shop and an 886-seat proscenium-style theater. The YPAS building did not contain extensive classroom space, however, and for many years teachers conducted YPAS classes in hallways and on loading docks if other space wasn&#x27;t available. Since 1993, YPAS has used an adjacent facility, built in 1899 and formerly home to Cochran Elementary, as an annex.

==Academics==
Manual focused on industrial training early in its history, but by the late 1970s it had a standard curriculum. In 1980, Iowa Test of Basic Skills scores ranked Manual 23rd out of the 24 high schools in the county. Under principal Joe Liedtke, academics improved, especially after Manual became a magnet school in 1984 and could attract students from throughout the county.

All students enroll in one of five magnet programs. The High School University (HSU) magnet offers a traditional college preparatory curriculum with electives. The Math/Science/Technology (MST) magnet specifically prepares students for college programs in engineering, science and math. Minimal requirements for MST students include courses in algebra, trigonometry, calculus (including mandatory AP Calculus), biology, chemistry and computer programming. The Journalism &amp; Communication (J&amp;C) magnet focuses on journalism, publishing, and media production. To earn class credit, J&amp;C students can participate in the creation of the school&#x27;s national award-winning publications and productions: yearbook (&quot;The Crimson&quot;), a city-wide youth newsmagazine (&quot;On the Record&quot;), literary magazine (&quot;One&quot; &quot;Blue&quot; &quot;Wall&quot;), a school news website (&quot;RedEye&quot;) and a daily morning television show called CSPN-TV, which is streamed online and broadcast to classrooms. The J&amp;C program was formerly known as CMA (Communications and Media Arts), but the name was changed so that the Manual program&#x27;s specific emphasis on journalism would be reflected in the name, distinguishing the magnet from others in the district with similar names.

Admission to the HSU, MST and J&amp;C magnets are decided by a committee of Manual teachers based on academic performance as measured by prior school grades and the Commonwealth Accountability Testing System, although extracurricular involvement is also considered. The acceptance rate to each magnet varies with the number of applicants in any given year; in the mid-1990s about a third of applicants to these three magnets were selected each year. Admission the other two magnets, Visual Arts and the Youth Performing Arts School, are decided based primarily on auditions.

The Visual Arts magnet is located in a wing of art classrooms and features an art show each year for graduating seniors. The Visual Arts magnet provides students with the opportunity to work with a variety of media, including clay/sculpture, fibers, printmaking, painting, drawing and graphic design. The Math/Science/Technology program and the Youth Performing Arts School have achieved national recognition on multiple occasions.

In 1994, Manual began offering Advanced Placement (AP) courses. In 2001 it offered 45 AP courses, more than any other school in the state. Qualifying students may take college courses free of charge at the University of Louisville, which is located directly south of Manual. In 2000, Manual implemented block scheduling, which allowed students to take eight classes per year, which are scheduled four per day on alternating days.

Since 2000, Manual has held Kentucky&#x27;s state record of 52 National Merit Semifinalists, ranking third in the United States for that year. Manual&#x27;s academic team won state titles at Governor&#x27;s Cup, Kentucky&#x27;s top high school academic competition, in 1993, 1994, 2005, and 2013. Matt Morris, a Manual graduate who was on the 1993 and 1994 teams, was the 1994 Teen Champion on &quot;Jeopardy!&quot;. Three other Manual students have competed on &quot;Jeopardy!&quot;. Manual&#x27;s academic teams have also won both National Science Bowl and National Academic League championships, and achieved 7th place at the NAQT&#x27;s High School National Championships. Manual has a history of one of the top policy debate programs in the state. In the 1990s Manual students won the Jefferson County championships most years and qualified teams for the National Forensic League tournament and the TOC Tournament of Champions. Manual has been mentioned several times in lists of America&#x27;s top high schools in &quot;Redbook&quot; and &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazines. In 2002, Manual was separated from the rest of the schools in its district and made to hold its own regional science fair.

In 2015, duPont Manual had the distinction of being the high school that sent the most students to the INTEL International Science and Engineering Fair (ISEF).

In 2022, duPont Manual was ranked #47 in the National Rankings, #1 in Kentucky High Schools, #1 in Louisville, KY Metro Area High Schools, and #1 in Jefferson County Public Schools High Schools.

===Youth Performing Arts School===

The Youth Performing Arts School (YPAS) is one of only two programs in Kentucky allowing high school students to major in performing arts. Between 1995 and 2005, 90% of YPAS students received college scholarships totaling an average of over one million dollars per year. YPAS has its own building a half-block from Manual&#x27;s main building, which includes classrooms, production facilities, a costume shop and an 886-seat proscenium-style theater. Since 1993, YPAS has used an adjacent facility, built in 1899 and formerly home to Cochran Elementary, as an annex.

YPAS is one of Manual&#x27;s magnet programs and YPAS students take their academic classes at Manual and must complete the same academic requirements as any public school student in Kentucky. Unlike the other magnets, YPAS is semi-autonomous; it has its own assistant principals, counselor, administrative staff, and parents&#x27; organization. Many Manual students take classes at YPAS, even if it is not their academic major.

Students at YPAS major in vocal music, instrumental music (band, orchestra, piano, or guitar), dance, theater, design and production, or musical theatre. YPAS instructors are school teachers recruited from around the district for their backgrounds in the arts. The YPAS choir was the only chorus to perform at the January 2001 inauguration of President George W. Bush.

==Athletics==

===Football===

===Other sports===
John Reccius, an early Major League Baseball player, organized Manual&#x27;s first baseball team in 1900. An early baseball star was Ferdie Schupp, who would go on to pitch in the 1917 World Series, but left Manual two months before graduating. Manual claims seven &quot;mythical&quot; state baseball championships and has won six official ones, most recently in 1962. A total of ten Manual players have played in Major League Baseball, most notably Pee Wee Reese.

The varsity cheerleaders have won several NCA National Championship titles. In 1997, 1998, 2004, and 2005, they won the Large Varsity Division, and in 2003 and 2006 they won the Medium Varsity Division title. Varsity boys&#x27; soccer was second at states in 2005 and third in 2004.

In 2006, the Manual girls&#x27; cross country team won the school&#x27;s first team title after placing second in 2004 and 2005. The 2006 win was the first championship for a Jefferson County, Kentucky Class AAA Public School since 1980. In 2007, the Manual boys&#x27; cross country team also won a Class AAA state championship.

The swim team maintained state titles from 2003 to 2008. From 2004 through 2008, Manual won the Combined Girls&#x27; and Boys&#x27; State Championship, and the girls maintained their own state championship from 2005 through 2008.

The boys&#x27; tennis team achieved their best finish at the KHSAA State Tennis Tournament in 2008 by winning the team title. Previously, their best result had come in 2006 when they tied rival St. Xavier High School for second place. The boys&#x27; team also won the state doubles title in 2006, which was the first state title in Ram tennis history on the boys&#x27; side. The team had five consecutive runner up positions from the 2001—2002 year until the 2005—2006 year. In 2008, the Manual boys&#x27; tennis team went on to win the first ever regional tournament in Manual history. The state team won the state title in 2008, making Manual the second public school to ever win the title.

The boys&#x27; bowling team won the state title in 2010. The school also offers basketball, dance (called the Dazzlers), field hockey, golf, lacrosse, and volleyball, among other sports teams.

The varsity field hockey team won the state title in 2011 for the first time in the history of the program.

DuPont Manual girls&#x27; lacrosse has won many state titles and tournament trophies since 2001, when the program was developed.

==Notable alumni and faculty ==

Alumni
*James Gilbert Baker, astronomer and optician
*Michelle Banzer, 2007 Miss Kentucky USA
*Chad Broskey, actor, most often on the Disney Channel
*Bud Bruner, boxing trainer and manager
*Keenan Burton, NFL football player
*Nathaniel Cartmell, Olympic gold medalist
*Anjali Chadha, Biological Engineer
*James S. Coleman, sociologist
*Bryce Cosby (2017), professional football cornerback
*Paige Davis (1987), theater performer, host of Trading Spaces on TLC from 2001 to 2005.
*Bremer Ehrler, Jefferson County Judge-Executive and sheriff
*Sara Gettelfinger (1995), Broadway performer
*Ray Grenald (1945), architectural lighting designer
*Stratton Hammon, architect
*Bruce Hoblitzell, former Mayor of Louisville
*Sherman Lewis, Heisman Trophy runner-up
*Victor M. Longstreet, U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management), 1962–65
*Mitch McConnell, United States Senator from Kentucky, Senate minority leader
*Morgan McGarvey, U.S. Representative from Kentucky
*John Jacob Niles, &quot;Dean of American Balladeers&quot;
*Yared Nuguse U.S. Olympian and record holder in the 1 mile run
*Travis Prentice, college and professional football player
*Pee Wee Reese (1937), baseball player
*Aidan Robbins (2019), NFL running back for the Cleveland Browns
*Nicole Scherzinger (1996), lead singer of the Pussycat Dolls
*Joseph D. Scholtz, former mayor of Louisville
*Gene Snyder, U.S. Representative from Kentucky
*Josh Whelchel, award-winning video game composer and entrepreneur

Faculty
*Jeffrey Wigand, American biochemist and former vice president of research and development at Brown &amp; Williamson, blew the whistle on tobacco tampering at the company in 1996, inspiration for the 1999 film &quot;The Insider&quot;, former Teacher of the Year in the state of Kentucky

==See also==
* Public schools in Louisville, Kentucky

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5310013" start="0" end="25" title="DuPont Manual High School" label="duPont Manual High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="31" end="56" title="Magnet school" label="public magnet high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350195" start="72" end="86" title="Old Louisville" label="Old Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="103" end="123" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="169" end="170" title="ninth grade" label="9"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="171" end="173" title="twelfth grade" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175438" start="195" end="234" title="Jefferson County Public Schools (Kentucky)" label="Jefferson County Public School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="271" end="308" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971043" start="314" end="332" title="Blue Ribbon Schools Program" label="Blue Ribbon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653504" start="399" end="414" title="Industrial arts" label="manual training"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689505" start="505" end="521" title="Male High School" label="Male High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="662" end="668" title="gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567585" start="770" end="785" title="The Courier-Journal" label="Courier-Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="975" end="988" title="magnet school" label="magnet school"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="1142" end="1150" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430019" start="1441" end="1448" title="Redbook" label="Redbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="1465" end="1473" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986262" start="1741" end="1762" title="du Pont family" label="Alfred Victor du Pont"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653504" start="1872" end="1887" title="industrial arts" label="industrial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="1966" end="1975" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492931" start="2091" end="2107" title="Speed Art Museum" label="Speed Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q657238" start="2112" end="2136" title="Waverly Hills Sanatorium" label="Waverly Hills Sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689505" start="2841" end="2857" title="Male High School" label="Male High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3077" end="3082" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q750053" start="6318" end="6328" title="Homecoming" label="Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432637" start="6420" end="6433" title="school spirit" label="school spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="6549" end="6559" title="sororities" label="sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="6769" end="6796" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="7010" end="7020" title="inner city" label="inner city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="7150" end="7170" title="Desegregation busing in the United States" label="court-ordered busing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="7803" end="7819" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653504" start="8303" end="8307" title="Industrial arts" label="shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059248" start="8363" end="8391" title="Youth Performing Arts School" label="Youth Performing Arts School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061190" start="9054" end="9073" title="Central High School (Louisville, Kentucky)" label="Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="9551" end="9588" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q463832" start="9786" end="9797" title="The Insider (film)" label="The Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686507" start="9831" end="9845" title="Jeffrey Wigand" label="Jeffrey Wigand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="9932" end="9939" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926338" start="9948" end="9970" title="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson" label="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257971" start="10685" end="10702" title="Noe Middle School" label="Noe Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317143" start="10749" end="10773" title="University of Louisville" label="University of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="11867" end="11877" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571209" start="12337" end="12362" title="Iowa Test of Basic Skills" label="Iowa Test of Basic Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="12704" end="12723" title="college preparatory" label="college preparatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="12935" end="12942" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="12944" end="12956" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="12958" end="12966" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410440" start="12988" end="12999" title="AP Calculus" label="AP Calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="13002" end="13009" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="13011" end="13020" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="13025" end="13045" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089011" start="13301" end="13309" title="yearbook" label="yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14059" end="14101" title="Education in Kentucky#Kentucky Education Reform Act .28KERA.29" label="Commonwealth Accountability Testing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="14934" end="14952" title="Advanced Placement" label="Advanced Placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317143" start="15109" end="15133" title="University of Louisville" label="University of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974311" start="15397" end="15425" title="National Merit Scholarship" label="National Merit Semifinalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="15734" end="15743" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433488" start="15876" end="15888" title="Science Bowl" label="Science Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15893" end="15917" title="National Academic League" label="National Academic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970103" start="15963" end="15967" title="NAQT" label="NAQT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972761" start="16194" end="16218" title="National Forensic League" label="National Forensic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829308" start="16242" end="16265" title="Tournament of Champions (debate)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430019" start="16360" end="16367" title="Redbook" label="Redbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="16384" end="16392" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q635185" start="16519" end="16531" title="Intel International Science and Engineering Fair" label="science fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059248" start="16931" end="16959" title="Youth Performing Arts School" label="Youth Performing Arts School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="17049" end="17064" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="17352" end="17362" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="17524" end="17539" title="magnet school" label="magnet programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671286" start="17907" end="17921" title="academic major" label="academic major"/>
<link wikidata="Q685884" start="17950" end="17961" title="vocal music" label="vocal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775755" start="17983" end="17987" title="School band" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="17989" end="17998" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="18000" end="18005" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="18010" end="18016" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="18019" end="18024" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="18026" end="18033" title="Performing arts" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020619" start="18035" end="18056" title="Stagecraft" label="design and production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="18061" end="18076" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="18277" end="18291" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254413" start="18344" end="18356" title="John Reccius" label="John Reccius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="18367" end="18388" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443786" start="18477" end="18490" title="Ferdie Schupp" label="Ferdie Schupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560393" start="18524" end="18541" title="1917 World Series" label="1917 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q182485" start="18794" end="18807" title="Pee Wee Reese" label="Pee Wee Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="18822" end="18834" title="cheerleading" label="cheerleaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="19038" end="19044" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="19126" end="19139" title="Cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="19428" end="19432" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="19670" end="19676" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988929" start="19716" end="19721" title="Kentucky High School Athletic Association" label="KHSAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592208" start="19849" end="19871" title="St. Xavier High School, Louisville, Kentucky" label="St. Xavier High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="20364" end="20371" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="20429" end="20439" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="20441" end="20446" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="20470" end="20482" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="20484" end="20488" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="20490" end="20498" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="20504" end="20514" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q337213" start="20823" end="20842" title="James Gilbert Baker" label="James Gilbert Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785937" start="20869" end="20884" title="Michelle Banzer" label="Michelle Banzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785937" start="20891" end="20908" title="Miss Kentucky USA" label="Miss Kentucky USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q428783" start="20910" end="20922" title="Chad Broskey" label="Chad Broskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="20949" end="20963" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983798" start="20965" end="20975" title="Bud Bruner" label="Bud Bruner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382869" start="21005" end="21018" title="Keenan Burton" label="Keenan Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="21020" end="21023" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q982432" start="21041" end="21059" title="Nathaniel Cartmell" label="Nathaniel Cartmell"/>
<link wikidata="Q111377475" start="21084" end="21097" title="Anjali Chadha" label="Anjali Chadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681079" start="21120" end="21136" title="James Samuel Coleman" label="James S. Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112842738" start="21151" end="21162" title="Bryce Cosby" label="Bryce Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360520" start="21205" end="21216" title="Paige Davis" label="Paige Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536383" start="21252" end="21266" title="Trading Spaces" label="Trading Spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960553" start="21294" end="21307" title="Bremer Ehrler" label="Bremer Ehrler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421634" start="21355" end="21372" title="Sara Gettelfinger" label="Sara Gettelfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="21381" end="21389" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297545" start="21401" end="21412" title="Ray Grenald" label="Ray Grenald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622262" start="21454" end="21469" title="Stratton Hammon" label="Stratton Hammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977662" start="21482" end="21498" title="Bruce Hoblitzell" label="Bruce Hoblitzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251196" start="21507" end="21526" title="Mayor of Louisville" label="Mayor of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495213" start="21528" end="21541" title="Sherman Lewis" label="Sherman Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="21543" end="21557" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926113" start="21569" end="21589" title="Victor M. Longstreet" label="Victor M. Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809037" start="21596" end="21650" title="Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management)" label="Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management)"/>
<link wikidata="Q355522" start="21661" end="21676" title="Mitch McConnell" label="Mitch McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732298" start="21739" end="21754" title="Morgan McGarvey" label="Morgan McGarvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312433" start="21791" end="21807" title="John Jacob Niles" label="John Jacob Niles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107359685" start="21850" end="21862" title="Yared Nuguse" label="Yared Nuguse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836353" start="21914" end="21929" title="Travis Prentice" label="Travis Prentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q182485" start="21973" end="21986" title="Pee Wee Reese" label="Pee Wee Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q125948163" start="22012" end="22025" title="Aidan Robbins" label="Aidan Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="22059" end="22075" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q167696" start="22077" end="22095" title="Nicole Scherzinger" label="Nicole Scherzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q102385" start="22123" end="22137" title="Pussycat Dolls" label="Pussycat Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282436" start="22139" end="22156" title="Joseph D. Scholtz" label="Joseph D. Scholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501445" start="22186" end="22197" title="Gene Snyder" label="Gene Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289507" start="22234" end="22247" title="Josh Whelchel" label="Josh Whelchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686507" start="22310" end="22324" title="Jeffrey Wigand" label="Jeffrey Wigand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="22335" end="22345" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="22357" end="22371" title="vice president" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="22375" end="22399" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926338" start="22403" end="22425" title="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson" label="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="22427" end="22443" title="Whistleblower" label="blew the whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q463832" start="22525" end="22536" title="The Insider (film)" label="The Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257971" start="22612" end="22650" title="Public schools in Louisville, Kentucky" label="Public schools in Louisville, Kentucky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74342" wikidata="Q193193" url="?curid=74342" title="Sainte-Chapelle">
<text>The Sainte-Chapelle (; ) is a royal chapel in the Gothic style, within the medieval Palais de la Cité, the residence of the Kings of France until the 14th century, on the Île de la Cité in the River Seine in Paris, France.

Construction began sometime after 1238 and the chapel was consecrated on 26 April 1248. The Sainte-Chapelle is considered among the highest achievements of the Rayonnant period of Gothic architecture. It was commissioned by King Louis IX of France to house his collection of Passion relics, including Christ&#x27;s Crown of Thorns – one of the most important relics in medieval Christendom. This was later held in the nearby Notre-Dame Cathedral until the 2019 fire, which it survived.

Along with the Conciergerie, Sainte-Chapelle is one of the earliest surviving buildings of the Capetian royal palace on the Île de la Cité. Although damaged during the French Revolution and restored in the 19th century, it has one of the most extensive 13th-century stained glass collections anywhere in the world.

The chapel is now operated as a museum by the French Centre of National Monuments, along with the nearby Conciergerie, the other remaining vestige of the original palace.

==History==
===Construction of France ===
Sainte-Chapelle was inspired by the earlier Carolingian royal chapels, notably the Palatine Chapel of Charlemagne at his palace in Aix-la-Chapelle (now Aachen). It was built in about 800 and served as the oratory of the Emperor. In 1238 Louis IX had already built one royal chapel, attached to the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. This earlier chapel had only one level; its plan, on a much grander scale, was adapted for Sainte-Chapelle. 

The two levels of the new chapel, equal in size, had entirely different purposes. The upper level, where the sacred relics were kept, was reserved exclusively for the royal family and their guests. The lower level was used by the courtiers, servants, and soldiers of the palace. It was a very large structure, long, wide, and high, ranking in size with the new Gothic cathedrals in France. 

In addition to serving as a place of worship, the Sainte-Chapelle played an important role in the political and cultural ambitions of King Louis and his successors. With the imperial throne at Constantinople occupied by a mere Count of Flanders and with the Holy Roman Empire in uneasy disarray, Louis&#x27; artistic and architectural patronage helped to position him as the central monarch of western Christendom, the Sainte-Chapelle fitting into a long tradition of prestigious palace chapels. Just as the Emperor could pass privately from his palace into the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople, so now Louis could pass directly from his palace into the Sainte-Chapelle. More importantly, the two-story palace chapel had obvious similarities to Charlemagne&#x27;s palatine chapel at Aachen (built 782–805)—a parallel that Louis was keen to exploit in presenting himself as a worthy successor to the first Holy Roman Emperor. The presence of the fragment of the True Cross and crown of thorns gave enormous prestige to Louis IX. Pope Innocent IV proclaimed that it meant that Christ had symbolically crowned Louis with his own crown.

===The Royal Chapel===

Sainte-Chapelle, in the courtyard of the royal palace on the Île de la Cité (now part of a later administrative complex known as La Conciergerie), was built to house Louis IX&#x27;s collection of relics of Christ, which included the crown of thorns, the Image of Edessa, and some thirty other items. Louis purchased his Passion relics from Baldwin II, the Latin emperor at Constantinople, for the sum of 135,000 livres. This money was paid to the Venetians to whom the relics had been pawned. 

The relics arrived in Paris in August 1239, carried from Venice by two Dominican friars. Upon arrival, King Louis hosted a week-long celebratory reception for the relics. For the final stage of their journey they were carried by Louis IX himself, barefoot and dressed as a penitent, a scene depicted in the &quot;Relics of the Passion&quot; window on the south side of the chapel. The relics were stored in a large and elaborate silver chest, the &quot;Grand-Chasse&quot;, on which Louis spent a further 100,000 livres. 

The entire chapel, by contrast, cost 40,000 livres to build and glaze. Until it was completed in 1248, the relics were housed at chapels at the Château de Vincennes and a specially built chapel at the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. In 1246, fragments of the True Cross and the Holy Lance were added to Louis&#x27;s collection, along with other relics. The chapel was consecrated on 26 April 1248 and Louis&#x27;s relics were moved to their new home with great ceremony. Shortly afterward, the King departed on the Seventh Crusade, in which he was captured and later ransomed and released. In 1704, the French composer  Marc-Antoine Charpentier was buried in the chapel&#x27;s small cemetery, but this cemetery no longer exists.

The Parisian scholastic Jean de Jandun praised the building as one of Paris&#x27; most beautiful structures in his &quot;Tractatus de laudibus Parisius&quot; (1323), citing:

=== Modifications (16th–18th century) ===

The chapel underwent considerable modification in the centuries that followed. A new two-story building, the Treasury of Chartres, was attached to the chapel on the north side shortly after it was completed. It remained until 1783, when it was demolished to build the new Palace of Justice. Another building, which served as a vestiary and sacristy, as well as residence for the guardian of the treasury, was placed on the north side. In the 15th century, Louis X of France built a monumental enclosed stairway from the courtyard on the south side to the upper level. This was damaged by fire in 1630, rebuilt, but finally demolished. Fires in the palace in 1630 and 1776 also caused considerable damage, especially to the furniture, and a flood in the winter of 1689–1690 caused major damage to the painted walls of the lower chapel. The original stained glass on the ground floor was removed, and the floor raised. The original ground floor glass was replaced by Gothic-style windows in the 19th century.

===Revolutionary vandalism (18th century) ===
Sainte-Chapelle, as both a symbol of religion and royalty, was a prime target for vandalism during the French Revolution. The chapel was turned into a storehouse for grain, and the sculpture and royal emblems on the exterior were smashed. The spire was pulled down. Some of the stained glass was broken or dispersed, but nearly two-thirds of the glass today is original; some of the original glass was relocated in other windows, The sacred relics were dispersed although some survive as the &quot;relics of Sainte-Chapelle&quot; in the treasury of Notre-Dame de Paris. Various reliquaries, including the &quot;grande châsse&quot;, were melted down for their precious metal.

=== Restoration (19th–21st century) ===
Between 1803 and 1837, the upper chapel was turned into a depository for the archives of the Palace of Justice next door. The lower of stained glass was removed to facilitate working light. Some of the glass was used to replace broken glass in other windows, and other panes were put on the market. 
Beginning in 1835, scholars, archeologists and writers demanded that the church be preserved and restored to its medieval state. In 1840, under King Louis-Philippe, a long campaign of restoration began. It was first conducted by Félix Duban, then by Jean-Baptiste Lassus and Émile Boeswillwald, with the young Eugène Viollet-le-Duc as an assistant. The work continued for twenty-eight years, and served as a training ground for a generation of archeologists and restorers. It was faithful to the original drawings and descriptions of the chapel that survived.

The restoration of the stained glass was a parallel project, which lasted from 1846 until 1855, with the goal of returning the chapel to its original appearance. It was carried out by the glass craftsmen Antoine Lusson and Maréchal de Metz and the designer Louis Steinheil. About one third of the glass, added in later years, was removed and replaced with medieval glass from other sources, or with new glass made in the original Gothic style. Eighteen of the original panels are found today in the Musée de Cluny in Paris.

The stained glass was removed and placed into safe storage during World War II. In 1945 a layer of external varnish had been applied to protect the glass from the dust and scratches of wartime bombing. This had gradually darkened, making the already fading images even harder to see. In 2008, a more comprehensive seven-year programme of restoration began, costing some €10 million to clean and preserve all the stained glass, clean the facade stonework and conserve and repair some of the sculptures. Half of the funding was provided by private donors, the other half coming from the Villum Foundation. Included in the restoration was an innovative thermoformed glass layer applied outside the stained-glass windows for added protection. The restoration of the flamboyant rose window on the west facade was completed in 2015 in time for the 800th anniversary of the birth of St. Louis.

== Timeline ==
* 1239 - Louis IX purchases the reputed Crown of Thorns
* 1241 - The crown and other relics arrive in Paris 
* 1242-44 - Construction begins 
* 1248 - Sainte-Chapelle completed and consecrated 
* 1264-1267 - Installation of the tribune of relics
* 1379 - Charles V of France offers the Sainte-Chapelle Gospels to the treasury 
* 1383 - First spire rebuilt
* End of 15th c. - Monumental exterior stairway built by Louis XII
* 1460 (approx.) 14th-century spire replaced 
* 1485-1498 - west rose window installed 
* 1630 - Fire damages spire and outer stairway
* 1690 - Flood damages lower chapel - original lower chapel stained glass removed
* 1793 - Revolutionaries smash portals and royal emblems. Chapel turned to civil use, and spire destroyed.
* 1803-1837 - Chapel becomes storeroom for files of Ministry of Justice 
* 1805 - Relics of Passion transferred to Notre-Dame de Paris
* 1840-48 - Major restoration of chapel and decoration
* 1846-55 - Restoration and additions to stained glass windows 
* 1853-55 - Current spire constructed
* 1862- Chapel is classified as an historical monument

==Description==
The royal chapel is a prime example of the phase of Gothic architectural style called &quot;Rayonnant&quot;, marked by its sense of weightlessness and strong vertical emphasis. It stands squarely upon a lower chapel, which served as parish church for all the inhabitants of the palace, which was the seat of government.

===Exterior===

The contemporary visitor entering the courtyard of the Royal Palace would have been met by the sight of a grand ceremonial staircase (the &quot;Grands Degres&quot;) to their right and the north flank and eastern apse of the Sainte-Chapelle to their left. The chapel exterior shows many of the typical characteristics of Rayonnant architecture—deep buttresses surmounted by pinnacles, crocketted gables around the roof-line and vast windows subdivided by bar tracery. The internal division into upper and lower chapels is clearly marked on the outside by a string-course, the lower walls pierced by smaller windows with a distinctive spherical triangle shape. Despite its decoration, the exterior is relatively simple and austere, devoid of flying buttresses or major sculpture and giving little hint of the richness within.

No designer-builder is named in the archives concerned with the construction. In the 19th century it was assumed (as with so many buildings of medieval Paris) to be the work of the master mason Pierre de Montreuil, who worked on the remodelling of the Royal Abbey of Saint-Denis and completed the south transept façade of Notre-Dame Cathedral in Paris. Modern scholarship rejects this attribution in favour of Jean de Chelles or Thomas de Cormont, while Robert Branner saw in the design the hand of an unidentified master mason from Amiens.

The Sainte-Chapelle&#x27;s most obvious architectural precursors include the apsidal chapels of Amiens Cathedral, which it resembles in its general form, and the Bishop&#x27;s Chapel (c. 1180s) of Noyon Cathedral, from which it borrowed the two-story design. a major influence on its overall design may have come from contemporary metalwork, particularly the precious shrines and reliquaries made by Mosan goldsmiths.

Though the buttresses are substantial, they are too close to the vault to counter its side thrust. Metal elements such as iron rods or chains, able to support tension, were used to replace the flying buttresses of previous structures.

===West front===

The west front is composed of a porch two levels high, beneath a flamboyant Gothic rose window installed in the upper chapel in the 15th century. At the top is a pointed arch an oculus window, and a balustrade around the bottom of the roof, decorated with interlaced fleur-de-lys emblems placed by Charles V of France. On either side of the porch are towers which contain the narrow winding stairways to the upper chapel, and which also hide the buttresses. The spires of the towers are also decorated with royal fleur-des-lys beneath a sculpted crown of thorns. This decoration dates to the 15th century, and was restored in about 1850 by Geoffroy-Dechaume.

The portal of the upper chapel is located on the balcony of the upper level. The original sculpture of the west portal was smashed during the Revolution. It was restored by Geoffroy-Dechaume between 1854 and 1873.

===Spire===

The current spire, high, is the fifth to be built at Sainte-Chapelle since the 13th century. The appearance of the first is unknown, but the second, built in 1383 under Charles V, is pictured in an illustration of the Tres Riches Heures du Duc de Berry. He replaced it with another in about 1460, but this spire burned in 1630. It was replaced by another, which was destroyed following the French Revolution in 1793. The present spire was built of cedar wood by the architect Lassus beginning in 1852. The sculpture decorating the spire was designed in 1853 by Geoffroy-Dechaume. The painter-designer Steinheil designed the sculpture at the base of the spire, and his face appears as two of the apostles, Saint Thomas and Saint Bartholomew. Above the gables are statues representing angels carrying the instruments of The Passion. Above the chevet is a statue of the Archangel Michael slaying a dragon. Around the feet of the archangel are sculptures, also designed by Geoffroy-Dechaume, of eight persons, portrayed by workers of the reconstruction, laying wreaths at the Archangel&#x27;s feet.

==Interior==

Saint Chapelle, built to house a reliquary, was itself like a precious reliquary turned inside out (with the richest decoration on the inside). Although the interior is dominated by the stained glass (see below), every inch of the remaining wall surface and the vault was also richly coloured and decorated. Analysis of remaining paint fragments reveals that the original colours were much brighter than those favoured by the 19th-century restorers and would have been closer to the colours of the stained glass. The quatrefoils of the dado arcade were painted with scenes of saints and martyrs and inset with painted and gilded glass, emulating Limoges enamels, while rich textiles hangings added to the richness of the interior.

The most striking aspect and original feature of the plan is the nearly total absence of masonry walls in the upper chapel. The walls are replaced by pillars and buttresses, and the space between is almost entirely glass, filling the upper chapel with light.

=== Lower Chapel ===

The lower chapel was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and was used by the non-royal inhabitants of the neighbouring Royal Palace. The portal of the chapel represents the Virgin Mary as a column statue. The portal, and almost all the decoration of the chapel, was created by Geoffroy-Duchaume between 1854 and 1858. The primary decorative themes of the sculpture, columns and murals are the Fleur-de-Lys emblem of Louis IX and a stylised castle, the coat of arms of Blanche of Castile, the mother of Louis IX.

The lower chapel is only high, with a six-meter wide central vessel and two narrow side aisles. The supports of the ceiling vaults are unusual; the outward thrust of the vaults is counterbalanced by small, elegant arched buttresses between the outer and inner columns, and they are also reinforced by a metallic structure hidden under the paint and plaster.

The one-hundred forty capitals of the columns are an important decorative feature; they are from the mid-13th century, and predate the columns of the upper chapel. They have floral decoration of acanthus leaves typical of the period. Each of the gilded leaves corresponds with a slender colonette above, which rises upward to support the vaults. The columns are painted with alternating floral designs and the castle emblem of Castile. The red, gold and blue painting dates to the 19th century restoration.

The original stained glass of the lower chapel was destroyed by a flood in 1690; it was replaced by colourless glass. The present glass depicts scenes from the life of the Virgin Mary, surrounded by grisaille glass, while the apse has more elaborate and colourful scenes from the Virgin&#x27;s life. All the windows were designed by Steinheil during the 19th century restoration. The lower chapel originally had a doorway to the sacristy on the left lateral traverse. Since it could not have a window, it was decorated in the 13th century with a mural of the Annunciation. This was rediscovered during the 19th-century work, and restored by Steinheil.

=== Upper Chapel ===

The upper chapel is reached by narrow stairways in the towers from lower level. The structure is simple; a rectangle , with four traverses and an apse at the east end with seven bays of windows. The most striking features are the walls, which appear to be almost entirely made of stained glass; a total of of glass, not counting the rose window at the west end. This was a clever illusion created by the master builder; each vertical support of the windows is composed of seven slender columns, which disguise their full thickness. In addition, the walls and windows are braced on the exterior by two belts of iron chain, one at the mid-level of the bays and the other at the top of the lancets; these are hidden behind the bars holding the stained glass. Additional metal supports are hidden under the eaves of the roof to brace the windows against the wind or other stress. Furthermore, the windows of the nave are slightly higher than the windows in the apse ( compared with ), making the chapel appear longer than it actually is.

There are two small alcoves set into the walls on the third traverse of the chapel, with archivolts or arches richly decorated above with painting and sculpture of angels. These were the places where the King and Queen worshipped during religious services; the King on the north side, the Queen on the south.

=== Vaults of the upper chapel ===
==Stained glass==

The most famous features of the chapel, among the finest of their type in the world, are the fifteen great stained-glass windows in the nave and apse of the upper chapel, which date from the mid-13th century, as well as the later rose window (put in place in the 15th century). The stone wall surface is reduced to little more than a delicate framework. The thousands of small pieces of glass turn the walls into great screens of coloured light, largely deep blues and reds, which gradually change in intensity from hour to hour.

Most of the windows were put into place between 1242 and 1248. The names of the glass artists are unknown, but the art historian Louis Grodecki identified what appear to be three different ateliers with different styles. The windows in the apse and most of the windows on the north wall of the nave are made by one workshop. These works are known for supple forms and costumes, with simplified features. The second workshop, named by Grodecki as Master of the Ezekiel window, made the Ezekiel and Daniel windows, as well as the window of the Kings. That work is characterized by elongated forms, and more elaborate and angular draperies. The third artist or workshop is called the Master of Judith and Esther, for the distinct style of those windows, as well as the window of Job. They are distinguished by more subtle details in the faces, and a resemblance to the figures in illuminated manuscripts.

Despite some damage the windows display a clear iconographical programme. The three windows of the eastern apse illustrate the New Testament, featuring scenes of The Passion (centre) with the Infancy of Christ (left) and the Life of John the Evangelist (right). By contrast, the windows of the nave are dominated by Old Testament exemplars of ideal kingship/queenship in an obvious nod to their royal patrons. The cycle starts at the western bay of the north wall with scenes from the Book of Genesis (heavily restored). The next ten windows of the nave follow clockwise with scenes from Exodus, Joseph, Numbers/Leviticus, Joshua/Deuteronomy, Judges, (moving to the south wall) Jeremiah/Tobias, Judith/Job, Esther, David and the Book of Kings. The final window, occupying the westernmost bay of the south wall brings this narrative of sacral kingship right up to date with a series of scenes showing the rediscovery of Christ&#x27;s relics, the miracles they performed, and their relocation to Paris in the hands of King Louis himself.
===The west rose window ===

The rose window at the west of the upper chapel was made in the late 15th century, later than the other windows. It is a very fine example of the flamboyant Gothic style, named for the flamelike curling designs. It is nine meters in diameter, and is composed of eighty-nine separate panels representing scenes of the Apocalypse. The 15th-century glass artists used a new technique, called silver stain, which allowed them to paint on the glass with enamel paints, and to use fire to fuse the paint onto the glass. This allowed them to modify the color, and create shading and other fine details. It was thoroughly cleaned in 2014–15, giving it greater brightness and clarity.

===Stained glass from Saint-Chapelle in other museums===
Some of the early stained glass that was removed from Saint-Chapelle is now found in the other museums, including the National Museum of the Middle Ages, or Musee de Cluny, in Paris and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. 
==Art and decoration==
===Sculpture===

Most of the sculpture of the portals was destroyed during the French Revolution, but between 1855 and 1870 the sculptor Adolphe-Victor Geoffroy-Dechaume was able to recreate it, using 18th century descriptions and engravings. One of the major works he recreated was the tympanum over the portal of the upper chapel, with a figure of Christ giving a blessing, with the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist alongside him. Two angels are behind him, holding the crown of thorns and the cross, the most famous relics of the chapel. On the lintel below, the sculpture depicts Saint Michael weighing the souls of the dead, with those sent to heaven on the left and those damned on the right. Sculpted Biblical scenes from the Old Testament fill the panels on lower walls, including the Creation and Noah&#x27;s ark. They were made by Geoffroy-Dechaume in 1869–70.

While most of the sculpture on the exterior dates to the 19th century, the apse of the upper chapel contains a number of original 12th century statues, which, unlike the exterior statues, were polychrome. Traces of color were found during the restoration in the 19th century, and the statues were restored to include those colors. The arches of the tribune in the apse at the east end, where the case of sacred relics was placed, is ornamented with the original polychrome angels from the 13th century.
The upper chapel walls also displayed a group of sixteen statues of the Apostles, which date to about 1240. Some portray the apostles in simple classical costumes and bare feet, while others are polychrome and have much more elaborate clerical costumes. Some of these statues are now found in the collection of the National Museum of the Middle Ages in the Musée de Cluny.

=== Painting ===

The goal of the two principal architects of the 19th century restoration, Durban and Lassus, was to recreate the interior, as much as possible, as it appeared in the 13th century. They collected traces of the original polychrome paint from the columns, and in 1842 presented a comprehensive plan for interior decoration. In the soubassements, the lower portions where no traces of original color were found, they used a neutral tone, to avoid conflicting with the colors of the stained glass windows. For their palette of colors on other decoration, they drew upon the illuminations of a 13th-century book of Psalm from the Royal Library. They systematically repainted the forty-four 13th-century quadrilobe medallions on the stone arches of the soubassements, which depicted the martyrdom of saints presented against a gilded background. In 1845 Steinheil continued by repainting all of the medallions of the nave, with the exception of those in the two royal alcoves, following the original compositions. In 1983 the Service of Historic Monuments cleaned four of the medallions which had not been restored, and un-restored two which had been repainted, to study the original traces of paint from before 1845.

== The relics and the reliquary ==
The principal relics for which the chapel was built were the crown of thorns, believed to have been worn by Christ during his Passion, and a small piece of the cross on which he was crucified. These were found in Constantinople, which had been captured by the Crusaders in 1204, and was then ruled by Baudouin II of Cortenay. Baudouin agreed to sell the crown for 135,000 livres, which went primarily to Venetian bankers, to whom he had mortgaged the crown to pay for the defence of the city. By purchasing the crown, Louis gained the prestige of funding the conquest of Constantinople, as well as displaying his personal devotion. The crown arrived in August 1239 and was placed in the earlier royal chapel of St. Nicholas, near the palace. Two years later, he made an additional purchase from Baudouin of a piece of the true cross and other relics related to the Passion, which were brought to Paris in September 1241. Thereafter, on each Holy Friday, the day of the Crucifixion, he conducted a solemn ceremony at Sainte-Chapelle, in which the relic was brought out and displayed to the faithful.

The King had a large chasse made to hold and display the sacred objects. This was a case, open on the front, long, made of silver and gilded copper. Each of the individual objects had its own case of precious metal with jewels. This was originally placed above the altar, but between 1264 and 1267, it was placed atop a high tribune in the apse of the church, where everyone could see it. In 1306, a new sacred relic was added: a portion of the skull of Louis himself, since he had been declared a saint.

During the French Revolution, the Chasse and the vessels holding the relics were taken apart and melted down for their jewels and precious metals. The fragment of the cross was transferred first in 1793 to a collection of antiquities, then given to the Bishop of Paris. A new reliquary of gold and crystal was made for the crown of thorns. Since the Concordat of 1801, it was displayed in the treasury of the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, but it was saved from the Notre-Dame de Paris fire on 15 April 2019 and has since been kept in the Louvre Museum.

== Organ ==

An organ is attested from the beginning; it was replaced in 1493, 1550 and 1762. it was not until July 1791 when the organ was transferred from the Sainte-Chapelle to Saint-Germain l&#x27;Auxerrois due to the French Revolution. The organ was built by François-Henri Clicquot, in a case designed by Pierre-Noël Rousset in 1752. However, its Neoclassical style seems to some writers to be too modern for that date.

==Other &quot;Saintes-Chapelles&quot;==
Prior to the dissolution of the Sainte-Chapelle in 1803, following the French Revolution, the term &quot;Sainte-Chapelle royale&quot; also referred not only to the building but to the &quot;chapelle&quot; itself, the choir of Sainte-Chapelle. However, the term was also applied to a number of other buildings. 
Louis IX&#x27;s chapel inspired several &quot;copies&quot;, in the sense of royal or ducal chapels of broadly similar architectural form, built to house relics, particularly fragments of Louis&#x27; Passion Relics given by the King. Such chapels were normally attached to a ducal palace (e.g. Bourges, Riom), or else to an Abbey with particular links to the royal family (e.g. St-Germer-de-Fly). As with the original, such Holy Chapels were nearly always additional to the regular palatine or abbatial chapel, with their own dedicated clergy—usually established as a college of canons. For the patrons, such chapels served not only as public expressions of personal piety but also as valuable diplomatic tools, encouraging important visitors to come and venerate their relics and showing their connection to the French crown. Notable &quot;Saintes-Chapelles&quot; in France include:

* Bourbon-l&#x27;Archambault: Founded by Louis IX&#x27;s grandson, Duke Louis I de Bourbon to house a fragment of the True Cross
* Chambéry: Founded 
* Châteaudun: Founded 1451
* Bourges: Founded 1392 by Duke Jean de Berry decorated with sculptures and stained glass by André Beauneveu. Now destroyed.
* Riom: Founded 1382 by Jean de Berry
* Saint-Germer-de-Fly Abbey: A very similar structure, also called the Sainte-Chapelle, was erected twelve years after the Paris chapel as an addition to the abbey church.
* Vincennes: Founded 1379 at one of the favourite Valois royal palaces by Charles V
* Vivier-en-Brie: Founded 1358 by the future Charles V while he was still the Dauphin

As the status of Saint Louis grew among Europe&#x27;s aristocracy, the influence of his famous chapel also extended beyond France, with important copies at Karlštejn Castle near Prague (), the Hofburgkapelle in Vienna (consecrated 1449), Collegiate Church of the Holy Cross and St. Bartholomew, Wrocław (c. 1350) and Exeter College, Oxford (1860).

==See also==
* French Gothic architecture
* French Gothic stained glass windows
* Gothic architecture
* Gothic cathedrals and churches
* List of historic churches in Paris
* Lady Leng Memorial Chapel
* List of tourist attractions in Paris

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===

== Bibliography ==
* boom

==Further reading==
* Gebelin, F. (1937) &quot;La Sainte Chapelle et la Conciergerie&quot;. Paris.
* Smith, Elizabeth Bradford. (2015). ‘All my stained glass which I brought from Europe’: William Poyntell and the Sainte-Chapelle medallions.&quot; &quot;Journal of the History of Collections.&quot; V.27 (November): 323–334.

==External links==
* L&#x27;Internaute Magazine: Diaporama (in French)
* Informative Article From 1921 On Sainte Chapelle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193193" start="4" end="19" title="Sainte-Chapelle" label="Sainte-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147981" start="30" end="42" title="royal chapel" label="royal chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="50" end="56" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047247" start="84" end="101" title="Palais de la Cité" label="Palais de la Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="124" end="139" title="Kings of France" label="Kings of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q190063" start="171" end="185" title="Île de la Cité" label="Île de la Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="199" end="204" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="208" end="213" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="282" end="293" title="consecration" label="consecrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914850" start="384" end="393" title="Rayonnant" label="Rayonnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="404" end="423" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="453" end="471" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="499" end="506" title="Passion (Christianity)" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="507" end="512" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="539" end="554" title="Crown of Thorns" label="Crown of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="602" end="613" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="649" end="669" title="Notre-Dame Cathedral" label="Notre-Dame Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q63167656" start="680" end="689" title="Notre-Dame fire" label="2019 fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q138101" start="726" end="738" title="Conciergerie" label="Conciergerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937731" start="806" end="814" title="House of Capet" label="Capetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="879" end="896" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="977" end="990" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1073" end="1108" title="French Centre of National Monuments" label="French Centre of National Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q138101" start="1132" end="1144" title="Conciergerie" label="Conciergerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="1285" end="1296" title="Carolingian" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458522" start="1324" end="1339" title="Palatine Chapel, Aachen" label="Palatine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1343" end="1354" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q580499" start="1446" end="1453" title="oratory (worship)" label="oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="1539" end="1571" title="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="2302" end="2319" title="Count of Flanders" label="Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2333" end="2350" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="2469" end="2488" title="Western Christianity" label="western Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="2637" end="2649" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2653" end="2667" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="2818" end="2829" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="2856" end="2862" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="3034" end="3044" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="3106" end="3117" title="Innocent IV" label="Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q138101" start="3363" end="3375" title="Conciergerie" label="Conciergerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="3397" end="3405" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3437" end="3443" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="3464" end="3479" title="crown of thorns" label="crown of thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q223246" start="3485" end="3500" title="Image of Edessa" label="Image of Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="3551" end="3558" title="Passion of Christ" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q269573" start="3571" end="3581" title="Baldwin II, Latin Emperor" label="Baldwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="3587" end="3600" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3604" end="3618" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670039" start="3643" end="3649" title="Livre tournois" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="3783" end="3789" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="3797" end="3812" title="Dominican friar" label="Dominican friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q663673" start="4392" end="4412" title="Château de Vincennes" label="Château de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="4449" end="4481" title="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="4509" end="4519" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q478195" start="4528" end="4538" title="Holy Lance" label="Holy Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="4765" end="4780" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4869" end="4894" title=" Marc-Antoine Charpentier" label=" Marc-Antoine Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q573807" start="5004" end="5018" title="Jean de Jandun" label="Jean de Jandun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="5654" end="5671" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="6355" end="6372" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424434" start="6750" end="6775" title="relics of Sainte-Chapelle" label="relics of Sainte-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="6801" end="6820" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967773" start="6863" end="6876" title="Chasse (casket)" label="grande châsse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="7417" end="7431" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q653434" start="7497" end="7508" title="Félix Duban" label="Félix Duban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163757" start="7518" end="7538" title="Jean-Baptiste Lassus" label="Jean-Baptiste Lassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844549" start="7543" end="7561" title="Émile Boeswillwald" label="Émile Boeswillwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q272912" start="7578" end="7599" title="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc" label="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124095" start="8328" end="8342" title="Musée de Cluny" label="Musée de Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931130" start="8939" end="8956" title="Villum Foundation" label="Villum Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="9230" end="9239" title="Louis IX of France" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="9266" end="9274" title="Louis IX" label="Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="9297" end="9312" title="Crown of Thorns" label="Crown of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="9512" end="9531" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q945884" start="9543" end="9566" title="Sainte-Chapelle Gospels" label="Sainte-Chapelle Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="9670" end="9679" title="Louis XII" label="Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="10119" end="10138" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="10420" end="10446" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914850" start="10460" end="10469" title="Rayonnant" label="Rayonnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="10646" end="10652" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111117" start="11089" end="11096" title="crocket" label="crocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="11100" end="11105" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q847108" start="11159" end="11170" title="bar tracery" label="bar tracery"/>
<link wikidata="Q959203" start="11338" end="11356" title="Reuleaux triangle" label="spherical triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314747" start="11724" end="11743" title="Pierre de Montreuil" label="Pierre de Montreuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="11782" end="11808" title="Saint Denis Basilica" label="Royal Abbey of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="11852" end="11881" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame Cathedral in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342319" start="11984" end="11998" title="Robert Branner" label="Robert Branner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="12063" end="12069" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q106934" start="12168" end="12184" title="Amiens Cathedral" label="Amiens Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q932828" start="12269" end="12284" title="Noyon Cathedral" label="Noyon Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12472" end="12477" title="Mosan art#Metal work" label="Mosan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351624" start="12810" end="12820" title="flamboyant" label="flamboyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="13012" end="13024" title="fleur-de-lys" label="fleur-de-lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="13043" end="13062" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="13802" end="13811" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q211062" start="13851" end="13885" title="Tres Riches Heures du Duc de Berry" label="Tres Riches Heures du Duc de Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="14338" end="14350" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Saint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="14355" end="14372" title="Saint Bartholomew" label="Saint Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="14451" end="14462" title="Passion of Jesus" label="The Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="14500" end="14517" title="Archangel Michael" label="Archangel Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413441" start="15260" end="15270" title="quatrefoil" label="quatrefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="16144" end="16156" title="Fleur-de-Lys" label="Fleur-de-Lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q353" start="16219" end="16237" title="Blanche of Castile" label="Blanche of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="17690" end="17702" title="Annunciation" label="Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q636008" start="18930" end="18940" title="archivolts" label="archivolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="19312" end="19325" title="stained-glass" label="stained-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250492" start="19865" end="19879" title="Louis Grodecki" label="Louis Grodecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="21708" end="21719" title="rose window" label="rose window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351624" start="21850" end="21860" title="flamboyant" label="flamboyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="22021" end="22031" title="Apocalypse" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="22093" end="22105" title="Silver stain (glass)" label="silver stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124095" start="22595" end="22609" title="Musee de Cluny" label="Musee de Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="22628" end="22654" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124095" start="24422" end="24436" title="Musée de Cluny" label="Musée de Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="25830" end="25837" title="Passion of Christ" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="25964" end="25973" title="Crusaders" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670039" start="26076" end="26082" title="Livre tournois" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="26526" end="26536" title="true cross" label="true cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="26645" end="26656" title="Holy Friday" label="Holy Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967773" start="26825" end="26831" title="Chasse (casket)" label="chasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428015" start="27660" end="27677" title="Concordat of 1801" label="Concordat of 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="27732" end="27751" title="Notre Dame de Paris" label="Notre Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q63167656" start="27779" end="27803" title="Notre-Dame de Paris fire" label="Notre-Dame de Paris fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="27852" end="27865" title="Louvre" label="Louvre Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429394" start="28048" end="28078" title="Saint-Germain l&amp;#x27;Auxerrois" label="Saint-Germain l&amp;#x27;Auxerrois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="28406" end="28423" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402335" start="28552" end="28576" title="Sainte-Chapelle (choir)" label="choir of Sainte-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q245080" start="29532" end="29558" title="Bourbon-l&amp;#x27;Archambault" label="Bourbon-l&amp;#x27;Archambault"/>
<link wikidata="Q536615" start="29597" end="29620" title="Louis I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Duke Louis I de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165090" start="29661" end="29669" title="Chambéry" label="Chambéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181886" start="29682" end="29692" title="Châteaudun" label="Châteaudun"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="29709" end="29716" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q346761" start="29739" end="29752" title="Jean de Berry" label="Jean de Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q516990" start="29800" end="29815" title="André Beauneveu" label="André Beauneveu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207575" start="29834" end="29838" title="Riom" label="Riom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833461" start="29872" end="29897" title="Saint-Germer-de-Fly Abbey" label="Saint-Germer-de-Fly Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q193819" start="30044" end="30053" title="Vincennes" label="Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="30116" end="30125" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="30204" end="30211" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q266698" start="30369" end="30385" title="Karlštejn Castle" label="Karlštejn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46242" start="30406" end="30420" title="Hofburg Palace" label="Hofburgkapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="30424" end="30430" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11741013" start="30451" end="30515" title="Collegiate Church of the Holy Cross and St. Bartholomew, Wrocław" label="Collegiate Church of the Holy Cross and St. Bartholomew, Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="30530" end="30552" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245347" start="30577" end="30603" title="French Gothic architecture" label="French Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854258" start="30606" end="30641" title="French Gothic stained glass windows" label="French Gothic stained glass windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="30644" end="30663" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379745" start="30666" end="30696" title="Gothic cathedrals and churches" label="Gothic cathedrals and churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q115533277" start="30699" end="30733" title="List of historic churches in Paris" label="List of historic churches in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q122920105" start="30736" end="30761" title="Lady Leng Memorial Chapel" label="Lady Leng Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403319" start="30764" end="30800" title="List of tourist attractions in Paris" label="List of tourist attractions in Paris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74344" wikidata="Q78454" url="?curid=74344" title="William the Silent">
<text>William the Silent or William the Taciturn (; 24 April 153310 July 1584), more commonly known in the Netherlands as William of Orange (), was the leader of the Dutch revolt against the Spanish Habsburgs that set off the Eighty Years&#x27; War (1568–1648) and resulted in the formal independence of the United Provinces in 1648. Born into the House of Nassau, he became Prince of Orange in 1544 and is thereby the founder of the Orange-Nassau branch and the ancestor of the monarchy of the Netherlands. In the Netherlands, he is also known as Father of the Fatherland (; ).

A wealthy nobleman, William originally served the Habsburgs as a member of the court of Margaret of Parma, governor of the Spanish Netherlands. Unhappy with the centralisation of political power away from the local estates and with the Spanish persecution of Dutch Protestants, William joined the Dutch uprising and turned against his former masters. The most influential and politically capable of the rebels, he led the Dutch to several successes in the fight against the Spanish. Declared an outlaw by the Spanish king in 1580, he was assassinated by Balthasar Gérard in Delft in 1584.

==Early life and education==
William was born on 24 April 1533 at Dillenburg Castle in the County of Nassau-Dillenburg, in the Holy Roman Empire (now in Hesse, German Federal Republic). He was the eldest son of Count William I of Nassau-Siegen and his second wife, Countess Juliana of Stolberg. William&#x27;s father had one surviving daughter by his previous marriage to Walburga of Egmont, and his mother had four surviving children by her previous marriage to Philipp II, Count of Hanau-Münzenberg. His parents had twelve children together, of whom William was the eldest; he had four younger brothers and seven younger sisters. The family was religiously devout and William was raised a Lutheran.

In 1544, William&#x27;s agnatic first cousin, René of Chalon, Prince of Orange, died in the siege of St Dizier, childless. In his testament, René of Chalon named William the heir to all his estates and titles, including that of Prince of Orange, on the condition that he receive a Roman Catholic education. William&#x27;s father acquiesced to this condition on behalf of his 11-year-old son, and this was the founding of the House of Orange-Nassau. Besides the Principality of Orange (located today in France) and significant lands in Germany, William also inherited vast estates in the Low Countries (present-day Netherlands and Belgium) from his cousin. Because of William&#x27;s young age, Emperor Charles V, who was the overlord of most of these estates, served no one.
William received his Catholic education in the Low Countries, first at his family&#x27;s estate in Breda and later in Brussels under the supervision of the Emperor&#x27;s sister Mary of Hungary, governor of the Habsburg Netherlands (Seventeen Provinces). In Brussels, he was taught foreign languages and received a military and diplomatic education under the direction of Jérôme Perrenot de Champagney, brother of Cardinal de Granvelle.

On 6 July 1551, William married Anna, daughter and heir of Maximiliaan van Egmond, an important Dutch nobleman, a match that had been secured by Charles V. Anna&#x27;s father had died in 1548, and therefore William became Lord of Egmond and Count of Buren upon his wedding day. The marriage was a happy one and produced three children, one of whom died in infancy. Anna died on 24 March 1558, aged 25, leaving William much grieved.

==Career==

===Imperial favourite===
Being a ward of Charles V and having received his education under the tutelage of the Emperor&#x27;s sister Mary, William came under the particular attention of the imperial family, and became a favourite. He was appointed captain in the cavalry in 1551 and received rapid promotion thereafter, becoming commander of one of the Emperor&#x27;s armies at the age of 22. This was in 1555, when Charles sent him to Bayonne with an army of 20,000 to take the city in a siege from the French. William was also made a member of the Raad van State, the highest political advisory council in the Netherlands. It was in November of the same year (1555) that the gout-afflicted Emperor Charles leaned on William&#x27;s shoulder during the ceremony when he abdicated the Low Countries in favour of his son, Philip II of Spain. William was also selected to carry the insignia of the Holy Roman Empire to Charles&#x27;s brother Ferdinand, when Charles resigned the imperial crown in 1556 and was one of the Spanish signatories for the April 1559 Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis.

In 1559, Philip II appointed William stadtholder (governor) of the provinces of Holland, Zeeland and Utrecht, thereby greatly increasing his political power. A stadtholdership over Franche-Comté followed in 1561.

===From politician to rebel===

Although he never directly opposed the Spanish king, William soon became one of the most prominent members of the opposition in the Council of State, together with Philip de Montmorency, Count of Hoorn, and Lamoral, Count of Egmont. They were mainly seeking more political power for themselves against the &quot;de facto&quot; government of Count Berlaymont, Granvelle and Viglius of Aytta, but also for the Dutch nobility and, ostensibly, for the Estates, and complained that too many Spaniards were involved in governing the Netherlands. William was also dissatisfied with the increasing persecution of Protestants in the Netherlands. Brought up as a Lutheran and later a Catholic, William was very religious but was still a proponent of freedom of religion for all people. The activity of the Inquisition in the Netherlands, directed by Cardinal Granvelle, prime minister to the new governor Margaret of Parma (1522–1583, natural half-sister to Philip II), increased opposition to Spanish rule among the then mostly Catholic population of the Netherlands. Lastly, the opposition wished to see an end to the presence of Spanish troops.

According to the &quot;Apology&quot;, William&#x27;s letter of justification, which was published and read to the States General in December 1580, his resolve to expel the Spaniards from the Netherlands had originated when, in the summer of 1559, he and the Duke of Alba had been sent to France as hostages for the proper fulfilment of the Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis following the Hispano-French war. During his stay in Paris, on a hunting trip to the Bois de Vincennes, King Henry II of France started to discuss with William a secret understanding between Philip II and himself aimed at the violent extermination of Protestantism in France, the Netherlands &quot;and the entire Christian world&quot;. The understanding was being negotiated by Alba, and Henry had assumed, incorrectly, that William was aware of it. At the time, William did not contradict the king&#x27;s assumption, but he had decided for himself that he would not allow the slaughter of &quot;so many honourable people&quot;, especially in the Netherlands, for which he felt a strong compassion.

On 25 August 1561, William of Orange married for the second time. His new wife, Anna of Saxony, was described by contemporaries as &quot;self-absorbed, weak, assertive, and cruel&quot;, and it is generally assumed that William married her to gain more influence in Saxony, Hesse and the Palatinate. The couple had five children. The marriage used Lutheran rites, and marked the beginning of a gradual change in his religious opinions, which was to lead William to revert to Lutheranism and eventually moderate Calvinism. Still, he remained tolerant of other religious opinions.
Up to this time William&#x27;s life had been marked by lavish display and extravagance. He surrounded himself with a retinue of young noblemen and dependents and kept open house in his magnificent Nassau palace at Brussels. Consequently, the revenue of his vast estates was not sufficient to prevent him being crippled by debt. But after his return from France, a change began to come over William. Philip made him councillor of state, knight of the Golden Fleece, and stadtholder of Holland, Zeeland and Utrecht, but there was a latent antagonism between the natures of the two men.

Up to 1564, any criticism of governmental measures voiced by William and the other members of the opposition had ostensibly been directed at Granvelle; however, after the latter&#x27;s departure early that year, William, who may have found increasing confidence in his alliance with the Protestant princes of Germany following his second marriage, began to openly criticise the King&#x27;s anti-Protestant politics. In August of that year, Philip issued an order for carrying out the decrees of the anti-Protestant Council of Trent. But, in an iconic speech to the Council of State, William to the shock of his audience justified his conflict with Philip by saying that, even though he had decided for himself to keep to the Catholic faith (at the time), he could not agree that monarchs should rule over the souls of their subjects and take from them their freedom of belief and religion.

In early 1565, a large group of lesser noblemen, including William&#x27;s younger brother Louis, formed the Confederacy of Noblemen. On 5 April, they offered a petition to Margaret of Parma, requesting an end to the persecution of Protestants. From August to October 1566, a wave of iconoclasm (known as the &quot;Beeldenstorm&quot;) spread through the Low Countries. Calvinists (the major Protestant denomination), Anabaptists, and Mennonites, angered by Catholic oppression and theologically opposed to the Catholic use of images of saints (which in their eyes conflicted with the Second Commandment), destroyed statues in hundreds of churches and monasteries throughout the Netherlands.

Following the Beeldenstorm, unrest in the Netherlands grew, and Margaret agreed to grant the wishes of the Confederacy, provided the noblemen would help to restore order. She also allowed more important noblemen, including William of Orange, to assist the Confederacy, and William went to Antwerp where he succeeded in quelling the riot. In late 1566, and early 1567, it became clear that she would not be allowed to fulfill her promises, and when several minor rebellions failed, many Calvinists and Lutherans fled the country. Following the announcement that Philip II, unhappy with the situation in the Netherlands, would dispatch his loyal general Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba, or Alva (also known as &quot;The Iron Duke&quot;), to restore order, William laid down his functions and retreated to his native Nassau in April 1567. He had been financially involved with several of the rebellions.

After his arrival in August 1567, Alba established the &quot;Council of Troubles&quot; (known to the people as the &quot;Council of Blood&quot;) to judge those involved in the rebellion and the iconoclasm. William was one of the 10,000 to be summoned before the council, but he failed to appear. He was subsequently declared an outlaw, and his properties were confiscated. As one of the most prominent and popular politicians of the Netherlands, William of Orange emerged as the leader of armed resistance. He financed the &quot;Watergeuzen&quot;, refugee Protestants who formed bands of corsairs and raided the coastal cities of the Netherlands (often killing Spanish and Dutch alike). He also raised an army, consisting mostly of German mercenaries, to fight Alba on land. William allied with the French Huguenots, following the end of the second Religious War in France when they had troops to spare. Led by his brother Louis, the army invaded the northern Netherlands in 1568. However, the plan failed almost from the start. The Huguenots were defeated by French royal troops before they could invade, and a small force under Jean de Villers was captured within two days. Villers gave all the plans of the campaign to the Spanish following his capture. On 23 May, the army under the command of Louis won the Battle of Heiligerlee in the northern province of Groningen against a Spanish army led by the stadtholder of the northern provinces, Jean de Ligne, Duke of Arenberg. Arenberg was killed in the battle, as was William&#x27;s brother Adolf. Alba countered by killing a number of convicted noblemen (including the Counts of Egmont and Hoorn on 6 June), and then by leading an expedition to Groningen. There, he annihilated Louis&#x27; forces on German territory in the Battle of Jemmingen on 21 July, although Louis managed to escape. These two battles are now considered to be the start of the Eighty Years&#x27; War.

===War===

In October 1568, William responded by leading a large army into Brabant, but Alba carefully avoided a decisive confrontation, expecting the army to fall apart quickly. As William advanced, disorder broke out in his army, and with winter approaching and money running out, William turned back and crossed into France. William made several more plans to invade in the next few years, but little came of them, since he lacked support and money. He remained popular with the public, in part through an extensive propaganda campaign conducted through pamphlets. One of his most important claims, with which he attempted to justify his actions, was that he was not fighting the rightful ruler of the land, the King of Spain, but only the inadequate rule of the foreign governors in the Netherlands, and the presence of foreign soldiers.

On 22 August 1571, his second wife Anna gave birth to a daughter, named Christina von Dietz, and fathered by Jan Rubens, best known as the father of painter Peter Paul Rubens; Jan Rubens had been sent by Anna&#x27;s uncle in 1570 to manage her finances. Later that year, William had this marriage legally dissolved on the grounds that Anna was insane.

On 1 April 1572, a group known as the Watergeuzen (&quot;Sea Beggars&quot;) captured the city of Brielle, which had been left unattended by the Spanish garrison. Contrary to their normal &quot;hit and run&quot; tactics, they occupied the town and claimed it for the prince by raising the Prince of Orange&#x27;s flag above the city. This event was followed by other cities opening their gates for the Watergeuzen, and soon most cities in Holland and Zeeland were in the hands of the rebels, notable exceptions being Amsterdam and Middelburg. The rebel cities then called a meeting of the &quot;Staten Generaal&quot; (which they were technically unqualified to do), and reinstated William as the stadtholder of Holland and Zeeland.

Concurrently, rebel armies captured cities throughout the entire country, from Deventer to Mons. William himself then advanced with his own army and marched into several cities in the south, including Roermond and Leuven. William had counted on intervention from the Huguenots as well, but this plan was thwarted after the St. Bartholomew&#x27;s Day Massacre on 24 August, which signalled the start of a wave of violence against the Huguenots. After a successful Spanish attack on his army, William had to flee and he retreated to Enkhuizen, in Holland. The Spanish then organised countermeasures, and sacked several rebel cities, sometimes massacring their inhabitants, such as in Mechelen or Zutphen. They had more trouble with the cities in Holland, where they took Haarlem after seven months and a loss of 8,000 soldiers, and they had to break off their siege of Alkmaar.

In 1573, William joined the Calvinist Church. He appointed a Calvinist theologian, Jean Taffin (1573–1581) as his court preacher. Taffin was later joined by Pierre Loyseleur de Villiers (1577–1584), who also became an important political advisor to the prince.

 In 1574, William&#x27;s armies won several minor battles, including several naval encounters. The Spanish, led by Don Luis de Zúñiga y Requesens since Philip replaced Alba in 1573, also had their successes. Their decisive victory in the Battle of Mookerheyde in the south east, on the Meuse embankment, on 14 April cost the lives of two of William&#x27;s brothers, Louis and Henry. Requesens&#x27;s armies also besieged the city of Leiden. They broke off their siege when nearby dykes were breached by the Dutch. William was content with the victory, and established the University of Leiden, the first university in the Northern Provinces.

William married for the third time on 24 April 1575 to Charlotte de Bourbon-Montpensier, a former French nun, who was also popular with the public, although less so with the Catholic faction. They had six daughters. The marriage, which seems to have been a love match on both sides, was happy.

After failed peace negotiations in Breda in 1575, the war continued. The situation improved for the rebels when Don Requesens died unexpectedly in March 1576, and a large group of Spanish soldiers, not having received their salary in months, mutinied in November of that year and unleashed the &quot;Spanish Fury&quot; on Antwerp, sacking the city in what became a tremendous propaganda coup for the rebels. While the new governor, Don Juan of Austria, was en route, William of Orange got most of the provinces and cities to sign the Pacification of Ghent, in which they declared themselves ready to fight for the expulsion of Spanish troops together. However, he failed to achieve unity in matters of religion. Catholic cities and provinces would not allow freedom for Calvinists.

When Don Juan signed the Perpetual Edict in February 1577, promising to comply with the conditions of the Pacification of Ghent, it seemed that the war had been decided in favour of the rebels. However, after Don Juan took the city of Namur in 1577, the uprising spread throughout the entire Netherlands. Don Juan attempted to negotiate peace, but the prince intentionally let the negotiations fail. On 24 September 1577, he made his triumphal entry into Brussels, the capital. At the same time, Calvinist rebels grew more radical, and attempted to forbid Catholicism in areas under their control. William was opposed to this both for personal and political reasons. He desired freedom of religion, and he also needed the support of the less radical Protestants and Catholics to reach his political goals. On 6 January 1579, several southern provinces, unhappy with William&#x27;s radical following, signed the Treaty of Arras, in which they agreed to accept their Catholic governor, Alessandro Farnese, Duke of Parma (who had succeeded Don Juan).

Five northern provinces, later followed by most cities in Brabant and Flanders, then signed the Union of Utrecht on 23 January, confirming their unity. William was initially opposed to the Union, as he still hoped to unite all provinces. Nevertheless, he formally gave his support on 3 May. The Union of Utrecht would later become a &quot;de facto&quot; constitution, and would remain the only formal connection between the Dutch provinces until 1797.

===Declaration of Independence===

In spite of the renewed union, the Duke of Parma was successful in reconquering most of the southern part of the Netherlands. Because he had agreed to remove the Spanish troops from the provinces under the Treaty of Arras, and because Philip II needed them elsewhere subsequently, the Duke of Parma was unable to advance any further until the end of 1581.

In March 1580 Philip issued a royal ban of outlawry against the Prince of Orange, promising a reward of 25,000 crowns to any man who would succeed in killing him. William responded with his &quot;Apology&quot;, a document (in fact written by Villiers) in which his course of actions was defended, the person of the Spanish king viciously attacked, and his own Protestant allegiance restated.

In the meantime, William and his supporters were looking for foreign support. The prince had already sought French assistance on several occasions, and this time he managed to gain the support of Francis, Duke of Anjou, brother of King Henry III of France. On 29 September 1580, the Staten Generaal (with the exception of Zeeland and Holland) signed the Treaty of Plessis-les-Tours with the Duke of Anjou. The Duke would gain the title &quot;Protector of the Liberty of the Netherlands&quot; and become the new sovereign. This, however, required that the Staten Generaal and William renounce their formal support of the King of Spain, which they had maintained officially up to that moment.

On 22 July 1581, the Staten Generaal declared that they no longer recognised Philip II of Spain as their ruler, in the Act of Abjuration. This formal declaration of independence enabled the Duke of Anjou to come to the aid of the resisters. He did not arrive until 10 February 1582, when he was officially welcomed by William in Flushing. On 18 March, the Spaniard Juan de Jáuregui attempted to assassinate William in Antwerp. Although William suffered severe injuries, he survived thanks to the care of his wife Charlotte and his sister Mary. While William slowly recovered, Charlotte became exhausted from providing intensive care and died on 5 May. The Duke of Anjou was not very popular with the population. The provinces of Zeeland and Holland refused to recognise him as their sovereign, and William was widely criticised for what was called his &quot;French politics&quot;. When Anjou&#x27;s French troops arrived in late 1582, William&#x27;s plan seemed to pay off, as even the Duke of Parma feared that the Dutch would now gain the upper hand.

However, Anjou himself was displeased with his limited powers and secretly decided to seize Antwerp by force. The citizens, who had been warned in time, ambushed Anjou and his troops as they entered the city on 18 January 1583,
in what is known as the &quot;French Fury&quot;. Almost all of Anjou&#x27;s men were killed, and he was reprimanded by both Catherine de Medici and Elizabeth I of England (whom he had courted). Anjou&#x27;s position became untenable, and he subsequently left the country in June. His departure discredited William, who nevertheless maintained his support for Anjou. William stood virtually alone on this issue and became politically isolated. Holland and Zeeland nevertheless maintained him as their stadtholder and attempted to declare him count of Holland and Zeeland, thus making him the official sovereign. In the middle of all this, William married for the fourth and final time on 12 April 1583 to Louise de Coligny, a widowed French Huguenot and daughter of Gaspard de Coligny. She was to be the mother of Frederick Henry (1584–1647), William&#x27;s fourth legitimate son. With her, &quot;Father William&quot;, as he was affectionately styled, settled at the Prinsenhof at Delft, and lived like a simple Dutch burgher.

==Assassination==

The Burgundian Catholic Balthasar Gérard (born 1557) was a subject and supporter of Philip II, and regarded William of Orange as a traitor to the king and to the Catholic religion. In 1581, when Gérard learned that Philip II had declared William an outlaw and promised a reward of 25,000 crowns for his assassination, he decided to travel to the Netherlands to kill William. He served in the army of the governor of Luxembourg, Peter Ernst I von Mansfeld-Vorderort, for two years, hoping to get close to William when the armies met. This never happened, and Gérard left the army in 1584. He went to the Duke of Parma to present his plans, but the Duke was unimpressed. In May 1584, he presented himself to William as a French nobleman, and gave him the seal of the Count of Mansfelt. This seal would allow forgeries of the messages of Mansfelt to be made. William sent Gérard back to France to pass the seal on to his French allies.

Gérard returned in July, having bought two wheel-lock pistols on his return journey. On 10 July, he made an appointment with William of Orange in his home in Delft, the Prinsenhof. That day, William was having dinner with his guest Rombertus van Uylenburgh. After William left the dining room and walked downstairs, van Uylenburgh heard Gérard shoot William in the chest at close range. Gérard fled immediately.

According to official records, William&#x27;s last words were:

Gérard was caught before he could escape Delft, and was imprisoned. He was tortured before his trial on 13 July, where he was sentenced to an execution brutal even by the standards of that time. The magistrates decreed that the right hand of Gérard should be burned off with a red-hot iron, that his flesh should be torn from his bones with pincers in six different places, that he should be quartered and disembowelled alive, that his heart should be torn from his chest and flung in his face, and that, finally, his head should be cut off.

William was the first politician to be assassinated by handgun. (The Scottish Regent Moray had been shot 13 years earlier in the first firearm assassination of a head of government.)

===Burial and tomb===

Traditionally, members of the Nassau family were buried in Breda, but as that city was under royal control when William died, he was buried in the New Church in Delft. The monument on his tomb was originally very modest, but it was replaced in 1623 by a new one, made by Hendrik de Keyser and his son Pieter.

Since then, most of the members of the House of Orange-Nassau, including all Dutch monarchs, have been buried in the same church. His great-grandson William III and II, King of England, Scotland and Ireland, and Stadtholder in the Netherlands, was buried in Westminster Abbey.

==Legacy==

===Succession and family ties===
Philip William, William&#x27;s eldest son by his first marriage, to Anna of Egmond, succeeded him as the Prince of Orange. However, as Philip William was a hostage in Spain and had been for most of his life, his brother Maurice of Nassau was appointed Stadholder and Captain-General at the suggestion of Johan van Oldenbarneveldt, and as a counterpoise to the Earl of Leicester. Phillip William died in Brussels on 20 February 1618 and was succeeded by his half-brother Maurice, the eldest son by William&#x27;s second marriage, to Anna of Saxony, who became Prince of Orange. A strong military leader, he won several victories over the Spanish. Van Oldenbarneveldt managed to sign a very favourable twelve-year armistice in 1609, although Maurice was unhappy with this. Maurice was a heavy drinker and died on 23 April 1625 from liver disease. Maurice had several sons by Margaretha van Mechelen, but he never married her. So, Frederick Henry, Maurice&#x27;s half-brother (and William&#x27;s youngest son from his fourth marriage, to Louise de Coligny) inherited the title of Prince of Orange. Frederick Henry continued the battle against the Spanish. Frederick Henry died on 14 March 1647 and is buried with his father William &quot;The Silent&quot; in Nieuwe Kerk, Delft. The Netherlands became formally independent after the Peace of Münster in 1648.

The son of Frederick Henry, William II of Orange succeeded his father as stadtholder, as did his son, William III of Orange. The latter also became king of England, Scotland and Ireland from 1689. Although he was married to Mary II, Queen of Scotland and England for 17 years, he died childless in 1702. He appointed his cousin Johan Willem Friso (William&#x27;s great-great-great-grandson) as his successor as the Prince of Orange. Because Albertine Agnes, a daughter of Frederick Henry, married William Frederik of Nassau-Dietz, the present royal house of the Netherlands is descended from William the Silent through the female line. See House of Orange for a more extensive overview. As the chief financer and political and military leader of the early years of the Dutch revolt, William is considered a national hero in the Netherlands, even though he was born in Germany, and usually spoke French.

In the 19th century the Netherlands became a constitutional monarchy, currently with King Willem-Alexander as head of state: he has cognatic descent from William of Orange. All stadtholders after William of Orange were drawn from his descendants or the descendants of his brother.

Many of the Dutch national symbols can be traced back to William of Orange:

* He is the ancestor of the Dutch monarchy
* The flag of the Netherlands (red, white and blue) is derived from the flag of the prince, which was orange, white and blue.
* The coat of arms of the Netherlands is based on that of William of Orange. Its motto &quot;Je maintiendrai&quot; (French, &quot;I will maintain&quot;) was also used by William, who based it on the motto of his cousin René of Chalon, who used &quot;Je maintiendrai Chalon&quot;.
* The national anthem of the Netherlands, the &quot;Wilhelmus&quot;, was originally a propaganda song for William. It was probably written by Philips of Marnix, Lord of Saint-Aldegonde, a supporter of him.
* The national colour of the Netherlands is orange, and it is used, among other things, in the clothing of Dutch athletes.
* The Prussian Order of the Black Eagle, founded by Frederick I of Prussia in 1702, had an orange sash in honour of his mother, Louise Henriette of Nassau, who was the granddaughter of William the Silent.

Other remembrances of William of Orange:
*A statue of William the Silent was erected in 1928 on the main campus of Rutgers University across from the New Brunswick Theological Seminary of the Reformed Church in America in New Brunswick, New Jersey, a legacy of the university&#x27;s founding by ministers of the Dutch Reformed Church in 1766. The statue is commonly known to students and alumni as &quot;Willie the Silent&quot; or &quot;Silent Bill&quot; and contains an inscription referring to William as &quot;Father of his Fatherland&quot;.
*Another statue of William the Silent was erected in 1908 in front of the Marktkirche, Wiesbaden, Germany. The statue is a copy of the original statue by Walter Schott in front of the Berlin Palace, which was destroyed in the World War II.
*In January 2008, the asteroid 12151 Oranje-Nassau was named after him.

===Epithet===

There are several explanations for the origin of the style, &quot;William the Silent&quot;. The most common one relates to his prudence in regard to a conversation with Henry II, the king of France.
One day, during a stag-hunt in the Bois de Vincennes, Henry, finding himself alone with the Prince, began to speak of the great number of Protestant who, during the late war, had increased so much in his kingdom to his great sorrow. His conscience, said the King, would not be easy nor his realm secure until he could see it purged of the &quot;accursed vermin,&quot; who would one day overthrow his government, under the cover of religion, if they were allowed to get the upper hand. This was the more to be feared since some of the chief men in the kingdom, and even some princes of the blood, were on their side. But he hoped by the grace of God and the good understanding that he had with his new son, the King of Spain, that he would soon get the better of them. The King talked on thus to Orange in the full conviction that he was aware of the secret agreement recently made with the Duke of Alba for the extirpation of heresy. But the Prince, subtle and adroit as he was, answered the good King in such a way as to leave him still under the impression that he, the Prince, knew all about the scheme proposed by Alba; and on this understanding the King revealed all the details of the plan which had been arranged between the King of Spain and himself for the rooting out and rigorous punishment of the heretics, from the lowest to the highest rank, and in this service the Spanish troops were to be mainly employed.

Exactly when and by whom the nickname &quot;the Silent&quot; was used for the first time is not known with certainty. It is traditionally ascribed to Cardinal de Granvelle, who is said to have referred to William as &quot;the silent one&quot; sometime during the troubles of 1567. Both the nickname and the accompanying anecdote are first found in a historical source from the early 17th century.

In the Netherlands, William is known as the &quot;Vader des Vaderlands&quot;, &quot;Father of the Fatherland&quot;, and the Dutch national anthem, the &quot;Wilhelmus&quot;, was written in his honour.

===Popular culture===
* This proverb is often attributed to William, but it has not been found in his written texts, and it is also attributed to William II, William III and Charles the Bold.
* He is featured as a playable leader in the computer strategy game series &quot;Civilization&quot;, appearing in &quot;Civilization III: Conquests&quot;, &quot;Civilization IV: Beyond the Sword&quot;, and &quot;Civilization V: Gods &amp; Kings&quot;.
* A Dutch YouTube channel called Studio Massa has a series of videos featuring him as a rapper who goes by the artistic name of Stille Willem (Silent William). The most famous of such videos are &quot;Fijn Uitgedoste Barbaar&quot; (Finely Clothed Barbarian) and &quot;Specerijen&quot; (Spices).

==Personal life==

===First marriage===
In the castle of Buren on 6 July 1551, the 18-year-old William married Anna van Egmond en Buren, aged 18 and the wealthy heiress to the lands of her father. William thus gained the titles Lord of Egmond and Count of Buren. The couple had a happy marriage and became the parents of three children together; their son Philip William would succeed William as prince. Anna died on 24 March 1558, leaving William much grieved.

A couple of years after Anna&#x27;s death, William had a brief relationship with Eva Elincx, a commoner, leading to the birth of an illegitimate son, Justinus van Nassau: William officially recognised Justinus as his son and took responsibility for his education – Justinus would become an admiral in adult life.

===Second marriage===
On 25 August 1561, William of Orange married for the second time. His new wife, Anna of Saxony, was tumultuous, and it is generally assumed that William married her to gain more influence in Saxony, Hesse and the Palatinate. The couple had two sons and three daughters. One of the sons died in infancy and the other son, the famous Maurice of Nassau, who was to eventually succeed his father as stadtholder, never married. Anna died after William renounced her and her own family imprisoned her in one of their castles. The cause was due to the accusation that she committed adultery with the lawyer Jan Rubens (father of the famous painter Peter Paul Rubens), and became pregnant by him, giving birth to a daughter. Before her death William had already announced his third marriage, which drew the disapproval of her family who argued that, despite the adultery, the two were still married.

===Third marriage===

William married for the third time on 12 June 1575 to Charlotte de Bourbon-Montpensier, a former French nun, who was also popular with the public. They had six daughters. The marriage, which seems to have been a love match on both sides, was happy. Charlotte allegedly died from exhaustion while trying to nurse her husband after an assassination attempt in 1582. Though William was outwardly stoical, it was feared that his grief might cause a fatal relapse. Charlotte&#x27;s death was widely mourned.

===Fourth marriage===

William married for the fourth and final time on 12 April 1583 to Louise de Coligny, a French Huguenot and daughter of Gaspard de Coligny. She was to be the mother of Frederick Henry (1584–1647), William&#x27;s fourth legitimate son and fifteenth legitimate child. This youngest of William&#x27;s children, who was born only a few months before William&#x27;s death, was to be the only one of his sons to bear children and carry the dynasty forward. Incidentally, Frederick Henry&#x27;s only male-line grandson, William III, would become king of England, Scotland and Ireland, but he would die childless, at which point the agnatic lineage of William the Silent would end, to be succeeded by that of his brother John VI.

===Issue===
Between his first and second marriages, William had a common law relationship with Eva Elincx. They had a son, Justinus van Nassau (1559–1631), whom William acknowledged. On 4 December 1597 Justinus van Nassau married Anne, Baronesse de Mérode (9 January 1567 – Leiden, 8 October 1634). They had three children.

==Coats of arms and titles==
A noble&#x27;s power was generally based on his ownership of vast tracts of land and lucrative offices. Besides being ruler over the principality of Orange and a Knight of the Golden Fleece, William possessed other estates, mostly enfeoffed to some other sovereign, either the King of France or the imperial Habsburgs. As holder of these fiefs, he was &quot;inter alia&quot;:

* Marquis of Veere and Vlissingen
* Count of Nassau-Dillenburg, Katzenelnbogen, and Vianden
* Viscount of Antwerp
* Baron of Breda, Lands of Cuijk, City of Grave, Diest, Herstal, Warneton, Beilstein, Arlay, and Nozeroy; Lord of Dasburg, Geertruidenberg, Hooge en Lage Zwaluwe, Klundert, Montfort, Naaldwijk, Niervaart, Polanen, Steenbergen, Willemstad, Bütgenbach, Sankt Vith, and Besançon

William used two sets of arms in his lifetime. The first one shown below was his ancestral arms of Nassau. The second arms he used most of his life from the time he became Prince of Orange on the death of his cousin René of Chalon. He placed the arms of Chalon-Arlay as princes of Orange as an inescutcheon on his father&#x27;s arms. In 1582, William purchased the marquisate of Veere and Vlissingen in Zeeland. It had been the property of Philip II since 1567, but had fallen into arrears to the province. In 1580, the Court of Holland ordered it sold. William bought it as it gave him two more votes in the States of Zeeland. He owned the government of the two towns, and so could appoint their magistrates. He already had one as First Noble for Philip William, who had inherited Maartensdijk. This made William the predominant member of the States of Zeeland. It was a smaller version of the countship of Zeeland (and Holland) promised to William, and was a potent political base for his descendants. William then added the shield of Veere and Buren to his arms as shown in the third coat of arms below. It shows how arms were used to represent political power in general, and the growing political power of William.

==Ancestry==

==See also==
* Pompey (dog)
* List of monarchs of the Netherlands

==Notes==
==References==
* Petrus Johannes Blok, &quot;History of the People of the Netherlands&quot;. New York: G. P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons, 1898.
* Herbert H. Rowen, &quot;The Princes of Orange: The Stadholders in the Dutch Republic&quot;. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
* Jardine, Lisa. &quot;The Awful End of William the Silent: The First Assassination of a Head of State with A Handgun&quot;. London: HarperCollins: 2005: 
* John Lothrop Motley. &quot;The Rise of the Dutch Republic&quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers Publishers, 1855.
* John Lothrop Motley. &quot;History of the United Netherlands from the Death of William the Silent to the Synod of Dort&quot;. London: John Murray, 1860.
* John Lothrop Motley. &quot;The Life and Death of John of Barneveld: Advocate of Holland&quot;. New York and London: Harper &amp; Brothers Publishers, 1874.
*van der Lem, Anton. 1995. &quot;De Opstand in de Nederlanden 1555–1609&quot;. Utrecht: Kosmos. .
*Various authors. 1977. &quot;Winkler Prins – Geschiedenis der Nederlanden&quot;. Amsterdam: Elsevier. .
*Wedgwood, Cicely Veronica. &quot;William the Silent: William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, 1533–1584&quot;. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1944.

==Further reading==
*Shorto, Russell (2013). &quot;Amsterdam: A History of the World&#x27;s Most Liberal City&quot;. New York: Doubleday.

==External links==
*The Revolt of the Netherlands
*Het Huis van Oranje-Nassau en de Nederlandse geschiedenis 
*Willem van Oranje. Dutch history website 
*The Complete Correspondence of William I of Orange. Digital archive by the Huygens Institute for Dutch History </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="0" end="18" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="22" end="42" title="William the Silent" label="William the Taciturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="101" end="112" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="116" end="133" title="William the Silent" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="193" end="202" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="220" end="242" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="302" end="318" title="Dutch Republic" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="342" end="357" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="369" end="385" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="428" end="448" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="Orange-Nassau branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="473" end="500" title="monarchy of the Netherlands" label="monarchy of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="542" end="566" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="584" end="592" title="nobleman" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="624" end="633" title="Habsburgs" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q307815" start="662" end="679" title="Margaret of Parma" label="Margaret of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="697" end="716" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="839" end="850" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="1069" end="1075" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q537169" start="1128" end="1144" title="Balthasar Gérard" label="Balthasar Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="1148" end="1153" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q822186" start="1230" end="1247" title="Dillenburg Castle" label="Dillenburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12817455" start="1265" end="1282" title="Nassau-Dillenburg" label="Nassau-Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1291" end="1308" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="1317" end="1322" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q796920" start="1324" end="1347" title="German Federal Republic" label="German Federal Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q688471" start="1381" end="1407" title="William I, Count of Nassau-Siegen" label="William I of Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q202566" start="1438" end="1457" title="Juliana of Stolberg" label="Juliana of Stolberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556143" start="1536" end="1554" title="Walburga of Egmont" label="Walburga of Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q91218" start="1627" end="1664" title="Philipp II, Count of Hanau-Münzenberg" label="Philipp II, Count of Hanau-Münzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1855" end="1863" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="1890" end="1897" title="agnatic" label="agnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q654855" start="1912" end="1926" title="René of Chalon" label="René of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="1928" end="1944" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486015" start="1958" end="1976" title="Siege of Saint-Dizier" label="siege of St Dizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="2291" end="2313" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="2559" end="2576" title="Emperor Charles V" label="Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="2687" end="2700" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="2739" end="2744" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="2758" end="2766" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q157077" start="2818" end="2833" title="Mary of Hungary (governor of the Netherlands)" label="Mary of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q700022" start="2835" end="2871" title="governor of the Habsburg Netherlands" label="governor of the Habsburg Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="2873" end="2892" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3012" end="3041" title="Nicolas Perrenot de Granvelle#Succession" label="Jérôme Perrenot de Champagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="3054" end="3075" title="Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle" label="Cardinal de Granvelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q266926" start="3110" end="3114" title="Anna of Egmont" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q707621" start="3137" end="3159" title="Maximiliaan van Egmond" label="Maximiliaan van Egmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q73061" start="3328" end="3333" title="Buren" label="Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="3771" end="3778" title="Captain (OF-2)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="3786" end="3793" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="3959" end="3966" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4073" end="4087" title="Council of State (Netherlands)#Habsburg Netherlands" label="Raad van State"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="4343" end="4361" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4418" end="4435" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="4462" end="4471" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q836963" start="4580" end="4606" title="Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis" label="Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="4646" end="4657" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="4689" end="4696" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705" start="4698" end="4705" title="Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q776" start="4710" end="4717" title="Utrecht (province)" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q16394" start="4790" end="4803" title="Franche-Comté" label="Franche-Comté"/>
<link wikidata="Q700105" start="5019" end="5056" title="Philip de Montmorency, Count of Hoorn" label="Philip de Montmorency, Count of Hoorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q435844" start="5062" end="5086" title="Lamoral, Count of Egmont" label="Lamoral, Count of Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316636" start="5196" end="5212" title="Charles de Berlaymont" label="Count Berlaymont"/>
<link wikidata="Q639344" start="5228" end="5244" title="Viglius" label="Viglius of Aytta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5460" end="5471" title="Protestant Church" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978029" start="5651" end="5662" title="Inquisition of the Netherlands" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="5695" end="5713" title="Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle" label="Cardinal Granvelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q700022" start="5741" end="5749" title="Governors of the Habsburg Netherlands" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q307815" start="5750" end="5767" title="Margaret of Parma" label="Margaret of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="6108" end="6122" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="States General"/>
<link wikidata="Q836963" start="6334" end="6360" title="Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis" label="Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="6470" end="6488" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q76488" start="7141" end="7155" title="Anna of Saxony" label="Anna of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="7326" end="7332" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="7348" end="7358" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="7571" end="7580" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780063" start="7836" end="7849" title="Nassau Palace (Brussels)" label="Nassau palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="8739" end="8755" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155243" start="8789" end="8805" title="Dutch Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q700300" start="9205" end="9210" title="Louis of Nassau" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639040" start="9223" end="9246" title="Compromise of Nobles" label="Confederacy of Noblemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="9398" end="9408" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q513860" start="9429" end="9441" title="Beeldenstorm" label="Beeldenstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="9483" end="9493" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="9531" end="9542" title="Anabaptists" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="9548" end="9558" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="9698" end="9716" title="Ten Commandments" label="Second Commandment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="9765" end="9776" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="10095" end="10102" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="10307" end="10315" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="10458" end="10502" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q877087" start="10782" end="10801" title="Council of Troubles" label="Council of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q699636" start="11250" end="11261" title="Geuzen" label="Watergeuzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="11309" end="11317" title="Privateer" label="corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="11460" end="11471" title="mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="11520" end="11536" title="French Huguenots" label="French Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q505699" start="12033" end="12054" title="Battle of Heiligerlee (1568)" label="Battle of Heiligerlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q752" start="12083" end="12092" title="Groningen (province)" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q552175" start="12166" end="12197" title="Jean de Ligne, Duke of Arenberg" label="Jean de Ligne, Duke of Arenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q701367" start="12498" end="12517" title="Battle of Jemmingen" label="Battle of Jemmingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="12624" end="12646" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="12724" end="12731" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682176" start="13601" end="13611" title="Jan Rubens" label="Jan Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="13649" end="13666" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q699636" start="13883" end="13894" title="Watergeuzen" label="Watergeuzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33426218" start="13942" end="13949" title="Brielle" label="Brielle"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="14283" end="14290" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705" start="14295" end="14302" title="Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="14361" end="14370" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q52101" start="14375" end="14385" title="Middelburg, Zeeland" label="Middelburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="14439" end="14454" title="Staten Generaal" label="Staten Generaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10001" start="14656" end="14664" title="Deventer" label="Deventer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83407" start="14668" end="14672" title="Mons, Belgium" label="Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9783" start="14778" end="14786" title="Roermond" label="Roermond"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="14791" end="14797" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q163891" start="14900" end="14935" title="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre" label="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9918" start="15108" end="15117" title="Enkhuizen" label="Enkhuizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="15259" end="15267" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535" start="15271" end="15278" title="Zutphen" label="Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q652271" start="15341" end="15353" title="Siege of Haarlem" label="took Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q972" start="15444" end="15451" title="Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685842" start="15537" end="15548" title="Jean Taffin" label="Jean Taffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182094" start="15835" end="15861" title="Luis de Zúñiga y Requesens" label="Luis de Zúñiga y Requesens"/>
<link wikidata="Q695732" start="15954" end="15975" title="Battle of Mookerheyde" label="Battle of Mookerheyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="16002" end="16007" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="16149" end="16155" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="16288" end="16308" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q271581" start="16414" end="16446" title="Charlotte of Bourbon" label="Charlotte de Bourbon-Montpensier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="16689" end="16694" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q874235" start="16948" end="16983" title="Sack of Antwerp" label="&amp;quot;Spanish Fury&amp;quot; on Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q157107" start="17086" end="17105" title="Don Juan of Austria" label="Don Juan of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q700035" start="17188" end="17209" title="Pacification of Ghent" label="Pacification of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383188" start="17462" end="17477" title="Edict of 1577" label="Perpetual Edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="17672" end="17677" title="Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q700027" start="18348" end="18363" title="Union of Arras" label="Treaty of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="18421" end="18454" title="Alessandro Farnese, Duke of Parma and Piacenza" label="Alessandro Farnese, Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="18556" end="18564" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q216165" start="18582" end="18598" title="Union of Utrecht" label="Union of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q700027" start="19180" end="19195" title="Union of Arras" label="Treaty of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q318380" start="19920" end="19942" title="Francis, Duke of Anjou" label="Francis, Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="19960" end="19979" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929388" start="20078" end="20105" title="Treaty of Plessis-les-Tours" label="Treaty of Plessis-les-Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q634839" start="20535" end="20552" title="Act of Abjuration" label="Act of Abjuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464916" start="20566" end="20593" title="declaration of independence" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10084" start="20745" end="20753" title="Vlissingen" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516755" start="20781" end="20797" title="Juan de Jáuregui (assassin)" label="Juan de Jáuregui"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="20834" end="20841" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457514" start="21728" end="21739" title="French Fury" label="French Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="21822" end="21841" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="21846" end="21868" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q238227" start="22402" end="22419" title="Louise de Coligny" label="Louise de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q204975" start="22463" end="22481" title="Gaspard II de Coligny" label="Gaspard de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q167236" start="22511" end="22526" title="Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange" label="Frederick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q281903" start="22664" end="22674" title="Prinsenhof" label="Prinsenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941338" start="22715" end="22722" title="Burgher (title)" label="burgher"/>
<link wikidata="Q16394" start="22748" end="22758" title="Franche-Comté" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q537169" start="22768" end="22784" title="Balthasar Gérard" label="Balthasar Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="23160" end="23170" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q701932" start="23172" end="23208" title="Peter Ernst I von Mansfeld-Vorderort" label="Peter Ernst I von Mansfeld-Vorderort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967985" start="23721" end="23731" title="wheel-lock" label="wheel-lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="23836" end="23841" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942163" start="23910" end="23934" title="Rombertus van Uylenburgh" label="Rombertus van Uylenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="24547" end="24556" title="Dismemberment" label="quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="24776" end="24788" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="Regent Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="24964" end="24969" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q678611" start="25052" end="25062" title="Nieuwe Kerk (Delft)" label="New Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="25066" end="25071" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q525861" start="25176" end="25193" title="Hendrik de Keyser" label="Hendrik de Keyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="25254" end="25276" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="25292" end="25306" title="Dutch monarchy" label="Dutch monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="25364" end="25382" title="William III of England" label="William III and II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="25473" end="25490" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q264258" start="25538" end="25552" title="Philip William, Prince of Orange" label="Philip William"/>
<link wikidata="Q266926" start="25606" end="25620" title="Anna of Egmond" label="Anna of Egmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="25643" end="25659" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="25758" end="25775" title="Maurice of Nassau" label="Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="25790" end="25800" title="Stadholder" label="Stadholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="25805" end="25820" title="Captain-General" label="Captain-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q166623" start="25842" end="25867" title="Johan van Oldenbarneveldt" label="Johan van Oldenbarneveldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="25898" end="25915" title="Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester" label="Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="26008" end="26015" title="Maurice of Nassau" label="Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q76488" start="26070" end="26084" title="Anna of Saxony" label="Anna of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q167236" start="26466" end="26481" title="Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange" label="Frederick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q167236" start="26633" end="26648" title="Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange" label="Frederick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q681800" start="26867" end="26883" title="Peace of Münster" label="Peace of Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q311455" start="26922" end="26942" title="William II of Orange" label="William II of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="26996" end="27017" title="William III of England" label="William III of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="27042" end="27057" title="Kingdom of England" label="king of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="27059" end="27067" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="27072" end="27079" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="27118" end="27125" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q62538" start="27222" end="27240" title="John William Friso" label="Johan Willem Friso"/>
<link wikidata="Q271950" start="27335" end="27350" title="Albertine Agnes of Nassau" label="Albertine Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q702722" start="27391" end="27423" title="William Frederick, Prince of Nassau-Dietz" label="William Frederik of Nassau-Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="27534" end="27549" title="House of Orange" label="House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="27883" end="27904" title="King Willem-Alexander" label="King Willem-Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029725" start="27930" end="27938" title="cognatic" label="cognatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="28185" end="28199" title="Dutch monarchy" label="Dutch monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46585" start="28206" end="28229" title="flag of the Netherlands" label="flag of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q872603" start="28272" end="28290" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Flag" label="flag of the prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="28332" end="28344" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="28612" end="28627" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131713" start="28658" end="28667" title="Wilhelmus" label="Wilhelmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q701605" start="28748" end="28790" title="Philips of Marnix, Lord of Saint-Aldegonde" label="Philips of Marnix, Lord of Saint-Aldegonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q94145" start="28950" end="28974" title="Order of the Black Eagle" label="Order of the Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="28987" end="29009" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q196301" start="29063" end="29089" title="Louise Henriette of Nassau" label="Louise Henriette of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066322" start="29183" end="29213" title="William the Silent (statue)" label="A statue of William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="29256" end="29274" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13428327" start="29291" end="29325" title="New Brunswick Theological Seminary" label="New Brunswick Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="29333" end="29359" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Reformed Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="29363" end="29388" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q543425" start="29760" end="29782" title="Marktkirche, Wiesbaden" label="Marktkirche, Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724348" start="29840" end="29853" title="Walter Schott" label="Walter Schott"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="29870" end="29883" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272221" start="29957" end="29976" title="12151 Oranje-Nassau" label="12151 Oranje-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q271639" start="30248" end="30265" title="Bois de Vincennes" label="Bois de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="32119" end="32143" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="32165" end="32180" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131713" start="32192" end="32201" title="Wilhelmus" label="Wilhelmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311455" start="32383" end="32393" title="William II, Prince of Orange" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="32395" end="32406" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="32411" end="32427" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868663" start="32510" end="32522" title="Civilization (series)" label="Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32549" end="32576" title="Civilization III: Conquests" label="Civilization III: Conquests"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32590" end="32623" title="Civilization IV: Beyond the Sword" label="Civilization IV: Beyond the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32641" end="32673" title="Civilization V: Gods &amp;amp; Kings" label="Civilization V: Gods &amp;amp; Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876128" start="33024" end="33039" title="Castle Buren" label="castle of Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q266926" start="33088" end="33112" title="Anna of Egmont" label="Anna van Egmond en Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q73061" start="33233" end="33238" title="Buren" label="Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q264258" start="33333" end="33347" title="Philip William, Prince of Orange" label="Philip William"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="33572" end="33584" title="illegitimate" label="illegitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q551885" start="33590" end="33609" title="Justinus van Nassau" label="Justinus van Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q76488" start="33856" end="33870" title="Anna of Saxony" label="Anna of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="33967" end="33973" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="33989" end="33999" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="34108" end="34125" title="Maurice of Nassau" label="Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682176" start="34376" end="34386" title="Jan Rubens" label="Jan Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="34417" end="34434" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q271581" start="34745" end="34777" title="Charlotte of Bourbon" label="Charlotte de Bourbon-Montpensier"/>
<link wikidata="Q238227" start="35284" end="35301" title="Louise de Coligny" label="Louise de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q204975" start="35337" end="35355" title="Gaspard II de Coligny" label="Gaspard de Coligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q167236" start="35385" end="35400" title="Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange" label="Frederick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="35730" end="35741" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="36006" end="36016" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q551885" start="36063" end="36082" title="Justinus van Nassau" label="Justinus van Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="36412" end="36417" title="Prince of Orange" label="ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281221" start="36427" end="36449" title="principality of Orange" label="principality of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="36456" end="36483" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Knight of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="36571" end="36585" title="King of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="36589" end="36611" title="House of Habsburg" label="the imperial Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="36673" end="36680" title="Marquis" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10083" start="36684" end="36689" title="Veere" label="Veere"/>
<link wikidata="Q10084" start="36694" end="36704" title="Vlissingen" label="Vlissingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="36707" end="36712" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q12817455" start="36716" end="36733" title="Nassau-Dillenburg" label="Nassau-Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q452332" start="36735" end="36749" title="County of Katzenelnbogen" label="Katzenelnbogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q836082" start="36755" end="36762" title="Vianden" label="Vianden"/>
<link wikidata="Q185902" start="36765" end="36773" title="Viscount" label="Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="36777" end="36784" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="36787" end="36792" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="36796" end="36801" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635419" start="36803" end="36817" title="Cuijk" label="Lands of Cuijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9839" start="36819" end="36832" title="Grave, Netherlands" label="City of Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="36834" end="36839" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q211033" start="36841" end="36848" title="Herstal" label="Herstal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863977" start="36850" end="36858" title="Warneton, Belgium" label="Warneton"/>
<link wikidata="Q814755" start="36860" end="36869" title="Beilstein, Hessen" label="Beilstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530459" start="36871" end="36876" title="Arlay" label="Arlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q818309" start="36882" end="36889" title="Nozeroy" label="Nozeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="36891" end="36895" title="Lord" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q553499" start="36899" end="36906" title="Dasburg" label="Dasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9834" start="36908" end="36923" title="Geertruidenberg" label="Geertruidenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144482" start="36925" end="36946" title="Hooge en Lage Zwaluwe" label="Hooge en Lage Zwaluwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76996" start="36948" end="36956" title="Klundert" label="Klundert"/>
<link wikidata="Q725305" start="36958" end="36966" title="Montigny-Montfort" label="Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613459" start="36968" end="36977" title="Naaldwijk" label="Naaldwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q76996" start="36979" end="36988" title="Klundert" label="Niervaart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205036" start="36990" end="36997" title="Houtrijk en Polanen" label="Polanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9870" start="36999" end="37010" title="Steenbergen" label="Steenbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76937" start="37012" end="37022" title="Willemstad (North Brabant)" label="Willemstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q160005" start="37024" end="37034" title="Bütgenbach" label="Bütgenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q152748" start="37036" end="37046" title="St. Vith" label="Sankt Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="37052" end="37060" title="Besançon" label="Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654855" start="37278" end="37292" title="René of Chalon" label="René of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838107" start="37316" end="37328" title="House of Chalon-Arlay" label="Chalon-Arlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="37332" end="37349" title="Prince of Orange" label="princes of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16674374" start="37427" end="37446" title="marquisate of Veere" label="marquisate of Veere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869823" start="37582" end="37598" title="Hof van Holland" label="Court of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893701" start="38312" end="38324" title="Pompey (dog)" label="Pompey (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254688" start="38327" end="38362" title="List of monarchs of the Netherlands" label="List of monarchs of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q581507" start="38391" end="38411" title="Petrus Johannes Blok" label="Petrus Johannes Blok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592610" start="38511" end="38527" title="Herbert H. Rowen" label="Herbert H. Rowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242410" start="38663" end="38676" title="Lisa Jardine" label="Jardine, Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q689281" start="38818" end="38837" title="John Lothrop Motley" label="John Lothrop Motley"/>
<link wikidata="Q689281" start="38935" end="38954" title="John Lothrop Motley" label="John Lothrop Motley"/>
<link wikidata="Q689281" start="39090" end="39109" title="John Lothrop Motley" label="John Lothrop Motley"/>
<link wikidata="Q546097" start="39450" end="39475" title="C. V. Wedgwood" label="Wedgwood, Cicely Veronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381777" start="39632" end="39647" title="Russell Shorto" label="Shorto, Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257204" start="39979" end="40014" title="Huygens Institute for Dutch History" label="Huygens Institute for Dutch History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74348" wikidata="Q5421508" url="?curid=74348" title="Exponent (linguistics)">
<text>An exponent is a phonological manifestation of a morphosyntactic property. In non-technical language, it is the expression of one or more grammatical properties by sound. There are several kinds of exponents:

*Identity
*Affixation
*Reduplication
*Internal modification
*Subtraction

==Identity==
The identity exponent is both simple and common: it has no phonological manifestation at all.

An example in English:
: DEER + → deer

==Affixation==
Affixation is the addition of an affix (such as a prefix, suffix or infix) to a word.

Example in English:
: &quot;want&quot; + → &quot;wanted&quot;

==Reduplication==
Reduplication is the repetition of part of a word. 

An example in Sanskrit:
: दा &quot;dā&quot; (&quot;give&quot;) + + + + + → ददामि &quot; dadāmi&quot; (the da at the beginning is from reduplication of &quot;dā&quot; that involves a vowel change, a characteristic of class 3 verbs in Sanskrit)

==Internal modification==
There are several types of internal modification. An internal modification may be segmental, meaning it changes a sound in the root.

An example in English:
: STINK + = stank (i becomes a)

An internal modification might be a suprasegmental modification. An example would be a change in pitch or stress.

An example of the latter in English (acute accent indicates stress):
: RECÓRD + = récord

==Subtraction==
Subtraction is the removal of a sound or a group of sounds.

An example in French:
: OEUF /œf/ (&quot;egg&quot;) + = œufs /ø/ (final f is lost)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5421508" start="3" end="11" title="Exponent (linguistics)" label="exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="17" end="29" title="phonology" label="phonological"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="49" end="64" title="morphosyntax" label="morphosyntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="480" end="485" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="497" end="503" title="Prefix (linguistics)" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="505" end="511" title="suffix (linguistics)" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q201322" start="515" end="520" title="infix" label="infix"/>
<link wikidata="Q221446" start="615" end="628" title="Reduplication" label="Reduplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="682" end="690" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="884" end="897" title="Sanskrit verbs#Verb Classes" label="class 3 verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q602418" start="1020" end="1029" title="segment (linguistics)" label="segmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="1164" end="1178" title="suprasegmental" label="suprasegmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="1225" end="1230" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="1234" end="1240" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74349" wikidata="Q14688998" url="?curid=74349" title="Herbert Hoover National Historic Site">
<text>The Herbert Hoover National Historic Site is a unit of the National Park System in West Branch, Iowa, United States. The buildings and grounds are managed by the National Park Service to commemorate the life of Herbert Hoover, the 31st president of the United States. The park was established in 1965, shortly after it was named a National Historic Landmark. It now encompasses .

Hoover spent the first eleven years of his life in West Branch. The son of a blacksmith who practiced close to the town, Hoover was born in a small cottage in 1874. The family later moved nearby to the &quot;House of the Maples&quot;, a two-story house. Within the next few years, Hoover was orphaned and left West Branch to live with relatives in Oregon. Hoover would go on to become a successful mining engineer, humanitarian, and President of the United States.

The birthplace cottage fell into private hands and became a tourist destination following Hoover&#x27;s nomination to the presidency in 1928. After the Hoover family acquired the cottage in the 1930s, they worked to develop a park aimed at recreating Hoover&#x27;s formative childhood experience. Among the buildings that now stand in the park are a blacksmith shop similar to the one owned by his father, the first West Branch schoolhouse, and the Quaker meetinghouse where the Hoover family worshiped. In the 1960s, the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum first opened to maintain Hoover&#x27;s presidential papers and memorabilia. Herbert and his wife, First Lady Lou Henry Hoover, are buried under a monument designed by William Wagner. After the death of Herbert Hoover, an tallgrass prairie was developed.

==History==

===Birthplace and childhood home===
Herbert Clark Hoover spent the first eleven years of his life in West Branch, Iowa, a small farming community with a population around 500. His birthplace cottage was built in the spring of 1871 at the corner of Penn and Downey Streets. The two-room cottage, built for recent settlers Jesse Clark Hoover and his wife Hulda, was only and had two rooms. Jesse and Hulda were both Quakers. Jesse was a blacksmith, and opened a shop shortly after settling. The cottage was built on a stone foundation and built with board and batten timber. The timber was cut in a sawmill in Muscatine.

On August 10, 1874, Herbert (known in his childhood as &quot;Bert&quot; or &quot;Bertie&quot;) was born as the second child to Jesse and Hulda. Jesse&#x27;s blacksmith had grown to be very successful, and in 1878, Jesse Hoover sold the practice to open a farm implement store on the corner of Main and Downey Streets. In March 1879, the family moved to the House of the Maples, a two-story frame house. Hoover may have attended classes at an 1853 schoolhouse at the corner of Main and Downey Streets. He attended Quaker services at the nearby Friends Meetinghouse.

The prosperity of the Hoover family suddenly ended on December 13, 1880, when Jesse died of rheumatic fever. Hulda supported the family by sewing and taking in boarders. However, Hulda died of typhoid fever on February 24, 1884. Now an orphan, nine-year-old Herbert Hoover was sent to live with his uncle Allan Hoover on a nearby farm. Two years later, Hoover was sent to Newberg, Oregon to live with another uncle.

===Hoover career and presidency===
Herbert Hoover became a prosperous mining engineer, becoming very wealthy after working in Australia and China. He married Lou Henry in 1899. During World War I, Hoover was moved by a food crisis in Europe. Hoover oversaw operations for the Commission for Relief in Belgium to feed the nation of Belgium throughout the war. After the United States entered the war, Hoover was appointed the head of the U.S. Food Administration. Hoover was lauded for his efforts in his homeland. He campaigned on behalf of Warren G. Harding in 1920, who rewarded Hoover by appointing him Secretary of Commerce in his cabinet.

In 1928, Hoover was considered the leading candidate for president by the Republican Party. He defeated Al Smith in a landslide. However, his term was marred by the economic downturn of the Great Depression. Despite efforts to right the economy, Hoover was himself defeated in a landslide in 1932 to Franklin D. Roosevelt. During World War II, Hoover was again tasked with providing food to war-torn countries.

===Gravesite===

Herbert Hoover died from internal bleeding in 1964, enjoying the longest retirement of any President to that point. Hoover considered his years in West Branch to be his most formative, and requested that he and his wife (who had died twenty years earlier) be buried there. Allan Hoover selected the site, which was landscaped before Herbert Hoover&#x27;s death. 100,000 people lined the funeral procession route between Cedar Rapids and West Branch. William Wagner designed the memorial in collaboration with surviving Hoover family members. Standing at the foot of the monument, one can see the birthplace cottage.

==Historic development==
R. Portland and Jennie Scellers purchased the cottage in 1889. They moved it to the rear of the property and turned it so that it faced south. They then built a two-story house and connected it to the cottage. In 1928, when Hoover was nominated as president, tourists began to come to West Branch to see the birthplace of the candidate. The widowed Jennie Scellers opened the cottage to the public. Charging ten cents a tour, she entertained over 17,000 visitors in the first year alone. Enjoying the profitability of the building, Scellers refused to sell the property to the Hoover family, but upon her death in 1934, the house was sold to Hoover&#x27;s son Allan. He demolished the two-story house and turned the cottage back to its original orientation (facing east).

Hoover and his family believed that, by recreating the surroundings of his early life, visitors could be inspired by the experience. After Allan purchased the cottage in 1935, the Hoovers began work on developing the environment. By 1938, the cottage had been restored by the Hoover Birthplace Committee, a group founded to support Hoover&#x27;s 1928 campaign stop in West Branch. Lou Henry was the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of the group until her death in 1944. She oversaw all of the early developments, including the relocation of the &quot;Isis&quot; statue and the acquisition of land around the birthplace. She also developed a retaining wall for Hoover Creek and had a footpath built over it to connect the cottage with &quot;Isis&quot;. She installed trees, shrubs, and flowers from a Marion garden. Allan Hoover took over the project following his mother&#x27;s death.
The birthplace park hosted the first Hoover Day celebration of Hoover&#x27;s 74th birthday in 1948. The large crowds that came to celebrate the Iowan inspired Allan Hoover to further develop the site in time for his father&#x27;s 80th birthday in 1954. The Herbert Hoover Birthplace Park was officially dedicated on June 30, 1952. The following year, a comfort station and picnic shelter were constructed; these have both since been demolished. In collaboration with the Hoover celebration in 1954, the Boy Scouts of America built another picnic shelter and dedicated a bronze plaque to the former president. In 1957, the Hoover family decided to recreate the Jesse Hoover blacksmith shop, which was rebuilt using wood reclaimed from an 1870 barn. The blacksmith shop is a working shop producing various iron items for sale and replacement period hardware for the NPS.

In the late 1950s, the park was greatly expanded in response to the proposed Interstate 80, which would pass just south of the park. These land acquisitions maintained the integrity of the site. The Birthplace Society moved a 1905 house to the park in 1964 to serve as the house of the Director of the Presidential Library. The house has since been transferred to the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library Association, who use it as offices. Around the same time, the Birthplace Society moved the Quaker Meetinghouse to the site. Although the Hoovers were originally opposed to the idea, since the church was originally far from the house, they relented when learning of a demolition threat. It was the last building moved to the site before Hoover&#x27;s death.

==National Historic Site==

As the Herbert Hoover Birthplace, the site was declared a National Historic Landmark on June 23, 1965. The National Historic Site was established on August 12, 1965. When the National Register of Historic Places was created a year later, the site was automatically listed. The complex originally included twenty-eight buildings, fourteen sites, eight structures, and eight objects over . In 2013, the site was redefined to include thirteen buildings, one site, two structures, and one object over .

The National Historic Site features West Branch several buildings that would have been standing during Hoover&#x27;s childhood there. The 1853 schoolhouse was moved to the site near its original location. Likewise, the Friends Meetinghouse where Hoover worshiped has been moved to the site. Jesse Hoover&#x27;s blacksmith shop has been rebuilt. These four buildings are open for free touring. The gravesite overlooking the cottage can also be visited. Near the gravesite is a tallgrass prairie, designed to resemble the type of landscape that early West Branch settlers would have witnessed. The prairie was named a National Recreation Trail in 1981.

The large statue of the Egyptian deity Isis was presented to Hoover as a gift from the people of Belgium, in gratitude for his famine relief efforts on behalf of their country during the war. Sculpted by Belgian native , the statue originally decorated Hoover&#x27;s home in Palo Alto, California. The Hoovers brought it to West Branch in 1939, located &quot;contemplating the house&quot; where Hoover was born.

The site also includes historic houses on Downey and Poplar Streets that belonged to significant West Branch residents. These houses are not open to the public. Some of the historic house are used for park operations and storage, while others have been available as housing for park staff. In 2021 the NPS posted an RFEI for adaptive use of the Staples, Wright, and Hayhurst houses.

In 2020, the park service embarked on a multi-year flood mitigation project for Hoover creek, a tributary of the West Branch Wapsinonoc creek which runs through the site. The project involved widening the existing creek channel, replacement of bridges, and the construction of a 10-acre retention basin in the park&#x27;s tallgrass prairie.

===Downey Street===

Laban Miles was the brother-in-law of Hulda Hoover. The Miles and Hoover families became close friends, and Herbert would play with the Miles children. Laban Miles later served Rutherford B. Hayes as an Indian agent. Hoover briefly lived with the Miles family in 1882 on the Osage Nation reservation while permanent plans were being made for his rearing. A farmstead owned by the Miles family south of the residential district is also part of the park. Also on Downey Street is the Amanda Garvin House, a fine example of Gothic Revival architecture. The Charles E. Smith House was moved to the site in 1969. Smith built his house in 1903, after Hoover had already left West Branch. However, the National Park Service decided to move the house to the site because of its Queen Anne architecture. His sister was the wife of Dr. L. J. Leech, who also lived on the street. Leech lived in Miles&#x27; house after moving to West Branch in 1884. While the Miles family foreclosed on their house, Leech purchased it and lived there. He built his own house next door in 1920.

Hannah Varney built her house in 1899 after her divorce from her husband. She lived there for a year before moving to Iowa City and remarried. Her daughters Cora and Clara lived in the house until 1915. The house was moved to its present site in 1967. The P. T. Smith House was the only West Branch house that Hoover distinctly remembered when visiting the town years later. The Hoover children and the Smith children often played together, particularly enjoying sledding on nearby Cook&#x27;s Hill.

===Poplar Street===
Four houses are maintained on Poplar Street. The Wright family built a house there in 1873. Like Jesse Hoover, Billy Wright was a blacksmith. E. S. Hayhurst built a house in 1872, but foreclosed on it in 1878. Real estate developer John Wetherell and his wife built a house in 1872 and sold it four years later to the retired Dr. John Staples. David Mackey purchased a house in 1869. Mackey was a carpenter and built the house himself. Shortly after completion, he died, leaving the house to his wife, son, and sister. The widower was elected mayor of West Branch in 1879. Of all the houses on the two streets, the Mackey and Wright Houses have been the least altered since their construction.

===Presidential library and museum===

In 1939, Franklin D. Roosevelt established the first Presidential library, a collection of his presidential papers. He donated land and memorabilia to the government and built the structure with private funds. The recently developed National Archives and Records Administration was tasked with its oversight. President Truman followed suit in 1945, announcing that he intended to build a similar library. In response, the United States Congress passed the Presidential Libraries Act of 1955, establishing a system of Presidential libraries.

Hoover originally intended to simply donate his papers to his &quot;alma mater&quot;, Stanford University, and set up a small museum of memorabilia in West Branch. However, as the relationship between him and Stanford soured in the 1950s, Hoover decided to erect a presidential library and museum. The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum was the fourth such institution, opening on Hoover&#x27;s 88th birthday, August 10, 1962. It is one of three libraries in the system that include the birthplace or boyhood home and gravesite of the President.

The opening ceremony was dedicated by Harry Truman and Hoover gave a speech. The library and museum was rededicated by President Ronald Reagan following a massive expansion in 1992. The museum is the only part of the National Historic Site that requires an entrance fee ($10 for adults).

==In popular culture==
Grant Wood depicted the Herbert Hoover Birthplace in his 1931 piece, &quot;The Birthplace of Herbert Hoover, West Branch, Iowa&quot;. The painting was produced before the demolition of the Portland Scellers extension and relocation of the original cottage, so the face of the birthplace itself is obscured at the rear of the building in the center.

==See also==
* List of residences of presidents of the United States
* List of National Historic Landmarks in Iowa
* List of areas in the United States National Park System
* West Branch Commercial Historic District, a nearby commercial district
* Hoover–Minthorn House, Hoover&#x27;s childhood home in Oregon
* Lou Henry and Herbert Hoover House, their house in Palo Alto, California from 1920 to 1944
* Rapidan Camp, Hoover&#x27;s rustic retreat in Shenandoah National Park, Virginia
* Hoover Dam, named after Hoover and began during his presidency

==References==
==External links==
* Herbert Hoover National Historic Site
* Secondary National Park Service site
* &quot;Herbert Hoover: Iowa Farm Boy and World Humanitarian,&quot; a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
*&quot;Life Portrait of Herbert Hoover&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, broadcast from the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library &amp; Museum and the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site, October 4, 1999</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14688998" start="4" end="41" title="Herbert Hoover National Historic Site" label="Herbert Hoover National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267198" start="59" end="79" title="List of areas in the United States National Park System" label="National Park System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798762" start="83" end="100" title="West Branch, Iowa" label="West Branch, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="162" end="183" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="211" end="225" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="236" end="266" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="331" end="357" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1296" end="1302" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807904" start="1303" end="1315" title="meeting house" label="meetinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734521" start="1369" end="1415" title="Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum" label="Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="1514" end="1524" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q233669" start="1525" end="1541" title="Lou Henry Hoover" label="Lou Henry Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="1637" end="1654" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="1720" end="1740" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Clark Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798762" start="1785" end="1802" title="West Branch, Iowa" label="West Branch, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2098" end="2105" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="2119" end="2129" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748498" start="2242" end="2248" title="batten" label="batten"/>
<link wikidata="Q955896" start="2292" end="2301" title="Muscatine, Iowa" label="Muscatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q753904" start="2962" end="2977" title="rheumatic fever" label="rheumatic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558858" start="3030" end="3038" title="boarding house" label="boarders"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="3063" end="3076" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q193279" start="3106" end="3112" title="orphan" label="orphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q932637" start="3242" end="3257" title="Newberg, Oregon" label="Newberg, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233669" start="3445" end="3454" title="Lou Henry Hoover" label="Lou Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3471" end="3482" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780279" start="3563" end="3595" title="Commission for Relief in Belgium" label="Commission for Relief in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3618" end="3625" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453796" start="3724" end="3748" title="United States Food Administration" label="U.S. Food Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="3828" end="3845" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="3893" end="3914" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4006" end="4022" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="4036" end="4044" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="4048" end="4059" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="a landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4122" end="4138" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="4209" end="4220" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="a landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4232" end="4253" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4262" end="4274" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361887" start="4386" end="4403" title="internal bleeding" label="internal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="4781" end="4793" title="Cedar Rapids, Iowa" label="Cedar Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730703" start="5663" end="5668" title="Allan Hoover" label="Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q955933" start="6571" end="6577" title="Marion, Iowa" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="7159" end="7180" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q94873" start="7603" end="7616" title="Interstate 80" label="Interstate 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="8374" end="8400" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="8423" end="8445" title="National Historic Site (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="8491" end="8527" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="9292" end="9309" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810722" start="9432" end="9457" title="National Recreation Trail" label="National Recreation Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="9507" end="9511" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137058" start="9630" end="9658" title="Belgium in World War I" label="their country during the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="9743" end="9764" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432075" start="10197" end="10201" title="Request for proposal" label="RFEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="10805" end="10824" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131613569" start="10831" end="10843" title="Indian agent" label="Indian agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="10903" end="10915" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="11149" end="11176" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="11323" end="11344" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="11398" end="11421" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q487977" start="11814" end="11823" title="Iowa City" label="Iowa City"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="13184" end="13228" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="13373" end="13395" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546583" start="13407" end="13441" title="Presidential Libraries Act of 1955" label="Presidential Libraries Act of 1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="13561" end="13571" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="13579" end="13598" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734521" start="13795" end="13841" title="Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum" label="Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="14181" end="14194" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217434" start="14364" end="14374" title="Grant Wood" label="Grant Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14433" end="14496" title="Grant Wood#Paintings" label="&amp;quot;The Birthplace of Herbert Hoover, West Branch, Iowa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q185726" start="14729" end="14782" title="List of residences of presidents of the United States" label="List of residences of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847398" start="14785" end="14828" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in Iowa" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267198" start="14831" end="14886" title="List of areas in the United States National Park System" label="List of areas in the United States National Park System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984515" start="14889" end="14929" title="West Branch Commercial Historic District" label="West Branch Commercial Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898849" start="14962" end="14983" title="Hoover–Minthorn House" label="Hoover–Minthorn House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685547" start="15026" end="15060" title="Lou Henry and Herbert Hoover House" label="Lou Henry and Herbert Hoover House"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="15077" end="15098" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294243" start="15119" end="15131" title="Rapidan Camp" label="Rapidan Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="15165" end="15189" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="15191" end="15199" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172822" start="15202" end="15212" title="Hoover Dam" label="Hoover Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="15571" end="15577" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15591" end="15626" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74350" wikidata="Q1296201" url="?curid=74350" title="Effigy Mounds National Monument">
<text>Effigy Mounds National Monument preserves more than 200 prehistoric mounds built by pre-Columbian
Mound Builder cultures, mostly in the first millennium CE, during the later part of the Woodland period of pre-Columbian North America.
Numerous effigy mounds are shaped like animals, including bears and birds.

The monument is located primarily in Allamakee County, Iowa, with a small part in Clayton County, Iowa, in the midwestern United States. The park&#x27;s visitor center is located in Harpers Ferry, Iowa, just north of Marquette.
In 2017, the Effigy Mounds were featured in the America the Beautiful Quarters Program.

==Mounds==


Prehistoric earthworks by mound builder cultures are common in the Midwest. However, mounds in the shape of mammals, birds, or reptiles, known as effigies, apparently were constructed primarily by peoples in what is now known as southern Wisconsin, northeast Iowa, and small parts of Minnesota and Illinois. An exception is the Great Serpent Mound in southwestern Ohio.

Effigy Mounds National Monument takes in the western edge of the effigy region. The North Unit (67 mounds) and South Unit (29 mounds) are located where the counties meet along the Mississippi River. They are contiguous and easily accessible. The Sny Magill Unit (112 mounds) is approximately south of the other units, and offers no visitor facilities. Other mounds are located on remote parts of the Monument property. The monument contains with 206 mounds, of which 31 are effigies. The largest, Great Bear Mound, measures 42 meters from head to tail and rises over a meter above the original ground level.

In northeastern Iowa, the Effigy Mounds area was a point of transition between the eastern hardwood forests and the central prairies. Native Americans and early settlers would have been able to draw on natural resources available in forests, wetlands, and prairies. These areas were occupied by humans for many centuries.

Effigy Mounds is adjacent to the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge, the Driftless Area National Wildlife Refuge, the Yellow River State Forest, and a short distance to the south, Pikes Peak State Park. There are also a number of state-owned wildlife management areas, such as the one at Sny Magill Creek, where Clayton County also maintains a county park.

== Tribes associated with the monument ==
Numerous federally recognized tribes have linguistic and cultural ties to the ancestral peoples who built the effigy and other earthwork mounds at the monument site. The National Park Service recognizes a cultural association between the monument and the following present nations:

* Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska
* Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma
* Otoe–Missouria Tribe of Indians
* Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin
* Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska
* Upper Sioux Community of Minnesota
* Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community In the State of Minnesota
* Lower Sioux Indian Community of Mdewakanton Sioux Indians of Minnesota
* Prairie Island Indian Community In the State of Minnesota
* Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa
* Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska
* Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma
* Crow Creek Sioux of South Dakota
* Omaha Tribe of Nebraska
* Santee Sioux Nation of Nebraska
* Standing Rock Sioux Tribe of North Dakota
* Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota
* Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate
* Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe
* Ponca Tribe of Nebraska

==Public access==
The visitor center, located at the park entrance, contains museum exhibits highlighting archaeological and natural specimens, an auditorium, and book sales outlet. The park has 14 miles of hiking trails. No paved public automobile access roads exist in the park. Rangers give guided hikes and prehistoric tool demonstrations that are scheduled and advertised, mid-June through Labor Day weekend. Educational programs are presented on- and off-site by appointment.

Natural features in the monument include forests, tallgrass prairies, wetlands and rivers. There are no lodging or camping facilities in the park. Camping is available at nearby Pikes Peak State Park and Yellow River State Forest in Iowa; there is also Wyalusing State Park in Wisconsin. Various primitive campgrounds exist in the area as well. The national monument is quite close to the town of Marquette, Iowa, and is just across the Mississippi River from the city of Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin, where ample motel and gambling-boat facilities exist.

Effigy Mounds was proclaimed a National Monument on October 25, 1949. Charles R. Keyes, head of the Iowa Archaeological Survey, and Ellison Orr, chief field supervisor for the Iowa Archaeological Survey, worked to survey and map the area, and to establish its significance for preservation.

==Driftless Area==
The Effigy Mounds National Monument is noted for being in the Driftless Area, an area of North America which escaped glaciation during the last ice age. The adjacent Driftless Area National Wildlife Refuge takes its name from this region.

The Park Service writes:

Patchy remnants of Pre-Illinoian glacial drift more than 500,000 years old recently have been discovered in the area. Unlike the rest of Iowa, the Paleozoic Plateau was bypassed by the last of the Pleistocene glaciers (the Wisconsin), allowing the region&#x27;s fast cutting streams to expose and carve out deep channels in the bedrock-dominated terrain. The area is characterized by thin loess soil cover, isolated patches of glacial drift, deeply entrenched river valleys, and karst (sinkholes, caves, and springs) topography.

==Conservation issues==

From 1999 to 2009, Superintendent Phyllis Ewing &quot;oversaw more than $3 million in illegal construction of boardwalks, trails and other structures that damaged irreplaceable archaeological artifacts.&quot; She failed to conduct consultation with affiliated American Indian tribes and follow procedures of the National Historic Preservation Act and other statutes. The Park Service conducted an internal investigation, finding numerous violations but no intent to damage the park.

In July 2016, Thomas Munson, Superintendent for 20 years of the Effigy Mounds National Monument, was sentenced to several days in prison after pleading guilty to stealing bones in 1990 of 40 ancient Native Americans, who lived between 700 and 2,500 years ago, from the holdings of the museum at the site. The remains had been excavated along with artifacts from burial mounds at the park. Munson was apparently trying to evade the proposed provisions of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), which was passed by Congress that year. The act provides for artifacts and bones to be returned or repatriated by governmental agencies and other institutions to tribes who are affiliated with the peoples who buried the items.

Tracing the bones could have demonstrated a link to the affiliated tribes and required return of both the remains and related artifacts from grave goods. Without that evidence, most of the artifacts have been retained by the park museum. The government conducted a five-year investigation through the US Attorney&#x27;s Office, following questions raised in 2011 by Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska member Patt Murphy. As tribal representative under NAGPRA to receive &quot;remains and funerary objects for repatriation and reburial,&quot; he had requested an inventory from the national monument of all remains and goods, which they could not provide. This began the inquiry. Murphy has praised the work of the US Attorney&#x27;s Office and others in this case.

Munson was sentenced to a year of home detention, 10 weekends in jail, and paying &quot;$108,905 in restitution for the damage he caused to the bones and a $3,000 fine.&quot; Munson had retired from the National Park Service in 1994.

Jim Nepstad, who was appointed superintendent at the monument in 2011, worked to restore those disturbed areas of the park. He also worked to rebuild the Park Service&#x27;s standing with area residents and members of the site&#x27;s affiliated American Indian tribes. He was featured in the documentary .

In 2022, archaeologist Susa Snow was appointed superintendent of the monument. That same year, the National Park Service and leaders of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska (ITKN) signed a first-of-its-kind agreement establishing the first Tribal Sister Park relationship between a U.S. national park and a Tribal Nation’s National Park. 

==See also==
* Effigy Mounds National Monument Review Team Report
* Iowa archaeology
* Native American tribes in Iowa
* Indian Mounds Park (disambiguation)
* List of burial mounds in the United States
* List of national monuments of the United States
* Marching Bear Group

==References==
* &quot;The National Parks: Index 2001–2003&quot;. Washington: U.S. Department of the Interior.
==External links==

* Official NPS website: Effigy Mounds National Monument
* Sny Magill Creek Unit coordinates: </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1296201" start="0" end="31" title="Effigy Mounds National Monument" label="Effigy Mounds National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584134" start="68" end="73" title="mound" label="mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="84" end="97" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="98" end="111" title="Mound Builders" label="Mound Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="186" end="201" title="Woodland period" label="Woodland period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356478" start="243" end="255" title="effigy mound" label="effigy mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q111859" start="347" end="363" title="Allamakee County, Iowa" label="Allamakee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="365" end="369" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q113815" start="392" end="412" title="Clayton County, Iowa" label="Clayton County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="432" end="445" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q674908" start="492" end="511" title="Harpers Ferry, Iowa" label="Harpers Ferry, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q581365" start="527" end="536" title="Marquette, Iowa" label="Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q463177" start="586" end="616" title="America the Beautiful Quarters" label="America the Beautiful Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="666" end="688" title="Mound builder (people)" label="mound builder cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="707" end="714" title="U.S. Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832928" start="869" end="877" title="Aztalan State Park" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347173" start="878" end="887" title="Rock Lake (Wisconsin)" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q968802" start="968" end="987" title="Great Serpent Mound" label="Great Serpent Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="1191" end="1208" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548867" start="1257" end="1267" title="Sny Magill Creek" label="Sny Magill"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="1711" end="1726" title="hardwood forest" label="hardwood forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="1853" end="1859" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="1862" end="1869" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="1876" end="1883" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898801" start="1976" end="2033" title="Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge" label="Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307488" start="2039" end="2078" title="Driftless Area National Wildlife Refuge" label="Driftless Area National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051810" start="2084" end="2109" title="Yellow River State Forest" label="Yellow River State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364082" start="2146" end="2167" title="Pikes Peak State Park" label="Pikes Peak State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548867" start="2254" end="2270" title="Sny Magill Creek" label="Sny Magill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151185" start="2651" end="2684" title="Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska" label="Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151202" start="2687" end="2709" title="Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma" label="Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108926" start="2712" end="2743" title="Otoe–Missouria Tribe of Indians" label="Otoe–Missouria Tribe of Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148484" start="2746" end="2774" title="Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin" label="Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148824" start="2777" end="2804" title="Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska" label="Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552096" start="2807" end="2828" title="Upper Sioux Community" label="Upper Sioux Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276599" start="2844" end="2880" title="Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community" label="Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693817" start="2909" end="2937" title="Lower Sioux Indian Community" label="Lower Sioux Indian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237912" start="2982" end="3013" title="Prairie Island Indian Community" label="Prairie Island Indian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396546" start="3042" end="3086" title="Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa" label="Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396543" start="3089" end="3142" title="Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska" label="Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474201" start="3145" end="3163" title="Sac and Fox Nation" label="Sac and Fox Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189081" start="3178" end="3194" title="Crow Creek Sioux" label="Crow Creek Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="3213" end="3236" title="Omaha Tribe of Nebraska" label="Omaha Tribe of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420112" start="3239" end="3258" title="Santee Sioux Nation" label="Santee Sioux Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028848" start="3273" end="3298" title="Standing Rock Sioux Tribe" label="Standing Rock Sioux Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048832" start="3317" end="3352" title="Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota" label="Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590690" start="3355" end="3378" title="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate" label="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457381" start="3381" end="3409" title="Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe" label="Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821688" start="3412" end="3435" title="Ponca Tribe of Nebraska" label="Ponca Tribe of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411786" start="3459" end="3473" title="visitor center" label="visitor center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="3970" end="3987" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="4003" end="4008" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364082" start="4098" end="4119" title="Pikes Peak State Park" label="Pikes Peak State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051810" start="4124" end="4149" title="Yellow River State Forest" label="Yellow River State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q989464" start="4173" end="4193" title="Wyalusing State Park" label="Wyalusing State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="4197" end="4206" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581365" start="4317" end="4332" title="Marquette, Iowa" label="Marquette, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014155" start="4392" end="4419" title="Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin" label="Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="4507" end="4524" title="U.S. National Monument" label="National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081858" start="4546" end="4562" title="Charles R. Keyes" label="Charles R. Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307487" start="4849" end="4863" title="Driftless Area" label="Driftless Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="4931" end="4938" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307488" start="4953" end="4992" title="Driftless Area National Wildlife Refuge" label="Driftless Area National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909996" start="5072" end="5085" title="Pre-Illinoian" label="Pre-Illinoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="5094" end="5099" title="Moraine" label="drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307487" start="5200" end="5217" title="Driftless Area" label="Paleozoic Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="5250" end="5261" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="5276" end="5285" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="5442" end="5447" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="5532" end="5537" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="5539" end="5547" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="5550" end="5554" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973378" start="5920" end="5954" title="National Historic Preservation Act" label="National Historic Preservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140298" start="6550" end="6604" title="Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act" label="Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="8249" end="8270" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151185" start="8290" end="8323" title="Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska" label="Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064756" start="8559" end="8575" title="Iowa archaeology" label="Iowa archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024183" start="8578" end="8608" title="Native American tribes in Iowa" label="Native American tribes in Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345318" start="8611" end="8646" title="Indian Mounds Park (disambiguation)" label="Indian Mounds Park (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608375" start="8649" end="8691" title="List of burial mounds in the United States" label="List of burial mounds in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670549" start="8694" end="8741" title="List of national monuments of the United States" label="List of national monuments of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="8744" end="8763" title="Ursa Major" label="Marching Bear Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="8843" end="8874" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548867" start="8954" end="8970" title="Sny Magill Creek" label="Sny Magill Creek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74351" wikidata="Q7562158" url="?curid=74351" title="Sonogram">
<text>Sonogram may refer to:

* &quot;S.O.N.O.G.R.A.M.&quot;, a 2005 album by &quot;One Be Lo&quot;
* Sonograph, a term used for an audio-frequency spectrogram, a visual representation of the spectrum of frequencies in a sound
* Ultrasonogram, a diagnostic imaging technique based on the application of ultrasound

== See also ==

* Sinogram (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7562158" start="0" end="8" title="Sonogram" label="Sonogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943333" start="32" end="48" title="S.O.N.O.G.R.A.M." label="S.O.N.O.G.R.A.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q578970" start="142" end="153" title="spectrogram" label="spectrogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="223" end="236" title="Ultrasonogram" label="Ultrasonogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524884" start="327" end="352" title="Sinogram (disambiguation)" label="Sinogram (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74354" wikidata="Q62538" url="?curid=74354" title="John William Friso">
<text>John William Friso (; 14 August 1687 – 14 July 1711) became the (titular) Prince of Orange in 1702. He was the Stadtholder of Friesland and Groningen in the Dutch Republic. He also served in the Dutch States Army during the War of the Spanish Succession until his death by accidental drowning in the Hollands Diep in 1711. 

==Background==
Born on 14 August 1687 in Dessau, Anhalt, Friso was the son of Henry Casimir II, Prince of Nassau-Dietz, and Princess Henriëtte Amalia of Anhalt-Dessau who were both first cousins of William III. He was also a member of the House of Nassau (the branch of Nassau-Dietz), and through the testamentary dispositions of William III became the progenitor of the new line of the House of Orange-Nassau. He was educated under Jean Lemonon, professor at the University of Franeker.

==Succession==
With the death of William III of Orange, the legitimate male line of William the Silent (the second House of Orange) became extinct. John William Friso, the senior agnatic descendant of William the Silent&#x27;s brother and a cognatic descendant of Frederick Henry, grandfather of William III, claimed the succession as stadtholder in all provinces held by William III. This was denied to him by the republican faction in the Netherlands. 

The five provinces over which William III ruled – Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Gelderland and Overijssel – all suspended the office of stadtholder after William III&#x27;s death. The remaining two provinces – Friesland and Groningen – were never governed by William III, and continued to retain a separate stadtholder, John William Friso. He established the third House of Orange, which became extinct in the male line in 1890. His son, William IV of Orange, later became stadtholder of all seven provinces.

Under William III&#x27;s will, Friso stood to inherit the Principality of Orange, but due to the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession, Johan Willem Friso was unable to assert his claims to the principality and other possessions of William III. His inheritance was contested by his cousin, Frederick I of Prussia, as well as by his Catholic relative from Nassau-Siegen and various descendants of the old House of Chalon in France. Additionally, King Louis XIV sought to take control of the principality, which had long been a Protestant enclave. He temporarily supported the claims of the Prince of Conti, who was recognized by the French council as the rightful heir. The Protestant population was expelled, and the Principality of Orange remained in French hands following the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, with the Prince of Conti acknowledging Louis XIV’s sovereignty. The inheritance of William III and the title &quot;Prince of Orange&quot; became the subject of a serious dispute between the Frisian branch of the House of Nassau and the Prussian royal family, a conflict that remained unresolved at the time of Johan Willem Friso’s death in 1711.

==Military career==
===Apointment and first military actions===
In 1702 at the start of the War of the Spanish Succession, Friso intended to participate in his first military campaign with the Dutch States Army under the supervision of his governor, Van Heemstra, but was prevented by a fall from his horse. He eventually joined the war effort in 1703, serving under Field Marshal Hendrik van Nassau, Lord of Ouwerkerk. In 1704, after intense debate among the Dutch provinces, he was designated the position of General of Infantry. Although only nominally, as he was just 17 years old. Efforts to appoint him as a member of the Council of State in 1705 were blocked by Holland and Utrecht, and later, in 1707, by Zeeland and Overijssel.

When Johan Willem Friso came of age in 1707, he formally assumed his titles in the northern provinces, though in Groningen this did not occur until 1708 and was subject to restrictions. He quickly earned distinction as a general. Although he had previously been present at several engagements without holding an official command—such as the siege of Ostend and the siege of Menin—his first significant action as an active participant was at the Battle of Oudenaarde. At Oudenaarde he led the flank attack of 10,000 Dutch infantrymen that would decide the battle in favour of the Allies, for which he would receive much praise in and outside the Republic. 

Following that battle he joined Eugene of Savoy in his Siege of Lille and was in overal command of the Anglo-Dutch troops at the siege. He positioned his headquarters in the village of Lamberfart, dangerously close to the city’s cannons. On August 18, a cannonball struck his quarters while he was getting dressed. The shot narrowly missed him, passing just inches from his face, but killed his chamberlain, Du Cerceau, who was standing nearby. Blood and brain matter splattered across the room, but the prince remained remarkably composed, showing more concern for the loss of his loyal servant than for his own close brush with death. Following this incident, senior officials urged him to relocate his headquarters, and he eventually moved to the safer Castle of Holbeek. Lille fell after several bloody months and the campaign was concluded with the Siege of Gent and capture of Brugge in which Friso also played his part.

In June of 1709, as the allies marched on Tournai Friso was tasked with capturing Mortange and Saint-Amand, to safeguard the siege operations against French attacks from the side of Valenciennes. The primary objective was Fort l&#x27;Escarpe, which controlled the crossing of the Scheldt. Friso was fortunate when, after about a dozen shots from his accompanying field guns, the drawbridge unexpectedly fell without being destroyed. Taking advantage of this, his troops swiftly stormed the fort, met little resistance, and captured the garrison.

===Battle of Malplaquet===

Following the capture of Tournai on 3 September the French and Allied armies met at the Battle of Malplaquet. Here he commanded the infantry on the Allied left together with François Nicolas Fagel. Overall control was exercised by Count Tilly, who had succeeded Ouwerkerk as senior Dutch commander. In reality, Tilly&#x27;s anti-Orangist sympathies meant his largely pro-Orangist senior officers allegedly took their orders from Friso. 

The Duke of Marlborough, the Allied commander in overal control, tasked the 30 Dutch infantry battalions Dutch on left with attacking the French rightwing. This was a hopeless task. The French right wing, commanded by the seasoned military leader Louis-François de Boufflers, was shielded by a forest and a triple line of entrenchments. Additionally, Boufflers commanded twice as many troops as Friso. The Dutch initially expected to be reinforced by a division under Henry Withers, which was still advancing from Tournai. However, with the plans having changed, the left flank’s forces were now insufficient to execute the operation successfully.

Half an hour after the Allied right wing had engaged the enemy, Friso ordered his troops to join the fray. His Dutch forces, which included Scottish and Swiss regiments, were among the finest in Europe and launched three determined assaults on the French positions. Despite their tenacity and the ground they managed to seize, they were each time repelled with heavy casualties. Throughout the brutal combat, the prince fought courageously, and had his horse shot out from under him twice. At one point, Friso even seized a banner from the Swiss Mey Regiment, planted it on a redoubt, and called out to his troops: &#x27;By me, my friends, by me, you must stand!

It was only when Frederik Sirtema van Grovestins and his cavalry approached the French fortifications from behind that Friso was able to capture them. The Dutch forces paid a heavy price at Malplaquet, suffering around 10,000 dead and wounded. Yet, Friso’s assaults were not in vain. These fierce attacks made it impossible for Boufflers to reinforce the vulnerable French center, where the Allies ultimately broke through. Nonetheless, he faced significant criticism from the Republic where he was blamed for youthful recklessness and the unnecessary sacrifice of lives.

===Last military actions and Death===
After Malplaquet the Allies marched on Mons and Friso was tasked with leading all operations at the siege. In 1710 he led the Siege of Douai together with the Prince of Anhalt-Dessau. Dessau commanded the right, while Orange led the left. During the siege, the left side made significantly more progress than the right. Years later, Hertel, the Dutch engineer who had served under Dessau, confessed to Vegelin van Claerbergen that he had sabotaged the right-wing&#x27;s efforts, as the Prince of Orange had requested him under four eyes that the progress be delayed there. Later that year he managed to capture Saint Vernant. The prestige that he acquired from his military service should have favored his eventual elevation as stadtholder in the remaining five provinces. However, in 1711, when traveling from the front in Flanders to meet the King of Prussia in The Hague in connection with his suit in the succession dispute, he drowned on 14 July when the ferry boat on the Moerdyk was overturned in heavy weather. His son was born six weeks after his death.

==Marriage and issue==
On 26 April 1709, Friso married Princess Maria Louise of Hesse-Kassel (1688–1765), daughter of Charles I, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel, and granddaughter of Jacob Kettler, Duke of Courland. They had two children.

===Royal descendants===
==Legacy==
* Monuments in Moerdijk and Strijensas, on both sides of the historic ferry crossing across the Hollands Diep, commemorate the drowning of Johan Willem Friso.
* The Regiment Infantry Prins Johan Willem Friso (RI PJWF) is named in his honour.
*Central Royal Military Band of the Netherlands Army &quot;Johan Willem Friso&quot; is named in his honour.
* He is the most recent ancestor of all the monarchs reigned since World War II.

==Ancestry==
==See also==
* Louis IX, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt and Countess Palatine Caroline of Zweibrücken – Became the most recent common ancestors of all reigning hereditary European monarchs in 2022 when Elizabeth II died and her son, Charles, became king.
* Christian IX of Denmark and Louise of Hesse-Kassel – Common ancestors of many reigning hereditary European monarchs
** Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62538" start="0" end="18" title="John William Friso" label="John William Friso"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="74" end="90" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="111" end="122" title="Stadtholder" label="Stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366757" start="126" end="135" title="Lordship of Frisia" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342188" start="140" end="149" title="Lordship of Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="157" end="171" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240425" start="195" end="212" title="Dutch States Army" label="Dutch States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="224" end="253" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q957787" start="300" end="313" title="Hollands Diep" label="Hollands Diep"/>
<link wikidata="Q487070" start="366" end="372" title="Dessau" label="Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155815" start="374" end="380" title="Principality of Anhalt" label="Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q702732" start="403" end="443" title="Henry Casimir II, Prince of Nassau-Dietz" label="Henry Casimir II, Prince of Nassau-Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q271927" start="449" end="491" title="Princess Henriëtte Amalia of Anhalt-Dessau" label="Princess Henriëtte Amalia of Anhalt-Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="523" end="534" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="564" end="579" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="595" end="607" title="House of Nassau#First Counts and Princes of Nassau-Hadamar" label="Nassau-Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="712" end="734" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293929" start="789" end="811" title="University of Franeker" label="University of Franeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="847" end="868" title="William III of Orange" label="William III of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="898" end="916" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="929" end="944" title="House of Orange" label="House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="993" end="1000" title="agnatic" label="agnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029725" start="1055" end="1063" title="cognatic" label="cognatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167236" start="1078" end="1093" title="Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange" label="Frederick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1255" end="1266" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q762943" start="1320" end="1327" title="County of Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="1329" end="1336" title="County of Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679365" start="1338" end="1345" title="Lordship of Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q152420" start="1347" end="1357" title="Duchy of Guelders" label="Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751716" start="1362" end="1372" title="Lordship of Overijssel" label="Overijssel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="1705" end="1725" title="William IV of Orange" label="William IV of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281221" start="1835" end="1857" title="Principality of Orange" label="Principality of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="1890" end="1919" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="2075" end="2097" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878338" start="2117" end="2153" title="William Hyacinth, Prince of Nassau-Siegen" label="Catholic relative from Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q838107" start="2189" end="2204" title="House of Chalon" label="House of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q578007" start="2374" end="2389" title="Louis Armand II, Prince of Conti" label="Prince of Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="2564" end="2581" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240425" start="3131" end="3148" title="Dutch States Army" label="Dutch States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q571545" start="3319" end="3356" title="Henry de Nassau, Lord Overkirk" label="Hendrik van Nassau, Lord of Ouwerkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994787" start="4017" end="4032" title="Siege of Ostend (1706)" label="siege of Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q118897509" start="4041" end="4055" title="Siege of Menin (1706)" label="siege of Menin"/>
<link wikidata="Q316139" start="4121" end="4141" title="Battle of Oudenaarde" label="Battle of Oudenaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q694492" start="4388" end="4402" title="Siege of Lille (1708)" label="Siege of Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="4728" end="4739" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q74836290" start="5187" end="5200" title="Siege of Ghent (1708)" label="Siege of Gent"/>
<link wikidata="Q121746308" start="5292" end="5310" title="Siege of Tournai (1709)" label="marched on Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q682171" start="5343" end="5351" title="Mortagne-du-Nord" label="Mortange"/>
<link wikidata="Q626309" start="5356" end="5367" title="Saint-Amand-les-Eaux" label="Saint-Amand"/>
<link wikidata="Q163795" start="5443" end="5455" title="Valenciennes" label="Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316897" start="5924" end="5944" title="Battle of Malplaquet" label="Battle of Malplaquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q469161" start="6010" end="6032" title="François Nicolas Fagel" label="François Nicolas Fagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468991" start="6067" end="6078" title="Claude Frédéric t&amp;#x27;Serclaes, Count of Tilly" label="Count Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196963" start="6165" end="6173" title="Dutch States Party" label="Orangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="6278" end="6297" title="Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q316827" start="6521" end="6548" title="Louis-François de Boufflers" label="Louis-François de Boufflers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18671461" start="6742" end="6755" title="Henry Withers" label="Henry Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483985" start="7063" end="7071" title="Scots Brigade" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7076" end="7091" title="Swiss mercenaries#Netherlands" label="Swiss regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q119424114" start="7604" end="7635" title="Frederik Sirtema van Grovestins" label="Frederik Sirtema van Grovestins"/>
<link wikidata="Q111145659" start="8298" end="8303" title="Siege of Mons (1709)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q11794857" start="8324" end="8338" title="Siege of Douai (1710)" label="Siege of Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q61695" start="8357" end="8380" title="Leopold I, Prince of Anhalt-Dessau" label="Prince of Anhalt-Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8809" end="8822" title="Saint Vernant" label="Saint Vernant"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="8926" end="8937" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="9022" end="9030" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="9062" end="9071" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q62593" start="9317" end="9354" title="Marie Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Princess Maria Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62516" start="9380" end="9416" title="Charles I, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel" label="Charles I, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313191" start="9439" end="9470" title="Jacob Kettler" label="Jacob Kettler, Duke of Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9854" start="9546" end="9554" title="Moerdijk" label="Moerdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627301" start="9559" end="9569" title="Strijensas" label="Strijensas"/>
<link wikidata="Q667220" start="9696" end="9738" title="Regiment Infanterie Johan Willem Friso" label="Regiment Infantry Prins Johan Willem Friso"/>
<link wikidata="Q13745110" start="9774" end="9856" title="Central Royal Military Band of the Netherlands Army &amp;quot;Johan Willem Friso&amp;quot;" label="Central Royal Military Band of the Netherlands Army &amp;quot;Johan Willem Friso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q213610" start="9991" end="10029" title="Louis IX, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Louis IX, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q62063" start="10034" end="10075" title="Countess Palatine Caroline of Zweibrücken" label="Countess Palatine Caroline of Zweibrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="10176" end="10188" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="10207" end="10214" title="Charles III" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="10231" end="10254" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="Christian IX of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="10259" end="10281" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121175" start="10350" end="10388" title="Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark" label="Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74357" wikidata="Q156628" url="?curid=74357" title="Black Hawk County, Iowa">
<text>Black Hawk County is a county in the northeastern part of the U.S. state of Iowa. As of the 2020 census, the population was 131,144, making it Iowa&#x27;s fifth-most populous county. The county seat is Waterloo.

Black Hawk County is part of the Waterloo – Cedar Falls metropolitan area.

==History==
Black Hawk County was formed on February 17, 1853, from sections of Buchanan County. It was named after Black Hawk, a Sauk leader during the 1832 Black Hawk War.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (1.2%) is water.

The Cedar River roughly divides the county in half from the northwest to the southeast corner. The land is mostly level since much of it is on the river&#x27;s flood plain.

===Major highways===

* Interstate 380
* U.S. Highway 20
* U.S. Highway 63
* U.S. Highway 218
* Iowa Highway 21
* Iowa Highway 27
* Iowa Highway 57
* Iowa Highway 58
* Iowa Highway 175
* Iowa Highway 281
===Transit===
* Metropolitan Transit Authority of Black Hawk County
* List of intercity bus stops in Iowa

===Adjacent counties===
*Bremer County (north)
*Buchanan County (east)
*Benton County (southeast)
*Tama County (southwest)
*Grundy County (west)
*Butler County (northwest)
*Fayette County (northeast)

==Demographics==

===2020 census===
The 2020 census recorded a population of 131,144 in the county, with a population density of . 94.55% of the population reported being of one race. 73.49% were White, 10.43% were Black, 4.92% were Hispanic, 0.32% were Native American, 2.61% were Asian, 0.65% were Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander and 7.57% were some other race or more than one race. There were 58,559 housing units of which 54,223 were occupied.

===2010 census===
The 2010 census recorded a population of 131,090 in the county, with a population density of . There were 55,887 housing units, of which 52,470 were occupied.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 128,012 people, 49,683 households, and 31,946 families in the county. The population density was . There were 51,759 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 88.42% White, 7.95% Black or African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.98% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.93% from other races, and 1.49% from two or more races. 1.84%. were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 49,683 households 29.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.20% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.70% were non-families. 27.10% of households were one person and 10.90% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.97.

Age spread: 23.10% under the age of 18, 15.70% from 18 to 24, 25.20% from 25 to 44, 22.00% from 45 to 64, and 14.00% 65 or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.80 males.

The median household income was $37,266 and the median family income was $47,398. Males had a median income of $33,138 versus $23,394 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,885. About 7.90% of families and 13.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.40% of those under age 18 and 8.90% of those age 65 or over.

==Communities==
===Cities===

*Cedar Falls
*Dunkerton
*Elk Run Heights
*Evansdale
*Gilbertville
*Hudson
*Janesville
*Jesup
*La Porte City
*Raymond
*Waterloo
===Census-designated place===
*Washburn

===Other unincorporated communities===
*Blessing
*Dewar
*Eagle Center
*Finchford
*Glasgow
*Voorhies

===Townships===
Black Hawk County is divided into seventeen townships:

* Barclay
* Bennington
* Big Creek
* Black Hawk
* Cedar
* Cedar Falls
* Eagle
* East Waterloo
* Fox
* Lester
* Lincoln
* Mount Vernon
* Orange
* Poyner
* Spring Creek
* Union
* Washington
===Population ranking===
The population ranking of the following table is based on the 2020 census of Black Hawk County.

† &quot;county seat&quot;

==Politics==
Black Hawk County has been a Democratic stronghold in Iowa since the late 1980s. In presidential politics, it is one of the most Democratic counties in Iowa. As the state swung hard to the right in the 2010s and 2020s, Black Hawk County—as a major population center, in accordance with most other population centers nationwide—has remained staunchly Democratic. In 2016, however, Donald Trump became the first Republican since 1984 to hold the Democratic candidate&#x27;s margin to under 10 percent, and in 2024 Trump came the closest to winning the county since 1984.














==See also==

*National Register of Historic Places listings in Black Hawk County, Iowa
*Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on the meat industry in the United States

==References==

==External links==

*Black Hawk County government&#x27;s website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156628" start="0" end="17" title="Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Black Hawk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="23" end="29" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="62" end="72" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="76" end="80" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="92" end="103" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="187" end="198" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q496381" start="202" end="210" title="Waterloo, Iowa" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974317" start="246" end="286" title="Waterloo – Cedar Falls metropolitan area" label="Waterloo – Cedar Falls metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q714534" start="405" end="415" title="Black Hawk (Sauk leader)" label="Black Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="419" end="423" title="Sauk people" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q879980" start="447" end="461" title="Black Hawk War" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="495" end="513" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052530" start="586" end="597" title="Cedar River (Iowa River)" label="Cedar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="742" end="753" title="flood plain" label="flood plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482539" start="780" end="794" title="Interstate 380 (Iowa)" label="Interstate 380"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481532" start="797" end="812" title="U.S. Route 20 in Iowa" label="U.S. Highway 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869130" start="815" end="830" title="U.S. Route 63 in Iowa" label="U.S. Highway 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q819496" start="833" end="849" title="U.S. Route 218" label="U.S. Highway 218"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192306" start="852" end="867" title="Iowa Highway 21" label="Iowa Highway 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192631" start="870" end="885" title="Iowa Highway 27" label="Iowa Highway 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415786" start="888" end="903" title="Iowa Highway 57" label="Iowa Highway 57"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415826" start="906" end="921" title="Iowa Highway 58" label="Iowa Highway 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478361" start="924" end="940" title="Iowa Highway 175" label="Iowa Highway 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478853" start="943" end="959" title="Iowa Highway 281" label="Iowa Highway 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825282" start="976" end="1027" title="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Black Hawk County" label="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Black Hawk County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1030" end="1065" title="List of intercity bus stops in Iowa" label="List of intercity bus stops in Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q113763" start="1092" end="1105" title="Bremer County, Iowa" label="Bremer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115396" start="1115" end="1130" title="Buchanan County, Iowa" label="Buchanan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q111886" start="1139" end="1152" title="Benton County, Iowa" label="Benton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q119372" start="1166" end="1177" title="Tama County, Iowa" label="Tama County"/>
<link wikidata="Q486139" start="1191" end="1204" title="Grundy County, Iowa" label="Grundy County"/>
<link wikidata="Q113783" start="1213" end="1226" title="Butler County, Iowa" label="Butler County"/>
<link wikidata="Q486184" start="1240" end="1254" title="Fayette County, Iowa" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1925" end="1936" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2110" end="2123" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2149" end="2154" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2162" end="2167" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2171" end="2187" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2195" end="2210" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2218" end="2223" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2231" end="2247" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2319" end="2327" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2331" end="2337" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3259" end="3271" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q582212" start="3379" end="3390" title="Cedar Falls, Iowa" label="Cedar Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932636" start="3392" end="3401" title="Dunkerton, Iowa" label="Dunkerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933401" start="3403" end="3418" title="Elk Run Heights, Iowa" label="Elk Run Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933379" start="3420" end="3429" title="Evansdale, Iowa" label="Evansdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933253" start="3431" end="3443" title="Gilbertville, Iowa" label="Gilbertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931703" start="3445" end="3451" title="Hudson, Iowa" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931630" start="3453" end="3463" title="Janesville, Iowa" label="Janesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930436" start="3465" end="3470" title="Jesup, Iowa" label="Jesup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913054" start="3472" end="3485" title="La Porte City, Iowa" label="La Porte City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925900" start="3487" end="3494" title="Raymond, Iowa" label="Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q496381" start="3496" end="3504" title="Waterloo, Iowa" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801348" start="3536" end="3544" title="Washburn, Iowa" label="Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089860" start="3586" end="3594" title="Blessing, Iowa" label="Blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268073" start="3596" end="3601" title="Dewar, Iowa" label="Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325045" start="3603" end="3615" title="Eagle Center, Iowa" label="Eagle Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q86755819" start="3617" end="3626" title="Finchford, Iowa" label="Finchford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3628" end="3635" title="Glasgow, Iowa" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902780" start="3637" end="3645" title="Voorhies, Iowa" label="Voorhies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28111" start="3707" end="3716" title="Township (United States)" label="townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218241" start="3721" end="3728" title="Barclay Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219056" start="3731" end="3741" title="Bennington Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q685583" start="3744" end="3753" title="Big Creek Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Big Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218525" start="3756" end="3766" title="Black Hawk Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Black Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q523911" start="3769" end="3774" title="Cedar Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220262" start="3777" end="3788" title="Cedar Falls Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Cedar Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220091" start="3791" end="3796" title="Eagle Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218894" start="3799" end="3812" title="East Waterloo Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="East Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220108" start="3815" end="3818" title="Fox Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219236" start="3821" end="3827" title="Lester Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218938" start="3830" end="3837" title="Lincoln Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220637" start="3840" end="3852" title="Mount Vernon Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220985" start="3855" end="3861" title="Orange Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221140" start="3864" end="3870" title="Poyner Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Poyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220715" start="3873" end="3885" title="Spring Creek Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Spring Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221050" start="3888" end="3893" title="Union Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221643" start="3896" end="3906" title="Washington Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3994" end="4005" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975440" start="4667" end="4739" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Black Hawk County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q92248082" start="4741" end="4825" title="Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on the meat industry in the United States" label="Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on the meat industry in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74359" wikidata="Q280670" url="?curid=74359" title="Sonority hierarchy">
<text>A sonority hierarchy or sonority scale is a hierarchical ranking of speech sounds (or phones). Sonority is loosely defined as the loudness of speech sounds relative to other sounds of the same pitch, length and stress, therefore sonority is often related to rankings for phones to their amplitude. For example, pronouncing the vowel [a] will produce a louder sound than the stop [t], so [a] would rank higher in the hierarchy. However, grounding sonority in amplitude is not universally accepted. Instead, many researchers refer to sonority as the resonance of speech sounds. This relates to the degree to which production of phones results in vibrations of air particles. Thus, sounds that are described as more sonorous are less subject to masking by ambient noises.

Sonority hierarchies are especially important when analyzing syllable structure; rules about what segments may appear in onsets or codas together, such as SSP, are formulated in terms of the difference of their sonority values. Some languages also have assimilation rules based on sonority hierarchy, for example, the Finnish potential mood, in which a less sonorous segment changes to copy a more sonorous adjacent segment (e.g. &quot;-tne- → -nne-&quot;).

==Sonority hierarchy==
Sonority hierarchies vary somewhat in which sounds are grouped together. The one below is fairly typical:
Sound types are the most sonorous on the left side of the scale, and become progressively less sonorous towards the right (e.g., fricatives are less sonorous than nasals).

The labels on the left refer to distinctive features, and categories of sounds can be grouped together according to whether they share a feature. For instance, as shown in the sonority hierarchy above, vowels are considered [+syllabic], whereas all consonants (including stops, affricates, fricatives, etc.) are considered [−syllabic]. All sound categories falling under [+sonorant] are sonorants, whereas those falling under [−sonorant] are obstruents. In this way, any contiguous set of sound types may be grouped together on the basis of no more than two features (for instance, glides, liquids, and nasals are [−syllabic, +sonorant]).

==Sonority scale==


In English, the sonority scale, from highest to lowest, is the following:

In simpler terms, the scale has members of the same group hold the same sonority from the greatest to the smallest presence of vibrations in the vocal folds. Vowels have the most vibrations, but consonants are characterized as such in part by the lack of vibrations or a break in vibrations. The top of the scale, open vowels, has the most air used for vibrations, and the bottom of the scale has the least air being used for vibrations. That can be demonstrated by putting a few fingers on one&#x27;s throat and pronouncing an open vowel such as the vowel [a], and then pronouncing one of the plosives (also known as stop consonants) of the [p t k] class. For vowels, there is a consistent level pressure generated from the lungs and diaphragm, and the difference in pressure in one&#x27;s body and outside the mouth is minimal. For plosive, the pressure generated from the lungs and diaphragm changes significantly, and the difference in pressure in one&#x27;s body and outside the mouth is maximal before release (no air is flowing, and the vocal folds are not resisting the air flow).

More finely-nuanced hierarchies often exist within classes whose members cannot be said to be distinguished by relative sonority. In North American English, for example, the set /p t k/ has /t/ being by far the most subject to weakening when before an unstressed vowel (the usual American pronunciation has /t/ as a flap in &quot;later&quot; but normally no weakening of /p/ in &quot;caper&quot; or of /k/ in &quot;faker&quot;).

In Portuguese, intervocalic /n/ and /l/ are typically lost historically (e.g. Lat. LUNA &gt; /lua/ &#x27;moon&#x27;, DONARE &gt; /doar/ &#x27;donate&#x27;, COLORE &gt; /kor/ &#x27;color&#x27;), but /r/ remains (CERA &gt; /sera/ &#x27;wax&#x27;), but Romanian has transformed the intervocalic non-geminate /l/ into /r/ (SOLEM &gt; /so̯are/ &#x27;sun&#x27;) and reduced the geminate /ll/ to /l/ (OLLA &gt; /o̯alə/ &#x27;pot&#x27;). It has, however, left /n/ (LUNA &gt; /lunə/ &#x27;moon&#x27;) and /r/ (PIRA &gt; /parə/ &#x27;pear&#x27;) unchanged. Similarly, Romance languages often have geminate /mm/ weaker than /nn/, and geminate /rr/ is often stronger than other geminates, including /pp tt kk/. In such cases, many phonologists refer not to sonority but to a more abstract notion of relative strength. The latter was once posited as universal in its arrangement, but it is now known to be language-specific.

==Sonority in phonotactics==
Syllable structure tends to be highly influenced and motivated by the sonority scale, with the general rule that more sonorous elements are internal (i.e., close to the syllable nucleus) and less sonorant elements are external. For instance, the sequence /plant/ is permissible in many languages, while /lpatn/ is much less likely. (This is the sonority sequencing principle). This rule is applied with varying levels of strictness cross-linguistically, with many languages allowing exceptions: for example, in English, /s/ can be found external to stops even though it is more sonorous (e.g. &quot;strong&quot;, &quot;hats&quot;).

In many languages the presence of two non-adjacent highly-sonorous elements can be a reliable indication of how many syllables are in the word; /ata/ is most likely two syllables, and many languages would deal with the sequences like /mbe/ or /lpatn/ by pronouncing them as multiple syllables, with syllabic sonorants: [m̩.be] and [l̩.pat.n̩].

==Ecological patterns in sonority==

The sonority ranking of speech sounds plays an important role in developing phonological patterns in language, which allows for the intelligible transmission of speech between individuals in a society. Differences in the occurrence of particular sounds in languages around the world have been observed by numerous researchers. It has been suggested that these differences are as a result of ecological pressures.

This understanding was developed from the acoustic adaptation hypothesis, which was a theory initially used to understand differences in bird songs across varying habitats. However, the theory has been applied by researchers as a base for understanding why differences are shown in speech sounds within spoken languages around the world.

===Climates===
Maddieson and Coupé’s study on 633 languages worldwide observed that some of the variation in the sonority of speech sounds in languages can be accounted for by differences in climate. The pattern follows that in warmer climatic zones, language is more sonorous compared to languages in cooler climatic zones which favour the use of consonants. To explain these differences they emphasise the influence of atmospheric absorption and turbulence within warmer, ambient air, which may disrupt the integrity of acoustic signals. Therefore, employing more sonorous sounds in a language may reduce the distortion of soundwaves in warmer climates. 
Fought and Munroe instead argue that these disparities in speech sounds are as a result of differences in the daily activities of individuals in different climates. Proposing that throughout history individuals residing in warmer climates tend to spend more time outdoors (likely engaging in agricultural work or social activities), therefore speech requires effective propagation of sound through the air for acoustic signals to meet the recipient over these long distances, unlike in cooler climates where people are communicating over shorter distances (spend more time indoors).
Another explanation is that languages have adapted to maintain homeostasis. Thermoregulation aims to ensure body temperature remains within a certain range of values, allowing for the proper functioning of cells. Therefore, it has been argued that differences in the regularity of phones in a language are an adaptation which helps to regulate internal bodily temperatures. Employing the use of open vowels like /a/ which is highly sonorous, requires the opening of vocal articulators. This allows for air to flow out of the mouth and with it evaporating water which reduces internal bodily temperatures. In contrast, voiceless plosives like /t/ are more common in cooler climates. Producing this speech sound obstructs airflow out of the mouth due to the constriction of vocal articulators. Thus, reducing the transfer of heat out of the body, which is important for individuals residing in cooler climates.

===Vegetation===
A positive correlation exists, so that as temperature increases, so does the use of more sonorous speech sounds. However, the presence of dense vegetation coverage leads to the correlation occurring oppositely, so that less sonorous speech sounds are favoured by warmer climates when the area is covered by dense vegetation. This is said to be because in warmer climates with dense vegetation coverage individuals instead communicate over shorter distances, therefore favour speech sounds which are ranked lower in the sonority hierarchy.

===Altitude===
Everett, (2013) suggested that in high elevation regions such as in the Andes, languages regularly employ the use of ejective plosives like /kʼ/. Everett argued that in high altitude areas, with reduced ambient air pressure, the use of ejectives allows for ease of articulation when producing speech. Moreover, as no air is flowing out of the vocal folds, water is conserved whilst communicating, thus reducing dehydration in individuals residing in high elevation regions.

A range of other additional factors have also been observed which affect the degree of sonority of a particular language such as precipitation and sexual restrictiveness. Inevitably, the patterns become more complex when considering a range of ecological factors simultaneously. Moreover, large amounts of variation are shown which may be due to patterns of migration.

==References==
==External links==
*What is the sonority scale?
*Lingua::Phonology::Syllable — Perl module for extracting sonority scale from text.
*https://glossary.sil.org/term/sonority-scale
*The Syllable and Phonotactic Constraints
*http://linguismstics.tumblr.com/post/16916697835/linguistics-sonority-hierarchy
*The Derivation of a Sonority Hierarchy from the Syllable Contact Law (SCL) and the Productivity of SCL in American English
* Dual inheritance theory#Biased transmission</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q280670" start="2" end="20" title="Sonority hierarchy" label="sonority hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q280670" start="24" end="38" title="Sonority hierarchy" label="sonority scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="68" end="74" title="speech communication" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="75" end="80" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q202064" start="86" end="92" title="Phone (phonetics)" label="phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="327" end="332" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="374" end="378" title="stop consonant" label="stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="831" end="839" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q602418" start="868" end="876" title="Segment (linguistics)" label="segments"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="891" end="897" title="syllable onset" label="onsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="901" end="906" title="syllable coda" label="codas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562250" start="925" end="928" title="Sonority Sequencing Principle" label="SSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q148877" start="1023" end="1035" title="assimilation (linguistics)" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362703" start="1096" end="1110" title="potential mood" label="potential mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152224" start="1563" end="1582" title="distinctive feature" label="distinctive feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="1918" end="1926" title="sonorant" label="sonorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="1973" end="1982" title="obstruent" label="obstruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2195" end="2202" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="2818" end="2823" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="2885" end="2901" title="Stop consonant" label="stop consonants)"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="4083" end="4091" title="gemination" label="geminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="4898" end="4914" title="syllable nucleus" label="syllable nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562250" start="5074" end="5103" title="Sonority Sequencing Principle" label="sonority sequencing principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="5278" end="5283" title="stop consonant" label="stops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153018" start="5876" end="5888" title="Intelligibility (communication)" label="intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="6135" end="6155" title="Ecological selection" label="ecological pressures"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="7800" end="7811" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="7813" end="7829" title="Thermoregulation" label="Thermoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q748953" start="8203" end="8221" title="Vocal tract" label="vocal articulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="9291" end="9296" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663077" start="9360" end="9362" title="velar ejective" label="kʼ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="10158" end="10162" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10506" end="10549" title="Dual inheritance theory#Biased transmission" label="Dual inheritance theory#Biased transmission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="74360" wikidata="Q1951543" url="?curid=74360" title="Ms.">
<text>Ms. (American English) or Ms (British English; normally , but also , or when unstressed) is an English-language honorific used with the last name or full name of a woman, intended as a default form of address for women regardless of marital status. Like &quot;Miss&quot; and &quot;Mrs.&quot;, the term &quot;Ms.&quot; has its origins in the female English title once used for all women, &quot;Mistress&quot;. It originated in the 17th century and was revived into mainstream usage in the 20th century.

It is followed by a full stop, or period, in Canada and the United States, but not in many other English-speaking countries.

== Historical development and revival of the term ==
Miss and Mrs., both derived from the then formal Mistress, like Mister did not originally indicate marital status. Ms. was another acceptable abbreviation for Mistress in England in the 17th and 18th centuries. During the 19th century, however, Mrs. and Miss came to be associated almost exclusively with marital status. Ms. was popularized as an alternative in the 20th century.

The earliest known proposal for the modern revival of Ms. as a title appeared in &quot;The Republican&quot; of Springfield, Massachusetts, on November 10, 1901:

The term was again suggested as a convenience to writers of business letters by such publications as the &quot;Bulletin of the American Business Writing Association&quot; (1951) and &quot;The Simplified Letter&quot;, issued by the National Office Management Association (1952).

In 1961, Sheila Michaels attempted to put the term into use when she saw what she thought was a typographical error on the address label of a copy of &quot;News &amp; Letters&quot; sent to her roommate. Michaels &quot;was looking for a title for a woman who did not &#x27;belong&#x27; to a man.&quot; She knew the separation of the now common terms &quot;Miss&quot; and &quot;Mrs.&quot; had derived from &quot;Mistress&quot;, but one could not suggest that women use the original title with its now louche connotations. Her efforts to promote use of a new honorific were at first ignored.
In 1969, during a lull in an interview with &quot;The Feminists&quot; group on WBAI-FM radio in New York City, Michaels suggested the use of &quot;Ms.&quot; A friend of Gloria Steinem heard the interview and suggested it as a title for her new magazine. The magazine &quot;Ms.&quot; debuted on newsstands in January 1972, and its much-publicized name quickly led to widespread usage. In February 1972, the US Government Printing Office approved using &quot;Ms.&quot; in official government documents. In 1976, Marvel Comics introduced a new superhero named Ms. Marvel, billing her as the &quot;first feminist superhero.&quot;
Even several public opponents of such usage, including William Safire, were finally convinced that &quot;Ms.&quot; had earned a place in English by the case of US Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro. Ferraro, a United States vice-presidential candidate in 1984, was a married woman who used her birth surname professionally rather than her husband&#x27;s (Zaccaro). Safire, though saying &quot;it breaks my heart,&quot; admitted in 1984 that it would be equally incorrect to call her &quot;Miss Ferraro&quot; (as she was married) or &quot;Mrs. Ferraro&quot; (as her husband was not &quot;Mr. Ferraro&quot;)—and that calling her &quot;Mrs. Zaccaro&quot; would confuse the reader.

== Usage ==
Suggestions about how &quot;Ms.&quot; should be used, or whether it should be used at all, are varied, with more criticism in the U.K. than in the U.S.

&quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; states in its style guide that &quot;Ms&quot; should only be used if a subject requests it herself and it &quot;should not be used merely because we do not know whether the woman is Mrs or Miss.&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot;, which restricts its use of honorific titles to leading articles, states in its style guide: &quot;use Ms for women ... unless they have expressed a preference for Miss or Mrs.&quot; A BBC Academy style guide states, &quot;In choosing between Miss, Mrs and Ms, try to find out what the person herself uses, and stick to that.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; embraces the use of all three: Mrs., Miss, and Ms., and will follow the individual’s preferences.

Some British etiquette writers and famous figures do not support the use of &quot;Ms&quot;, including Charles Kidd, the editor of Debrett&#x27;s Peerage and Baronetage, who claims the usage is &quot;not very helpful&quot; and that he had been &quot;brought up to address a married woman as Mrs John Smith, for example.&quot; Debrett&#x27;s itself, concerning the case of a married woman who chooses not to take her husband&#x27;s name, states, &quot;The ugly-sounding Ms is problematic. Although many women have assumed this bland epithet, it remains incorrect to use it when addressing a social letter.&quot; The former British Conservative Party Member of Parliament (MP) Ann Widdecombe has stated, &quot;I can&#x27;t see the point of Ms and I don&#x27;t see it as an issue&quot;, whilst author and journalist Jessica Fellowes describes the title Ms as &quot;ghastly.&quot; The Queen&#x27;s English Society has criticised the use of Ms as &quot;an abbreviation that is not short for anything&quot;, describing it as a &quot;linguistic misfit [that] came about because certain women suddenly became sensitive about revealing their marital status.&quot;

The default use of &quot;Ms.&quot;, especially for business purposes, is championed by some American sources, including Judith Martin (&quot;a.k.a.&quot; Miss Manners). Concerning business, the Emily Post Institute states, &quot;Ms. is the default form of address, unless you know positively that a woman wishes to be addressed as Mrs.&quot; &quot;The American Heritage Book of English Usage&quot; states, &quot;Using Ms. obviates the need for the guesswork involved in figuring out whether to address someone as Mrs. or Miss: you can&#x27;t go wrong with Ms. Whether the woman you are addressing is married or unmarried, has changed her name or not, Ms. is always correct.&quot;

== Notes ==
== External links ==

* &quot;The Times&quot; style guide
* &quot;The Guardian&quot; style guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1951543" start="0" end="3" title="Ms." label="Ms."/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="5" end="21" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951543" start="26" end="28" title="Ms." label="Ms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="30" end="45" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378582" start="95" end="121" title="English honorific" label="English-language honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359947" start="260" end="264" title="Miss" label="Miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q313549" start="281" end="284" title="Mrs." label="Mrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910781" start="393" end="401" title="Mistress (form of address)" label="Mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q172008" start="523" end="532" title="full stop" label="full stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="548" end="554" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="563" end="576" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359947" start="682" end="686" title="Miss" label="Miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q313549" start="691" end="695" title="Mrs." label="Mrs."/>
<link wikidata="Q2276678" start="1150" end="1164" title="The Republican (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="The Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1174" end="1200" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q32328303" start="1513" end="1528" title="Sheila Michaels" label="Sheila Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983661" start="1660" end="1678" title="News &amp;amp; Letters" label="News &amp;amp; Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651267" start="2172" end="2176" title="WBAI" label="WBAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="2262" end="2276" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656351" start="2366" end="2369" title="Ms. (magazine)" label="Ms."/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="2603" end="2616" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="2634" end="2643" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316552" start="2650" end="2660" title="Ms. Marvel" label="Ms. Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q254983" start="2774" end="2788" title="William Safire" label="William Safire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2879" end="2895" title="US Congresswoman" label="US Congresswoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="2896" end="2913" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="3566" end="3585" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3799" end="3811" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q871232" start="3866" end="3881" title="leading article" label="leading article"/>
<link wikidata="Q15007283" start="4003" end="4014" title="BBC Academy" label="BBC Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4156" end="4174" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248561" start="4410" end="4424" title="Debrett&amp;#x27;s" label="Debrett&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4909" end="4927" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="4928" end="4948" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q298846" start="4954" end="4968" title="Ann Widdecombe" label="Ann Widdecombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187198" start="5092" end="5108" title="Jessica Fellowes" label="Jessica Fellowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269985" start="5160" end="5188" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s English Society" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s English Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303561" start="5555" end="5568" title="Judith Martin" label="Judith Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731892" start="5629" end="5649" title="Emily Post Institute" label="Emily Post Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
