<doc id="66880" wikidata="Q194369" url="?curid=66880" title="New York Islanders">
<text>The New York Islanders (colloquially known as the Isles) are a professional ice hockey team based in Elmont, New York. The Islanders compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Metropolitan Division in the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at UBS Arena. The Islanders are one of three NHL franchises in the New York metropolitan area, along with the New Jersey Devils and New York Rangers, and their fanbase resides primarily on Long Island.

The team was founded in 1972 as part of the NHL&#x27;s maneuvers to keep a team from rival league World Hockey Association (WHA) out of the newly built Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in suburban Uniondale, New York. After two years of building up the team&#x27;s roster, they found almost instant success by securing 14 straight playoff berths starting with their third season. The Islanders won four consecutive Stanley Cup championships between 1980 and 1983, the eighth of nine dynasties recognized by the NHL in its history. Their 19 consecutive playoff series wins between 1980 and 1984 is a feat that remains unparalleled in the history of professional sports. They are the last team in any major professional North American sport to win four consecutive championships, and to date the last NHL team to achieve a three-peat.

Following the team&#x27;s dynasty era, the franchise ran into problems with money, ownership and management, an aging arena, and low attendance. Their woes were reflected on the ice, as the team has not won a division title since 1987–88, and went 22 seasons without winning a playoff series prior to the 2016 playoffs. After years of failed attempts to rebuild or replace Nassau Coliseum in suburban Long Island, the Islanders relocated to Barclays Center in Brooklyn following the 2014–15 season. In the 2018–19 and 2019–20 seasons, the Islanders split their home games between Barclays Center and Nassau Coliseum. The Islanders played all their home games in the 2020–21 season at Nassau Coliseum. Their new arena near Belmont Park was opened in 2021.

Ten former members of the Islanders have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame, seven of whom—Mike Bossy, Clark Gillies, Denis Potvin, Billy Smith, Bryan Trottier, coach Al Arbour, and general manager Bill Torrey—were members of all four Cup-winning teams. Post-dynasty players Pat LaFontaine, Roberto Luongo and Pierre Turgeon were also inducted.

==History==

===The NHL heads to Long Island (1972–1974)===
In fall 1972, the emerging World Hockey Association (WHA) planned to place its New York team, the New York Raiders, in Nassau County&#x27;s brand-new Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum. County officials did not consider the WHA a major league and wanted to keep the Raiders out. William Shea, who had helped bring Major League Baseball&#x27;s New York Mets to the area a decade earlier, was enlisted to bring an NHL team to Long Island. Although Shea had previously worked with upstart rival leagues including the aborted Continental League, the American Football League and the American Basketball Association, his ultimate goal in these efforts had always been to try to persuade the established leagues to grant second franchises to New York as had been the case with the Mets (and also with the New York Jets and New York Nets, as a result of those teams&#x27; leagues merging with their established rivals).
In contrast, Shea decided there was no need to work with the WHA since unlike the initial results of his previous approaches to established leagues in the other major sports, Shea immediately found NHL president Clarence Campbell to be receptive to adding a second team in New York. Nevertheless, the Islanders&#x27; bid faced opposition from the New York Rangers, who did not want additional competition in the New York area. Eventually, Campbell and Shea persuaded the Rangers&#x27; owners, Madison Square Garden, to reconsider. Rangers&#x27; president Bill Jennings weighed pros and cons. Another local NHL team would be compelled to compensate the Rangers for sharing the New York area. On the other hand, a WHA team would owe the Rangers nothing unless it was included in a potential NHL–WHA merger, a prospect to which both Campbell and Jennings were adamantly opposed. Finally, consenting to the establishment of an NHL franchise in suburban Nassau County would help to ensure the vast majority of the Rangers&#x27; fanbase within New York City proper would continue to support the older franchise, and reduced the prospect of a rival league eventually establishing a team and fanbase there. Perhaps remembering the crucial role the Jets had played in ensuring the success of the AFL just a few years earlier as a challenger of the National Football League, Jennings decided to help bring a new NHL team to the New York metropolitan area.

Despite expanding to 14 teams just two years prior, the NHL awarded a Long Island-based franchise to clothing manufacturer Roy Boe, owner of the American Basketball Association&#x27;s New York Nets, on November 8, 1971. The terms included $6 million ($ million in dollars) franchise fee plus a $5 million ($ million in dollars) territorial fee to the Rangers. An expansion franchise was also given to Atlanta (the Flames) to keep the schedule balanced and to prevent the WHA from entering the growing market at the newly built Omni Coliseum.

The New York Islanders name was unveiled by the franchise on February 15, 1972, at a press conference held across the street from Roosevelt Raceway at a restaurant owned by Burt Bacharach. Many expected it to use the &quot;Long Island Ducks&quot;, after the Eastern Hockey League team that played from 1959 to 1973. The team was soon nicknamed the &quot;Isles&quot; by the local newspapers. The Islanders&#x27; arrival effectively doomed the Raiders, who played in Madison Square Garden under difficult lease terms and were forced to move to Cherry Hill, New Jersey in the middle of their second season.

Former California Golden Seals executive vice president Bill Torrey was named as the team&#x27;s general manager at the same press conference as the franchise&#x27;s name unveiling. The Islanders secured veteran forward Ed Westfall, defenseman Gerry Hart, and goaltender Billy Smith in the 1972 expansion draft, along with junior ice hockey stars Billy Harris, Lorne Henning, and Bobby Nystrom in the 1972 amateur draft. Soon after the draft, Phil Goyette was named as the team&#x27;s first head coach, however he was fired halfway through the season and replaced with Earl Ingarfield and assistant coach Aut Erickson. Unlike most other expansion teams&#x27; general managers, Torrey made few trades for veteran players in the early years, as he was committed to building the team through the draft. Torrey stated, &quot;I told the owners that we&#x27;re not going to beat this team next door by taking the castoffs from others teams. We&#x27;d have to develop our own stars.&quot; Before the season began, Westfall was named the team&#x27;s first captain.

By September 1972, the Islanders were waiting for the Nassau Coliseum to be completed as well as their practice facility &quot;The Royal Ice Rink&quot; in Kings Park. The team was forced to practice as late as October 6, the day before their first game, at the Rangers practice rink in New Hyde Park.

The Islanders&#x27; first win came on October 12, 1972, in a 3–2 game against the Los Angeles Kings. In the team&#x27;s first season, young players such as Smith, Nystrom, and Henning (all of whom would be part of the Islanders dynasty of the early 1980s) were given chances to prove themselves in the NHL. The young and inexperienced expansion team, however, posted a record of 12–60–6, setting an NHL record for most losses and worst overall record in a season. A highlight occurred on January 18, 1973, when they defeated the defending Stanley Cup champion Boston Bruins 9–7.

Finishing last in the standings that season, they received the right to select first in the 1973 draft. Off the ice, the Islanders struggled financially, a situation that was exacerbated by the then-unprecedented $11 million in franchise and territorial fees. Montreal Canadiens&#x27; general manager Sam Pollock was keen to acquire the Islanders&#x27; pick so he could draft French Canadian junior star defenseman Denis Potvin, who had been touted as &quot;the next Bobby Orr&quot; when he was 14 years old. Pollock made several lucrative trade offers including cash to the Islanders, but Torrey turned the Canadiens down and selected Potvin with the first overall pick. During the off-season, Torrey convinced former St. Louis Blues coach Al Arbour to come coach the Islanders. Even with Arbour as the team&#x27;s head coach and Potvin, who won the Calder Memorial Trophy as NHL Rookie of the Year, the team again finished last in the East Division during the 1973–74 season, but allowed 100 fewer goals than the previous season. The season included their first win against the Rangers, on October 27, 1973, which also happened to be the game where Potvin scored his first NHL goal. Although they failed to make the playoffs, their 56 points represented a 26-point improvement from the previous season.

===Ascendancy and playoff inability (1974–1979)===

With the 4th and 22nd picks in the 1974 draft, the Islanders added young forwards Clark Gillies and Bryan Trottier to continue Torrey&#x27;s building plan. In the 1974–75 season, the Islanders made one of the biggest turnarounds in NHL history. Led by Potvin, forwards Westfall, Harris, Nystrom, Gillies, and goaltenders Smith and Glenn &quot;Chico&quot; Resch, the team earned 88 points, 32 more than the previous season and two more than their first two seasons combined, earning their first playoff berth. They defeated the rival New York Rangers in a best-of-3 first-round series as J. P. Parise scored just 11 seconds into overtime of the third game. In the next round, down three games to none in a best-of-seven series against the Pittsburgh Penguins, the Islanders rallied to win the next four and take the series-winning game 7 on a late third-period goal by Westfall. Only four other major North American professional sports teams have accomplished this feat (the 1941–42 Toronto Maple Leafs, 2004 Boston Red Sox, the 2009–10 Philadelphia Flyers, and the 2013–14 Los Angeles Kings). They were close but not as lucky in the following round, rallying from another 3–0 deficit to force a seventh game against the defending Stanley Cup champion Philadelphia Flyers before the Flyers took the decisive seventh game at home and went on to win the Cup again. Despite a disappointing playoff finish, Arbour remained complimentary of the team&#x27;s attitude and maturity, saying &quot;If I called a practice next week, every one of them would show up.&quot;

The Islanders continued their climb up the standings in 1975–76, earning 101 points and the fifth-best record in the league. It was the first 100-point season in Islanders history, in only their fourth year of existence. Rookie center Trottier finished the season with 95 points and won the Calder Memorial Trophy; his points and assists (63) totals set a new league record for most in each category by a rookie. It would be the first of four consecutive 100-point seasons, including the first two division titles in franchise history. Despite the emergence of young star players and regular season success between 1976 and 1979 the Islanders suffered a series of playoff disappointments. In 1976 and 1977 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Islanders were knocked out in the semifinals by the eventual Stanley Cup champions, the Montreal Canadiens. The Canadiens posted a 24–3 record in the playoffs during those two seasons with all three losses coming at the hands of the Islanders.
In the 1977 draft, Torrey had the 15th overall pick and was deciding between forwards Mike Bossy and Dwight Foster. Bossy was known as an emerging scorer who lacked physicality. Foster was known as a solid checker with marginal offensive ability (despite having led the Ontario Hockey League in scoring). Arbour persuaded Torrey to pick Bossy, arguing it was easier to teach a scorer how to check. In the 1977–78 season, Bossy became the third Islander to win the Calder Trophy, and scored 53 goals that season, a rookie record at the time. The team earned their first Patrick Division and Campbell Conference championships. Six players finished the season with 30 goals scored or more, with five of them Islanders draft picks, showing the success of the draft building process. The season ended with a familiar result in the playoffs, as the team lost in overtime in game 7 of the quarterfinals against the Toronto Maple Leafs.

In 1978–79, the team finished with the best record in the NHL, clinching it with three goals in the third period of the season&#x27;s final game against the Rangers. Trottier won the Hart Memorial Trophy as league MVP and captured the Art Ross Trophy for the most points, while sophomore Bossy scored 69 goals, which also led the league. Despite their regular season dominance, the Islanders exited the playoffs with another upset playoff loss, this time to the Rangers in the semifinals. As the team was leaving Madison Square Garden following their game 6 elimination, Rangers fans rocked and threw objects at the team&#x27;s bus. Hockey professionals and journalists generally questioned whether the Islanders were capable of winning the important games needed to win a Stanley Cup championship. Islander players would cite fear of repeating the pain of this loss as spurring their later success. After transferring the captaincy to Gillies the season before, Westfall retired and shortly thereafter became a color commentator on the team&#x27;s telecasts.

Off the ice, the Islanders were on shaky ground. Boe was losing money on both his franchises, even as the Islanders quickly surged to NHL prominence and the Nets became an ABA power. The Islanders were still far behind on the $10 million they had paid in startup costs, and the expansion and territorial fees associated with moving the Nets to the National Basketball Association threw Boe&#x27;s finances into a tailspin. Eventually, Boe was forced to sell both his teams. He readily found a buyer for the Nets, but had less luck finding one for the Islanders. Torrey orchestrated a sale to one of the team&#x27;s limited partners, John Pickett. In return, Pickett promoted Torrey to team president, though Torrey had already been operating head of the franchise before then. Soon after purchasing the team, Pickett signed a very lucrative cable television contract with the fledgling SportsChannel network as their owner, Charles Dolan, thought the up-and-coming Islanders would be a perfect centerpiece for his new network. Dolan gave Pickett a long-term guaranteed contract intended not only to keep the team on Long Island, but give area governments an incentive to renew his cable contracts. The Islanders have remained on the network, now known as MSG Sportsnet, for over four decades.

===The Dynasty (1979–1983)===
After the Islanders&#x27; regular season dominance and playoff disappointment in 1979, Arbour decided that he would no longer concern himself too greatly with his team&#x27;s finish in the regular season. Instead, he focused his team&#x27;s energy on how they would perform in the playoffs. In 1980, the Islanders dropped below the 100-point mark for the first time in five years, earning only 91 points. However, they finally broke through and won the Stanley Cup.
Before the playoffs, Torrey made the difficult decision to trade longtime and popular veterans Billy Harris and defenseman Dave Lewis to the Los Angeles Kings for second line center Butch Goring. Goring&#x27;s arrival is often called the &quot;final piece of the puzzle&quot;, a strong two-way player, his presence on the second line ensured that opponents would no longer be able to focus their defensive efforts on the Islanders&#x27; first line of Bossy, Trottier and Clark Gillies. Contributions from new teammates, such as wingers Duane Sutter and Anders Kallur and stay-at-home defensemen Dave Langevin, Gord Lane, and Ken Morrow (the latter fresh off a gold medal win at the 1980 Olympics), also figured prominently in the Islanders&#x27; playoff success.

In the playoffs, the Islanders defeated the Los Angeles Kings 3–1 in the preliminary round, then beat the Boston Bruins 4–1 in the quarterfinals. In the semifinals, the Islanders faced the Buffalo Sabres, who had finished second overall in the NHL standings. The Islanders won the first two games in Buffalo, including a 2–1 victory in game two on Bob Nystrom&#x27;s goal in double overtime. They went on to win the series in six games and reach the finals for the first time in franchise history, where they would face the NHL&#x27;s regular season champions, the Philadelphia Flyers, who had gone undefeated for 35 straight games (25–0–10) during the regular season. In game one in Philadelphia, the Islanders won 4–3 on Denis Potvin&#x27;s power-play goal in overtime. Leading the series 3–2, they went home to Long Island for game six. In that game the Islanders blew a 4–2 lead in the third period but Nystrom continued his overtime heroics, scoring at 7:11 of the extra frame, on assists by John Tonelli and Lorne Henning, to bring Long Island its first Stanley Cup championship. This was the most recent Stanley Cup-clinching game won in overtime by the home team until the Los Angeles Kings did it in 2014. It was also the Islanders&#x27; sixth overtime victory of the playoffs. Bryan Trottier won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player in the playoffs. Torrey&#x27;s strategy of building through the draft turned out very well; nearly all of the major contributors on the 1980 champions were home-grown Islanders or had spent most of their NHL careers in the Islanders organization. The Islanders were the first NHL team to win the Stanley Cup with Europeans (Stefan Persson and Kallur) on its roster.

The Islanders dominated the next two seasons. Bossy scored 50 goals in 50 games in 1981 and the Islanders lost only three playoff games en route to defeating the Minnesota North Stars in five games to win the Stanley Cup. Goring won the Conn Smythe Trophy. During their semifinals sweep of the Rangers, Islander fans began taunting the Rangers with a chant of &quot;1940!&quot; – referring to the Rangers&#x27; last Stanley Cup win in (the Rangers would not win the cup again until 1994). Fans in other NHL cities soon picked up the chant.
In 1981–82, the Islanders won a then-record 15 straight games en route to a franchise-record 118 points, while Mike Bossy set a scoring record for right-wingers with 147 points in an 80-game schedule. The Islanders finished with the most points in the league (118), yet once in the playoffs against the Pittsburgh Penguins they found themselves down late in the third period of deciding game 5 before John Tonelli scored both the tying goal and the overtime winner. After defeating the Rangers in six games they swept both the Quebec Nordiques and the Vancouver Canucks in the first-ever coast-to-coast Stanley Cup Finals for their third straight championship. During that series Bossy, upended by a check from Tiger Williams and falling parallel to the ice, managed to hook the puck with his stick and score. Bossy netted the Stanley Cup-winning goal and was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy.

The next year, although the Islanders had won the Stanley Cup three straight times, more attention was being paid to the upstart Edmonton Oilers, whose young superstar Wayne Gretzky had just shattered existing scoring records. In 1982–83 the Oilers had a better regular season, but the Islanders swept them in the Stanley Cup Finals to win their fourth straight championship. Billy Smith was named the Conn Smythe Trophy winner after shutting down the Oilers&#x27; vaunted scoring machine. Gretzky failed to score a goal during the series. Duane and Brent Sutter scored seven and five points respectively in the first three games, while Bossy again scored the Stanley Cup-winning goal in game four. After that game, the Oilers players walked past the Islanders&#x27; dressing room and were surprised to see the champions exhausted. Oilers players such as Gretzky and Mark Messier said that they realized at that moment how much it would actually take to win the Stanley Cup.

===Post-dynasty and the Easter Epic (1983–1991)===
The Islanders finished the 1983–84 regular season tied atop the Prince of Wales Conference while successfully defending their Patrick Division title. The &quot;Drive for Five&quot; got off to a tense start. Late in the deciding game of their first-round series against the Rangers, Don Maloney tied the game with a controversial goal as the Islanders believed Maloney&#x27;s stick was too high. They ultimately eliminated the Rangers for the fourth consecutive year. The team then defeated the Washington Capitals in five games and the Montreal Canadiens in six to set up a finals rematch with the Oilers. The series featured rookie Pat LaFontaine scoring two third-period goals in 38 seconds. This time, the Oilers dethroned the Islanders to win the first of what would be five Stanley Cup victories in seven years. For the 1984 playoffs, the NHL changed the home and away schedule for the finals, which provided the Islanders home-ice advantage in the series based on Wales Conference teams collectively having a winning record in regular-season games versus Campbell Conference opponents, despite finishing lower than them in the overall standings. The new format had them play three straight games in Edmonton, where the Oilers managed to lock up the series, after the teams had split the first two games in New York. Bossy cited the team&#x27;s hard time winning an away game as their downfall in the series. The Oilers also ended the Islanders&#x27; 19-series playoff winning streak. It remains the longest streak in the history of professional sports (one more than the 1959–1967 streak by the Boston Celtics of the NBA). Unlike the 1976–1979 Montreal Canadiens, who needed to win three series in the 1976 and 1977 playoffs under the playoff format in place at that time, the Islanders had to win four series in each of their Stanley Cup seasons.

The Islanders remained competitive for the rest of the decade, even as some of the stars from the Cup teams departed. As the decade wore on, Pickett began to keep the money from the team&#x27;s cable deal rather than reinvest it in the team as he had done in years past. Although it did not become clear immediately, the lack of funds limited Torrey&#x27;s ability to replace all of the departing talent. In the 1984–85 NHL season, the Islanders slipped to third in their division, followed by similar results in the 1985–86 and 1986–87 seasons. They began facing stiff competition from division rivals, the Philadelphia Flyers, who eliminated the Islanders in the division finals in 1985 and 1987, and the Capitals, who swept the Islanders&#x27; 1986 first-round series, the team&#x27;s first exit without winning a playoff round since 1978.
In 1986, Nystrom retired due to a serious injury and Clark Gillies was picked up on waivers by the Buffalo Sabres. Arbour retired as coach following the 1985–86 season and was replaced by longtime junior hockey coach Terry Simpson. During the first round of the 1987 playoffs against the Capitals, the Islanders had fallen behind in the series three games to one but were not eliminated due to a playoff format change from a best-of-5 series to a best-of-7. The Islanders evened the series, which set the stage for one of the most famous games in NHL history: the &quot;Easter Epic&quot;. Kelly Hrudey stopped 73 shots on goal while Pat LaFontaine scored at 8:47 of the fourth overtime—and at 1:56 a.m. on Easter Sunday morning. The win came even though the Islanders had been outshot 75–52. They were eliminated in the division finals in seven games by the Flyers. Chronic back pain forced Mike Bossy to retire after the season.

The following season, the Islanders captured another division title, but were defeated in the first round of the playoffs by the upstart New Jersey Devils. Potvin retired after the playoffs, holding records for most career goals (310), assists (742) and points (1052) by a defenseman, though he has since been passed in these categories by Ray Bourque and Paul Coffey. Around this time, the team&#x27;s run of good luck in the draft began to run out. Of their four top draft picks from 1987 to 1990, they lost one to a freak knee injury and two others never panned out.

The 1988–89 season saw the Islanders win only seven of their first 27 games. Torrey fired Simpson and brought Arbour back. Arbour was unable to turn things around, and the team finished with 61 points, tied with the Quebec Nordiques for the worst record in the league. It was their first losing season and the first time missing the playoffs since their second season. Smith, the last remaining original Islanders player, retired after the season to become the team&#x27;s goaltending coach. Not long after the end of the season, Pickett moved to Florida and turned day-to-day operations over to a committee of four Long Island entrepreneurs: Ralph Palleschi, Bob Rosenthal, Stephen Walsh, and Paul Greenwood. In return, they each bought a 2.5% interest in the team. In the next season, the Islanders rebounded to get back into the playoffs, but fell to the Rangers in five games of the opening round. The team bought out the remaining years of Bryan Trottier&#x27;s contract, sending him off with a team record of games played. The 1990–91 season had the team finish well out of the playoffs after winning only 25 games.

===New faces and the 1993 run (1991–1995)===
LaFontaine was frustrated with the team&#x27;s lack of success and the progress of his contract negotiations, and held out rather than report to camp before 1991–92. In response to the holdout, Torrey engineered a rebuilding project with two blockbuster trades on October 25, 1991. He dealt LaFontaine, Randy Wood and Randy Hillier (along with future considerations) to the Buffalo Sabres in return for Pierre Turgeon, Benoit Hogue, Uwe Krupp and Dave McLlwain. He also sent longtime captain Brent Sutter and Brad Lauer to the Chicago Blackhawks for Steve Thomas and Adam Creighton. With these additions and a talented core of players such as Derek King, Ray Ferraro, and Patrick Flatley, along with incoming Soviet players Vladimir Malakhov and Darius Kasparaitis, the Islanders had a new foundation in the early 1990s. The management committee, however, was not nearly as patient as Boe and Pickett had been, and forced Torrey to resign after the Islanders missed the playoffs again that season. Assistant general manager Don Maloney was hired in Torrey&#x27;s place, while Torrey quickly resurfaced with the expansion Florida Panthers.

In Maloney&#x27;s first year, 1992–93, the Islanders rebounded to make the playoffs, in the process surpassing the 80-point mark for the first time in five years. The LaFontaine-Turgeon trade proved successful for both the Islanders and Sabres, as both players hit career highs in points and Turgeon won the Lady Byng Trophy.

Ray Ferraro emerged as a playoff hero, scoring a pair of overtime winners in the first-round series against the Capitals. Instead of celebrating after winning game 6 at Nassau Coliseum, however, the Islanders were both irate and despondent. Only seconds after Turgeon, the team&#x27;s star center and leading scorer, scored an insurance goal in the series-clinching game, Dale Hunter violently checked him from behind. Turgeon was believed to be out for the entire second round, if not longer, with a separated shoulder. He returned only for spot power-play duty in the last game of the second round. Hunter received a 21-game suspension, at the time the longest for on-ice misconduct in modern NHL history.

The Islanders&#x27; next opponent, the Pittsburgh Penguins, were twice-defending Stanley Cup champions and full of stars such as Mario Lemieux, Jaromir Jagr, and Ron Francis. The Penguins had roared through the regular season with 119 points, as well as recording a record 17 consecutive wins towards the end of the season, and were overwhelmingly favored to win a third straight championship. Jim Smith of &quot;Newsday&quot; predicted that with Turgeon on the sidelines, the Penguins would sweep the Islanders out of the playoffs, however on the strength of outstanding goaltending from Glenn Healy and contributions from all four lines, the Islanders achieved a huge upset when David Volek scored at 5:16 of overtime of the deciding seventh game. &quot;Newsday&quot;&#x27;s front page the day following the win was a picture of Healy with a headline reading, &quot;It&#x27;s a Miracle!&quot; This was the last playoff series won by the Islanders for 23 years, until the 2015–16 season. Turgeon returned to the Islanders&#x27; top line for the conference finals against the Montreal Canadiens, though he was not in peak form as he had not fully recovered. The Islanders bowed out of the playoffs after a hard-fought five games, two of which went to overtime. After beating the Islanders, the Canadiens went on to win the Cup.

Maloney had avoided making many personnel changes his first year, but on the eve of the 1993 expansion draft he traded backup goaltender Mark Fitzpatrick to the Quebec Nordiques for Ron Hextall. The clubs also exchanged first-round picks in the deal. Able to protect only one netminder in the expansion draft, the Islanders left Healy exposed. He was claimed by the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, then was claimed by the Tampa Bay Lightning in Phase II of the draft the next day, and finally had his rights traded to the Rangers, where he became the backup.

The Islanders barely squeezed past the Panthers to make the 1994 playoffs before being swept in a lopsided opening series by the first-place Rangers, who went on to win the Cup. It would be the Islanders last playoff appearance until 2002. Arbour retired for good as coach and was succeeded by longtime assistant Lorne Henning. Hextall, who allowed 16 goals in three games, drew most of the criticism for the failed playoff campaign and was shipped to Philadelphia for Tommy Soderstrom in September. In the lockout-shortened 1994–95 season, the Islanders not only failed to qualify for the playoffs, they finished ahead of only the third-year Ottawa Senators.

===Management issues (1995–2000)===
By the end of the 1994–95 season, Maloney was under considerable heat from the press and fan base for his handling of the team. Since taking over in 1992, the only noticeable attempt he made to upgrade the roster was the acquisition of Hextall. Near the end of the failed 1995 campaign, Maloney decided that the core of players he had left alone for three seasons needed to be revamped, leading to a rebuilding project. He traded Turgeon and Malakhov to the Montreal Canadiens for Kirk Muller and Mathieu Schneider, while Hogue was sent to Toronto for young goaltender Eric Fichaud. Additionally, Maloney allowed the team&#x27;s leading scorer, Ferraro, to depart as an unrestricted free agent at the conclusion of the season. Fans&#x27; displeasure at Maloney for trading the popular Turgeon was magnified when Muller balked at joining a rebuilding team. He played 45 games for the Islanders before being sent to Toronto as well.

Before the 1995–96 season, Maloney fired Henning and named Mike Milbury head coach. The same year, the Islanders&#x27; attempt at updating their look resulted in the unveiling of a new team logo of a slicker-clad fisherman holding a hockey stick. Islanders fans disliked it, and rival Rangers&#x27; fans mockingly called the Islanders &quot;fishsticks&quot;—mocking how the logo resembled the Gorton&#x27;s Fisherman. The team reverted to a modified version of the old logo as soon as the league allowed them to do so. (In spite of this, the logo found renewed popularity as a throwback design in the late 2010s and early 2020s, enough so that the team would revive it as their third &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; jersey in 2022 and would use an adjusted version of the logo for their AHL team, the Bridgeport Islanders, beginning in 2024.) The year was a disappointment on the ice as well, as the Islanders finished in last place with a record of 22–50–10. During the season, team management fired Maloney, whom fans blamed for the team&#x27;s downfall, and gave Milbury full control of hockey operations as both a coach and general manager. Milbury went on to resign as head coach during the following season and elevated assistant Rick Bowness to the position. After another unsuccessful season with little improvement, Milbury took over as coach again during the 1997–98 season. The team improved to fourth place in their division but again failed to make the playoffs. Milbury followed by once again stepping down as coach during the following season while retaining his job as general manager.

During the continued playoff drought, instability in the front office mirrored the Islanders&#x27; substandard performance on the ice. Pickett sold the team to Dallas businessman John Spano in 1996. However, three months after the 1997 closing, Spano had only paid Pickett a fraction of the first installment on the cable rights deal. Several Islanders executives tipped off &quot;Newsday&quot; that something was amiss about their new boss. In July, &quot;Newsday&quot; exposed Spano as a fraud who did not have the assets required to complete the deal. The investigation showed that Spano had deliberately misled the NHL and the Islanders about his net worth, and also had two lawsuits pending against him. Within days of the report, Spano was forced to relinquish the team to Pickett. Federal prosecutors turned up evidence that Spano had forged many of the documents used to vouch for his wealth and to promise payment to Pickett, and even appeared to have sent many of the documents from his own office in Dallas. He was sentenced to 71 months in prison for bank and wire fraud. The NHL took additional heat when reports surfaced that the league spent well under $1,000 (depending on the source, the league spent either $525 or $750) to check Spano&#x27;s background. It subsequently stiffened the process for vetting future owners. The incident and its aftermath were covered in the ESPN &quot;30 for 30&quot; documentary, &quot;Big Shot&quot;. Pickett finally found a buyer, a group led by Howard Milstein and Phoenix Coyotes co-owner Steven Gluckstern, a deal which almost fell through when Spectacor Management Group, which managed the Coliseum for Nassau County, tried to force Pickett to certify that the Coliseum was safe. Pickett refused, since the Coliseum had fallen into disrepair in recent seasons. SMG backed down under pressure from the Islanders, the NHL, and Nassau County officials.

Initially, the team made numerous trades and increased their payroll in an effort to assemble a better team. In one transaction, young players Todd Bertuzzi and Bryan McCabe were traded for veteran Trevor Linden. After the Islanders finished 12 points short of the playoffs in the 1997–98 season, however, Milstein and Gluckstern decided to run the team on an austere budget in an attempt to make a profit. They also complained about the condition of the Nassau Coliseum and made noises about moving the team elsewhere. They began trading or releasing many popular players to avoid paying their salaries, including star scorer Zigmund Palffy, team captain Linden, former rookie of the year Bryan Berard, and rugged defenseman Rich Pilon. Losing the highly regarded players, the team finished with similar results the next two seasons. Attendance, which had been in a steady decline over the past few years, decreased even further to under 12,000 per game. Around that time, Milstein bid hundreds of millions of dollars in unsuccessful attempts to purchase the National Football League&#x27;s Washington Redskins and Cleveland Browns.

===New ownership and a return to the playoffs (2000–2006)===

In 2000, Milstein and Gluckstern sold the team to Computer Associates executives Charles Wang and Sanjay Kumar. The sale cost $187.5 million ($ million in dollars) and gave fans hope for the team to turn its lack of success around. The new owners allowed Milbury to spend money and invest in free agents. His first attempt proved unpopular with fans, as he traded away future star players Roberto Luongo and Olli Jokinen to the Florida Panthers for Oleg Kvasha and Mark Parrish. Milbury then further surprised the hockey world when he took Rick DiPietro with the first selection in the 2000 draft, ahead of consensus picks Dany Heatley and Marian Gaborik. Reporters and fans were alternately confused and enraged by the moves, which Milbury acknowledged, saying, &quot;As dangerous as this may be, we think Mad Mike maybe has something going for him.&quot; Establishing a record of controversial decisions, Milbury held onto the &quot;Mad Mike&quot; nickname for years to follow. He remained adamant that his moves were to immediately improve the team, whose poor winning percentage that year was ahead of only the franchise&#x27;s first season. The team&#x27;s uninspired play led Milbury to fire head coach and past player Butch Goring. Fans vocalized their dislike of Goring taking the fall rather than Milbury, which was further worsened when Milbury passed on hiring Ted Nolan as Goring&#x27;s successor; Instead, Boston Bruins assistant coach Peter Laviolette was hired.
Three key personnel acquisitions were made prior to the 2001–02 season, Laviolette&#x27;s first. Alexei Yashin was acquired from the Ottawa Senators in exchange for forward Bill Muckalt, defenseman Zdeno Chara and the Islanders&#x27; second overall pick in the 2001 draft. Next, Islanders prospects Tim Connolly and Taylor Pyatt were traded to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for Michael Peca, who became the team&#x27;s captain. By virtue of finishing with the worst record in the previous season, Detroit Red Wings goaltender Chris Osgood was the next addition, taken as the first pick in the September 2001 waiver draft, adding a former Stanley Cup championship goaltender without giving up any players in exchange. The additions proved to be a great help, as the team opened the season with a 9–0–1–1 record, the best in franchise history. They finished the season with new broken records; their 96 points marked the fourth biggest one-year turnaround in the league&#x27;s history (44 points higher than the previous season), while Osgood&#x27;s 66 starts surpassed Ron Hextall&#x27;s previous record of 65. During the 2002 Stanley Cup playoffs, they were seeded fifth and faced the fourth-seeded Toronto Maple Leafs. The Islanders lost in a very physical first-round series in seven games; the home team won every game of the series. Notably, game 5 featured Gary Roberts charging Islander defenseman Kenny Jonsson, and Darcy Tucker submarining Peca with a questionable check that tore the Islander captain&#x27;s anterior cruciate ligament, sidelining both players for the series&#x27; final game. The situation between Tucker and Peca caused a bit of outrage, with speculation that Tucker had intended to injure Peca before the game had begun, which Tucker denied.

Despite the promise shown in the Toronto playoff series, the Islanders had a slow start to the 2002–03 season. They rebounded to make the playoffs, but lost a five-game series in the first round to the top-seeded Ottawa Senators. Milbury continued his controversial move-making by firing Laviolette after the season, citing postseason interviews with the players in which they expressed a lack of confidence in the coach. He was replaced with Steve Stirling, who had previously been coaching the team&#x27;s top minor league affiliate, the Bridgeport Sound Tigers. In the following season, the Islanders again lost in the first round of the playoffs, this time to the eventual champion Tampa Bay Lightning.

Following the 2004–05 NHL lockout, which eliminated that season of play, the Islanders made several player moves to increase offense for following season. Peca was traded to the Edmonton Oilers for center Mike York, freeing up room under the NHL&#x27;s new salary cap. The same day, the team signed winger Miroslav Satan to play alongside Yashin. Milbury also worked on remaking the team&#x27;s defense, adding Alexei Zhitnik, Brad Lukowich and Brent Sopel to replace the departed Adrian Aucoin and Roman Hamrlik, who left as free agents, and Jonsson, who left the NHL to play in the HockeyAllsvenskan in Sweden. In the aftermath, Yashin was named as the team&#x27;s new captain. The team&#x27;s inconsistent play led to Stirling&#x27;s dismissal midway through the season.

===Management shake-ups and the DiPietro contract (2006–2009)===
On the day of Stirling&#x27;s firing, January 11, 2006, Milbury also announced that he would step down as general manager once a successor was found. He served as vice president of Wang&#x27;s sports properties for one year before resigning in May 2007. Wang proceeded by hiring Neil Smith as general manager and Ted Nolan as head coach, following a brief stint by Brad Shaw as the team&#x27;s interim head coach. Smith, however, was fired after approximately one month and quickly replaced by the team&#x27;s backup goaltender Garth Snow, who retired from his playing career to accept the position. Before his dismissal, Smith made several free agent acquisitions, including defensemen Brendan Witt and Tom Poti, and forwards Mike Sillinger and Chris Simon.

On September 12, 2006, the Islanders signed DiPietro to a 15-year, $67.5 million ($ million in dollars) contract, which was believed to be the longest contract to date in the NHL and the second-longest in North American sports, behind a 25-year contract for National Basketball Association player Magic Johnson. DiPietro, Wang and Snow all spoke confidently and felt it was the best move for both sides, despite the mixed reactions it received from the rest of the hockey world. Specifically, Wang stated, &quot;This is not a big deal. You have to have a commitment to who you&#x27;re working with.&quot; As speculation began as to whether other teams would follow suit and give lengthy contracts to star players, Atlanta Thrashers&#x27; general manager Don Waddell felt that, &quot;It&#x27;s highly unlikely that you will see teams go beyond that. This is a once-in-a-lifetime contract. Ownership must feel very strongly that he&#x27;s their guy for the next 15 years.&quot;
The new-look Islanders were picked by most analysts to languish towards the bottom of the standings. Eyeing a playoff spot, Snow traded for forward Ryan Smyth from the Edmonton Oilers at the trade deadline on February 27, 2007. Injuries to DiPietro provided extra setbacks, but not enough to drop the team from playoff contention. They qualified for the playoffs, assisted by a late-season winning streak and a 3–2 shootout victory against the New Jersey Devils in their final regular season game. Despite DiPietro&#x27;s return to the team in time for the playoffs, the team lost their first round matchup in five games to the Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning Buffalo Sabres.

Management announced in June 2007 that they would buy out captain Alexei Yashin&#x27;s contract, which had four seasons remaining on it. Free agents Smyth, Poti, Viktor Kozlov, Jason Blake, and Richard Zednik also left in July 2007. During that month, the Islanders signed Bill Guerin to a two-year contract as he immediately assumed team captaincy. Also in the off-season, free agents Mike Comrie, Andy Sutton and Jon Sim joined the team. That summer, it was announced that Nolan extended an invitation to Al Arbour to return as a coach for one game in order to bring his total number of games coached to 1,500. Arbour signed a one-day contract, the shortest in league history, on November 3, 2007; it put him behind the bench the following day as the Islanders defeated the Pittsburgh Penguins 3–2, raising his career coaching win total to 740. The team remained in the playoff hunt through the trade deadline as they re-signed Comrie to a one-year contract and traded away Simon and Marc-Andre Bergeron. A rash of injuries saw them plummet to the fifth-worst record in the league by the end of the season.
At the 2008 NHL entry draft, the Islanders made two trades to move down from the fifth to the ninth overall pick, with which they selected center Josh Bailey. They also added free agents Mark Streit and Doug Weight. The team dismissed head coach Ted Nolan over alleged philosophy differences, and later that summer replaced him with Scott Gordon. Near the trade deadline, Snow traded Comrie and Chris Campoli to the Ottawa Senators in exchange for forward Dean McAmmond and the San Jose Sharks&#x27; first-round draft pick in the 2009 NHL entry draft and sent captain Bill Guerin to the Pittsburgh Penguins in exchange for a conditional draft pick.

In the 2008–09 season, the Islanders finished in last place in the league with a record of 26–47–9, which was the team&#x27;s worst record since the 2000–01 season. After the conclusion of regular season, they won the draft lottery to retain the first overall pick in the 2009 NHL entry draft.

===The Tavares era begins (2009–2015)===
Beginning an effort to rebuild the team with new and young talent, the Islanders selected John Tavares with the first-overall pick of the 2009 NHL entry draft. Tavares went into the draft as the top prospect in the majority of scouting reports, and it was widely expected that the Islanders would select him after they secured the first overall pick by winning the draft lottery, although there was plenty of competition between Tavares, Victor Hedman, and Matt Duchene. NHL Central Scouting Bureau&#x27;s Chris Edwards spoke highly of him, stating, &quot;[Tavares] is phenomenal at getting the puck through traffic to his linemates, getting to opening. The way he reads the play and can get to where he figures the rebounds will be and bangs in the rebound. He&#x27;s a real smart player.&quot; They traded up twice in the first round to also select defenseman Calvin de Haan with the 12th overall pick, as well as Casey Cizikas and Anders Lee in later rounds, all of whom would go on to play consistently on the main roster by the 2014–15 season.

The 2009–10 season started out slow, with the team winless its first six games. The team continued to play inconsistently due to injuries as many wrote them off as potential playoff contenders. The team hit a mid-season hot streak, however nine losses in 11 games before the Olympic break set them right back. They ultimately ended up at bottom of the standings again, finishing the season 26th in the league. The placement led to a fifth overall pick in 2010. Continuing with their rebuilding process, they used the first round to draft young forwards Nino Niederreiter and Brock Nelson with picks five and 30, respectively. As the 2010–11 season got underway, the team quickly fell into a ten-game losing streak, leading to the firing of head coach Scott Gordon. He was replaced on an interim basis by Jack Capuano, who had been coaching the Bridgeport Sound Tigers. Early in the season, they also acquired Michael Grabner from waivers, who went on to score 34 goals and was selected as a finalist for the Calder Memorial Trophy; he would go on to sign a five-year contract with the team at the end of the season. This year also featured the Penguins–Islanders brawl, which resulted in a combined 346 penalty minutes and a $100,000 fine to the Islanders for &quot;failure to control their players&quot;.
The following season was a breakout year for Tavares. The newly named assistant captain gained 31 goals and 50 assists, in addition to being selected to play in the 59th NHL All-Star Game at the age of 21; his 81 points were seventh-best in the league. Tavares&#x27; left-winger Matt Moulson also had a strong season, finishing with career highs of 36 goals, 33 assists and 69 points. Despite strong seasons from their top players, the team finished 27th in the league with a record of 34–37–11, continuing their pattern of racking up top prospects with early picks at the drafts. They used the first round of the 2012 draft to select defenseman Griffin Reinhart with the fourth overall pick.

On August 1, 2011, voters in Nassau County rejected a proposal for a new arena to replace Nassau Coliseum. This followed the failed decade-long attempt by owner Charles Wang to build a mixed-use development called The Lighthouse Project, which would have renovated the arena. In the wake of the vote, speculation began that the team would eventually move to Barclays Center in Brooklyn, new arenas in Queens or Suffolk County, the Sprint Center in Kansas City, or the Videotron Centre in Quebec City, the last of which was coincidentally set to open at the same time as the expiration of the Islanders&#x27; lease on the Nassau Coliseum in 2015.

On October 24, 2012, the Islanders made the announcement that the franchise would indeed be moving to the Barclays Center in Brooklyn for the 2015–16 NHL season, after signing a lease that would keep the team in the arena until 2040. The team retained its name, logo and colors as part of the move. As part of the deal, the management of Barclays Center took over the team&#x27;s business operations once the Islanders moved to Barclays Center. The decision to move to Brooklyn didn&#x27;t require the Rangers&#x27; approval. Under a longstanding provision of the agreement that allowed the Islanders to share the New York area with the Rangers, the Islanders are allowed to play their games anywhere on Long Island, including the two city boroughs on the island, Brooklyn and Queens.

Beginning on April 1, 2013, of the 2012–13 season, the team went on a near month-long unbeaten streak in regulation time, posting a 12-game streak of earning points until falling to the Philadelphia Flyers later that month. During that streak, on April 23, 2013, they clinched their first playoff berth since 2007 with a 4–3 shootout loss to the Carolina Hurricanes, ending a six-year playoff drought. Behind goaltender Evgeni Nabokov, the team was ultimately eliminated in six games by the Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round of the playoffs, continuing their winless streak in playoff series.

On September 10, 2013, Tavares was introduced as the 14th captain in New York Islanders history, replacing former Islander Mark Streit of the Philadelphia Flyers, who served as team captain since 2011. After posting a 4–4–3 record in their first 11 games, the Islanders made a trade, sending fan favorite and three-time 30-goal scorer Matt Moulson, their 2014 first-round draft pick and their 2015 second-round draft pick to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for Thomas Vanek, a highly regarded and dynamic goal scorer. Despite chemistry with linemates Tavares and Kyle Okposo, however, his desire to test free agency and the team&#x27;s impending move to Barclays Center led to Vanek being dealt to the Montreal Canadiens at the trade deadline for Sebastian Collberg and a second-round pick in 2014. After a season of player swapping and goaltending issues, they failed to qualify for the playoffs, finishing with a record of 34–37–11.
In the 2014 off-season, the Islanders made several moves to improve the team before their final season at Nassau Coliseum. In May, the Islanders acquired the rights to Jaroslav Halak from the Washington Capitals in exchange for a fourth-round pick in 2014. Halak was then signed to a four-year contract. The Islanders also signed Mikhail Grabovski, Nikolai Kulemin and goaltender Chad Johnson as free agents. Additionally, on October 4, the Islanders acquired Johnny Boychuk from the Boston Bruins for two-second round picks in 2014 and 2015 and a conditional third-round pick in 2015, as well as Nick Leddy from the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for prospect Ville Pokka, T. J. Brennan and the rights to Anders Nilsson.

The NHL Board of Governors approved the Islanders&#x27; sale to businessmen Jon Ledecky and Scott D. Malkin in October 2014. Ledecky and Malkin served as minority partners during a two-year transition period. At the end of the 2015–16 season, they formally took majority control from Wang, who retained a share of the franchise.

The Islanders finished the 2014–15 regular season with a record of 47–28–7 for 101 points, and met the Washington Capitals in the first round of the 2015 playoffs. The Capitals held home-ice advantage in the series after the Islanders lost their final regular season game to the Columbus Blue Jackets, 5–4, in a shootout, as the Islanders lost the season series to the Capitals after posting a 2–1–1 record in the season series (Washington went 2–0–2, winning the season series with six points to the Islanders&#x27; five). On April 19, 2015, in the third game of their first-round series against Washington, John Tavares scored 15 seconds into overtime to win the game for the Islanders, 2–1. It was the second-shortest overtime playoff game in Islanders history, and was the first overtime, game-winning goal for the Islanders in the playoffs since 1993. The Islanders lost the fourth and fifth games of their series before rebounding in the sixth game to force a seventh game in the series. However, they were denied entry into the second round by a single goal and would ultimately fall to the Capitals in seven games. As a result, game 6 was the Islanders&#x27; last game at Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum; the Isles&#x27; Cal Clutterbuck scored the final NHL goal in the building&#x27;s first run prior to the Islanders&#x27; return in 2018.

===Move to Barclays Center and playoff series win (2015–2017)===
In June 2015, the Islanders entered the 2015 draft without a first-round pick, but emerged with two first-rounders in Mathew Barzal and Anthony Beauvillier after a series of draft day trades. The Islanders also selected forward Andong Song in the sixth round of the 2015 draft, making him the first Chinese player to be drafted by an NHL team.
The Islanders played their first regular season game at Barclays Center on October 9, 2015, losing 3–2 in overtime to the Chicago Blackhawks. Artem Anisimov scored the first regular season goal, while Tavares scored the first regular season Islanders goal. The Islanders posted the fourth-best penalty kill rate and allowed the fewest power-play goals during the season. However, in the last quarter of the regular season, some players, including Halak and defenseman Travis Hamonic, suffered key injuries. The team finished the regular season fourth in the Metropolitan Division with 100 points, enough to clinch the first wild card spot in the Eastern Conference. In the first round of the playoffs, they faced off against the Florida Panthers; goaltender Thomas Greiss only played in 40 minutes of playoff hockey with the San Jose Sharks prior to this series. Both teams split the first four games of the series. The fifth game of the series proved to be a major turning point, as late season call-up Alan Quine scored the game-winning goal on the power play with four minutes left in double overtime to end the second-longest game in franchise history; that goal gave them a 3–2 series lead and a chance to clinch the series on home ice. In the sixth game, the Islanders trailed 1–0 for much of the game, but Tavares tied it late in the third period. Tavares would score again with the series-clinching goal in double overtime to give the Islanders their first playoff series win since 1993. In the second round of the playoffs, they faced the Tampa Bay Lightning for the first time since 2004. Despite winning the first game of the series, the Islanders lost their series to the Lightning in five games.
Summer of 2016 saw free agents and longtime Islanders Kyle Okposo, Frans Nielsen, and Matt Martin all depart the team, joining the Buffalo Sabres, Detroit Red Wings, and Toronto Maple Leafs, respectively. Snow signed free agents Andrew Ladd from the Chicago Blackhawks and Jason Chimera from the Washington Capitals to help fill the gaps left behind. After an underwhelming first half of the 2016–17 season, posting a 17–17–8 record through 42 games, head coach Jack Capuano was relieved of duties, with assistant general manager Doug Weight being named interim head coach. Having coached the team since 2010, Capuano was the second-winningest coach in the team&#x27;s history with 227 wins, also leading the team to their first playoff series win since 1993. Prior to Capuano&#x27;s release, goaltender Jaroslav Halak was placed on waivers, and eventually sent down to the Bridgeport Sound Tigers. Having carried three goaltenders for the second consecutive season, the decision was made to stick with the tandem of Greiss and back-up Jean-Francois Berube after Halak posted a 6–8–5 record with a .904 save percentage through the beginning of the 2016–17 season.

In late January 2017, following a report by &quot;Bloomberg News&quot; which speculated that Barclays Center was considering removing the Islanders due to poor attendance and effects on the venue&#x27;s profit margins (reception to Barclays Center as a hockey venue was mixed partly due to obstructed view seats, as well as features like an off-center scoreboard, and the Islanders had the third-worst average attendance in the entire league while playing at the venue), &quot;Newsday&quot; reported that Nassau County executive Edward Mangano had met with one of the team&#x27;s co-owners, and told the paper that it was possible that the Islanders could return to the renovated Nassau Coliseum. However, commissioner Gary Bettman considered the concept to be &quot;unviable&quot; (the renovation reduced the capacity of the arena to just under 14,000, which is smaller than any NHL arena), and noted that Ledecky and Malkin were pursuing a possible arena project at Belmont Park.

Despite winning their last six games of the 2016–17 season, the Islanders finished in ninth place in the Eastern Conference; they missed the playoffs by only one point when the Toronto Maple Leafs clinched the final playoff spot on the penultimate day of the season.

===Emergence of Barzal and management overhaul (2017–present)===
On February 9, 2018, rookie Mathew Barzal recorded his third five-point game, becoming only the second rookie to do so since Joe Malone in 1917–18 and tying a 100-year-old record in the process. At the end of the 2017–18 regular season, Barzal had 85 points (22 goals, 63 assists). He led his team and all NHL rookies in points, and was tied for 13th overall in scoring in the NHL. Barzal was the seventh rookie in NHL history, and first since Sidney Crosby in 2005–06, to have scored at least 20 goals and 60 assists in a single season. Barzal also tied Islanders legend, Bryan Trottier&#x27;s franchise record for rookie assists. Barzal won the Calder Trophy as NHL Rookie of the Year for his 85-point season, leading the closest candidate by 20 points and receiving 160 out of 164 first-place votes. Barzal was the first Islanders&#x27; player to win the award since Bryan Berard in 1997, and he was the fifth Islanders&#x27; player overall to win the trophy, joining Islanders legends Mike Bossy (1978), Trottier (1976), and Denis Potvin (1974).
During the 2018 off-season, the Islanders announced that former New Jersey Devils and Toronto Maple Leafs general manager Lou Lamoriello was named their president of hockey operations, with &quot;full authority over all hockey matters with the organization&quot;, and would become general manager on June 5, 2018, replacing Garth Snow. Additionally, Barry Trotz was hired as head coach of the Islanders. Trotz resigned from the Washington Capitals one month prior after coaching them to their first Stanley Cup championship since they entered the NHL in 1974. Captain John Tavares&#x27; contract with the team expired following the 2017–18 season, and despite attempts to re-sign him, he joined the Toronto Maple Leafs as a free agent.

In the 2018–19 season, the Islanders split their home games between Barclays Center and their former home, Nassau Coliseum. The use of both arenas would continue over the course of the following two seasons until the completion of a new 18,000-seat arena at Belmont Park in Elmont. The Islanders enjoyed success throughout the 2018–19 season, clinching a playoff berth at home for the first time in 17 years, and the first time in March since 1990. Nassau Coliseum hosted their home playoff games during the first round while the Barclays Center hosted their home games for the rest of the playoffs. In the first round of the 2019 playoffs, the Islanders swept the Pittsburgh Penguins, and in the second round the team was swept by the Carolina Hurricanes.
On August 8, 2019, the Empire State Development Corporation board (ESD) voted unanimously in favor of the Belmont Park Arena project.

In February 2020, it was announced that the Islanders would return to Nassau Coliseum for the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs and the 2020–21 season until UBS Arena was opened. Both the 2019–20 season and the construction of the new arena were interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. When the NHL season was suspended on March 12, 2020, the Islanders had twelve regular season games remaining and were one point shy of the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. The Islanders qualified for the NHL Return-to-Play initiative as the seventh seed, beating the Florida Panthers in four games in a best-of-5 qualifying round to make the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs. They would then go on to defeat the Washington Capitals in the first round in five games. Then, after blowing a 3–1 series lead to the Philadelphia Flyers that extended the series to seven games, the Islanders would go on to win game 7 against the Flyers and advance to the conference finals for the first time since the 1993 playoffs. However, their run would come to an end at the hands of the Tampa Bay Lightning in six games. In December 2020, New York Islanders Hockey Club, L.P. bought the remaining 15 percent stake of the team from the estate of Charles Wang and took full ownership of the team.

The Islanders again made the playoffs in the shortened 2020–21 season, defeating the Penguins and Bruins each in six games. They again lost to the Tampa Bay Lightning, this time in seven.

The Islanders started the 2021–22 season on a 13-game road trip while UBS Arena was finalizing construction, finishing their road trip with a 5–6–2 record. However, minutes before the first home game of the season on November 20, 2021, many Islander players contracted COVID-19 and missed the home opener and several others. Longest tenured Islander Josh Bailey and team captain Anders Lee missed the game, while Adam Pelech, Anthony Beauvillier, and Andy Greene were ruled out minutes before puck drop. They lost the home opener to the Calgary Flames by a score of 5–2. Brad Richardson scored the first goal in UBS Arena history, while Brock Nelson scored the first Islander goal. The Islanders won their first game at UBS Arena against the Devils, on December 11, by a score of 4–2. Former Devils captain Zach Parise scored the game-winning goal for the Islanders. The Islanders missed the playoffs after three consecutive trips, finishing the season with a 37–35–10 record. On May 9, 2022, head coach Barry Trotz was relieved from his duties, and replaced with Lane Lambert. In the next season, the Islanders finished as the first wild card, but were defeated by the Carolina Hurricanes in the first round of the 2023 playoffs.

After an inconsistent start to the 2023–24 season, head coach Lane Lambert was fired on January 20, 2024, and Patrick Roy was hired as his replacement. The Islanders finished in third place in the Metropolitan Division and lost to the Carolina Hurricanes in the first round of the 2024 playoffs.

==Team identity==

===Logo===
Advertising executive John Alogna created the original Islanders logo, a circle with the letters &quot;NY&quot; over a map of the Nassau and Suffolk counties. The lower part of the Y is made to resemble a hockey stick, with three orange stripes near the bottom of the shaft and a puck to the right of the stick blade. At the bottom of the logo, the name of the team is written so that the tip of the &quot;I&quot; ends in a point aimed at Uniondale, the location of Nassau Coliseum.

Before the 1995–96 season, the Islanders attempted to update their look by introducing a new logo depicting a fisherman holding a hockey stick. The new logo was a marketing disaster; the reaction among the fanbase was so negative that management announced it would revert to the original logo as soon as league rules allowed them to do so. Many found that the logo bore a strong resemblance to the Gorton&#x27;s fisherman; indeed, New York Rangers fans taunted the Islanders with chants of &quot;We want fishsticks!&quot; long after the logo was discarded. The traditional logo was phased back in over the next two seasons, starting as an alternate jersey logo in 1996–97 before fully replacing the fisherman in 1997–98. The only change to the classic logo at this time was its colors; as the team had replaced its original royal blue with navy, the logo was recolored to match.
Beginning in 2008–09, the Islanders introduced another modification to their original logo for their new third jersey. The &quot;new&quot; logo, once again in royal blue, now features four orange stripes on the hockey stick instead of three, representing the four consecutive Stanley Cup titles won by the team in the 1980s. This became the team&#x27;s full-time logo in 2010.

For their 2014 Stadium Series special jerseys, the Islanders used a simplified jersey logo with just the &quot;NY&quot; from their regular logo. Versions of that have since appeared on third jersey designs.

===Jerseys===
The Islanders debuted in 1972 with traditional-style jerseys: one was white with orange and royal blue stripes near the waistline and on the sleeves, the other was royal blue with white and orange stripes. The design remained largely the same, with only minor tweaks through the 1994–95 season.

Prior to the 1995–96 season, team executives decided to change the jersey. The fisherman logo replaced the &quot;NY&quot; circular design, incorporating navy blue and a brighter orange, and introducing teal and gray shades. The team was seeking increased merchandise revenues, with the outward justification of connecting the team more overtly to Long Island. The jersey included a lighthouse shoulder patch, a reference to the Montauk Lighthouse, and featured uneven stripes resembling an ocean wave near the waistline, on the sleeves, and across the shoulders. All of the numbering and lettering on the jerseys also followed the wave pattern. Late in the season, the team eliminated the fisherman logo, but league rules forbade them from switching jersey designs for the 1996–97 season on only a few months&#x27; notice. Instead, they debuted their first third (and fourth) jerseys, which were identical to the home and road jerseys worn by the team, except the circular &quot;NY&quot; crest, now colored in the navy blue and bright orange shades to match, replaced the fisherman logo. The team wore these jerseys in approximately 15 games during that season and adopted them permanently in the 1997–98 season.
Prior to the 1998–99 season, the team&#x27;s jerseys reverted to a traditional design but kept the navy blue and bright orange shades from the jerseys used the previous three seasons. They added a shoulder patch of four bars, alternating in color, to represent the Islanders&#x27; four Stanley Cup championships. A predominantly orange third jersey was introduced in 2002–03, featuring navy blue yokes and sides that formed sharp points on the sleeves and body. The team wore this jersey through the 2006–07 season.

For the 2007–08 season, the Islanders redesigned their uniforms as all NHL teams changed over to the Reebok Edge system. These jerseys resembled the prior design but included uniform numbers on the right chest above the logo. The name plates were also in two colored format: white on orange on the navy blue home jersey and navy blue on orange on the white road jersey. The sleeves on both jerseys were orange, with a wide navy stripe above a thin white stripe at the elbow. The jerseys had a thin stripe tracing around the shoulders, and featured &quot;retro&quot; laces at the neck.

A royal blue throwback design was introduced the following season as a third jersey. Before the 2010–11 season, the Islanders made this throwback design their new home jersey. A corresponding new white road jersey was unveiled during the Islanders&#x27; draft party at Nassau Coliseum.

For the following season, they unveiled an alternate jersey in black with grey on the shoulder yoke. The front of the jersey bore the team name above the player&#x27;s number in orange with blue and white trim. The Islanders crest was placed on the shoulder yoke. Diagonal side panels, blue trimmed in orange and gray, combined with similar panels on the black pants to form a diamond shape on the sides of each player. These were only used sparing for two seasons, as they proved unpopular.

During the 2014 Stadium Series, the Islanders wore a special edition jersey. The front side featured the &quot;NY&quot; from the primary logo in a special chrome treatment, while the back side featured a white nameplate with blue letters for player names, and bigger numbers in white trimmed in orange for visibility purposes. The sleeve numbers were also angled diagonally. The primary Islanders logo would be placed on the left shoulder within the white yoke. This jersey was promoted to an alternate third jersey in the 2014–15 season, replacing the black third jersey. During that season, on February 3, 2015, the team wore an updated version of the fisherman jersey for warmups before their game against the Florida Panthers.

The Islanders retired the Stadium Series third jersey after only one season, replacing it with a new black alternate that was unveiled to coincide with the team&#x27;s move to Brooklyn. Unlike the previous black alternate, this version featured little blue and orange at all (these colors appear only on the rear collar), while the &quot;NY&quot; insignia that was carried over from the Stadium Series jersey was stripped of its chrome accents. The four narrow white stripes on the sleeves symbolize the franchise&#x27;s four Stanley Cup wins.

When the NHL switched to Adidas as its uniform provider in 2017, the Islanders kept their primary jerseys mostly intact except for the restoration of the blue trim in the primary logo on the road jersey. As with all NHL teams, the Islanders only wore two jerseys for the 2017–18 season, thus retiring the all-black third jerseys.

The Islanders released a new blue third jersey for the 2018–19 season, featuring an updated &quot;NY&quot; insignia (shorter &quot;Y-stick&quot; with four orange stripes on the blade), white shoulder yoke (reminiscent of the 2014 Stadium Series alternates), the map of Long Island on the collar, and orange numbers that call back to the jerseys used during the team&#x27;s inaugural season.

In the 2020–21 season, the Islanders released a special &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniform. The uniform resembled their current home jerseys, but used the navy blue and bright orange scheme worn from 1995 to 2010. A second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform was released in the 2022–23 season, using the &quot;Fisherman&quot; uniform from 1995 to 1997 but with less teal elements and diagonal orange striping.

During the 2024 Stadium Series, the Islanders wore navy blue jerseys with a thick orange middle stripe. &quot;ISLES&quot; in navy blue letters was added within the orange stripe, as are the navy blue numbers.

===Mascot and Ice Girls===

The Islanders&#x27; team mascot is named &quot;Sparky the Dragon&quot;, who served at one point as cross-promotion with the Arena Football League&#x27;s New York Dragons team, who also played their home games at Nassau Coliseum. In the mid-1990s, the Islanders had a mascot named &quot;Nyisles&quot; whose body style went from round to human-shaped, and facial features vaguely resembled the logo fisherman, excluding its red hair and beard. Nyisles was discontinued toward the end of the 1997–98 season when the team distributed &quot;Who kidnapped Nyisles?&quot; flyers implying the reason for his disappearance was because of another NHL mascot, ultimately revealed to be Toronto Maple Leafs mascot Carlton the Bear. Nyisles returned as the secondary mascot of the club with a brand new look in December 2022 to coincide with the return of the Fisherman logo on the team&#x27;s reverse retro uniforms.

From the 2001–02 season to the 2014–15 season, the Islanders also had an ice crew named the &quot;Ice Girls&quot;, made up of only women who skated onto the ice during television breaks to clean up the snow that piled up during the game. The Ice Girls were also used for promotional purposes during games and at community events. Starting in the 2015–16 season, a co-ed ice crew would replace the Ice Girls.

==Season-by-season record==
:&quot;This is only a partial list of the last five seasons. For the full season-by-season history, see List of New York Islanders seasons&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players and personnel==
===Current roster===
===Honored members===


Eight past Islanders have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame – Mike Bossy, Clark Gillies, Pat LaFontaine, Roberto Luongo, Denis Potvin, Billy Smith, Bryan Trottier and Pierre Turgeon. Bossy and Potvin were the first Islanders to be inducted, in 1991. Turgeon is the most recent Islander to be inducted, in 2023.

In addition to the eight players, two team builders have been inducted; Bill Torrey and Al Arbour were inducted in 1995 and 1996, respectively. Lou Lamoriello, hired to serve as Islanders general manager in 2018, was previously inducted into the Hall of Fame in 2009.

Five of the eight Hall of Fame players (Bossy, Gillies, Potvin, Smith and Trottier), in addition to Bob Bourne, have since been inducted into the Islanders&#x27; Hall of Fame, established in 2007. In February 2008, the team unveiled the Hall of Fame plaques for each player, which are displayed at the team&#x27;s practice facility. In November 2011, first Islanders captain Ed Westfall was added to their Hall of Fame, followed by the addition of defenseman Ken Morrow in December 2011, right-winger Patrick Flatley (&quot;Chairman of the Boards&quot;) in January 2012 and Kenny Jonsson in February 2012. In February 2020, John Tonelli and Butch Goring were inducted into the Islanders Hall of Fame at the same time their numbers, 27 and 91 respectively, were retired by the team. Brent Sutter is scheduled to be inducted on January 18, 2025.

There are two other banners hanging with the retired numbers: one honors Al Arbour in recognition of his 1,500 games coached for the Islanders, and the other honors Bill Torrey, who held the titles of general manager, vice president, president, and chairman of the board for the Islanders organization from 1972 until 1993. In place of a number, Torrey&#x27;s banner features the words &quot;The Architect&quot; and his trademark bowtie.

The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.

===Team captains===
The Islanders have had 15 team captains. The team&#x27;s first, Ed Westfall, won the Bill Masterton Trophy during his captaincy; Michael Peca, who won the Frank J. Selke Trophy after the 2001–02 season, is the only other captain to have won an award during his term. The longest captaincy reign was Denis Potvin&#x27;s from 1979 through 1987, during which he played 521 regular season games. Bryan McCabe served for the shortest length of time, a mere 56 regular season games before being traded to the Vancouver Canucks. Also traded mid-season was Bill Guerin, who went to the Pittsburgh Penguins during the 2008–09 season. The Islanders&#x27; 15th and current captain, Anders Lee, was named to the position on October 4, 2018.

Two seasons have been played without a captain. Nobody was assigned to the position for the 1996–97 season after previous captain Patrick Flatley was released from his contract. The 2000–01 season also went by without a captain after Kenny Jonsson stepped down from the position on November 18, 2000.
* Ed Westfall, 1972–1977
* Clark Gillies, 1977–1979
* Denis Potvin, 1979–1987
* Brent Sutter, 1987–1991
* Patrick Flatley, 1991–1996
* Bryan McCabe, 1997–1998
* Trevor Linden, 1998–1999
* Kenny Jonsson, 1999–2000
* Michael Peca, 2001–2004
* Alexei Yashin, 2005–2007
* Bill Guerin, 2007–2009
* Doug Weight, 2009–2011
* Mark Streit, 2011–2013
* John Tavares, 2013–2018
* Anders Lee, 2018–present
===General managers===

The general manager is Lou Lamoriello, who took the role on June 5, 2018.

===Head coaches===

The current head coach of the Islanders is Patrick Roy, who was named to the role on January 20, 2024.

==Franchise records==

Bryan Trottier holds the franchise record for most points with the team (1,353), as well as most games played (1,123). Only Trottier and two others, Mike Bossy and Denis Potvin have scored over 1,000 points with the team, while six others have gained more than 500, with Derek King only one point shy. Potvin and Josh Bailey are the only other players besides Trottier to play in over 1,000 games with the team; Potvin is also the only defenseman in the top ten of the franchise scoring leaders, ranking third overall.

===Scoring leaders===
These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Islanders player

Note: &quot;Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;



===Individual records===
* Most goals in a season – Mike Bossy, 69 (1978–79)
* Most assists in a season – Bryan Trottier, 87 (1978–79)
* Most points in a season – Mike Bossy, 147 (1981–82)
* Most penalty minutes in a season – Brian Curran, 356 (1986–87)
* Most points in a season by a defenseman – Denis Potvin, 101 (1978–79)
* Most points in a season by rookie – Bryan Trottier, 95 (1975–76)
* Most wins in a season by a goaltender – Jaroslav Halak, 38 (2014–15)

==Television and radio==

Most Islanders games are shown locally on sports channels MSG Sportsnet and MSGSN 2. Brendan Burke is the team&#x27;s play-by-play announcer, while former Islanders player Butch Goring is their color analyst. Shannon Hogan joined the broadcast team for the 2014–15 season as their studio host.

Islanders&#x27; radio broadcasts originate on flagship station WRHU (88.7 FM) in Hempstead. In New York City itself, most games air on WEPN, with some airing on WRCN-FM in Riverhead. WRHU is the student radio station of Hofstra University; its signal covers the western section of Long Island and Nassau County. WRCN serves the middle section and Suffolk County. The play-by-play is done by longtime Islanders broadcaster Chris King, and color commentary is provided by Greg Picker. Picker and Cory Wright co-host the radio pregame and intermission shows. Hofstra students provide reporting for all home games and several away games and are also involved in producing and engineering the broadcasts from on- and off-site.

In New York City itself, WFAN picked up Islanders games from 2016–17 to 2018–19, when it shifted most of its broadcasts to internet streaming on Audacy (formerly Radio.com), which also partnered with the team on other exclusive ancillary content. Previously, public radio station WNYE had been the main Islanders outlet for New York City and its inner suburbs.

The Islanders are unusual among professional sports teams in their use of a noncommercial radio station as its primary outlet. However, the team does not maintain a traditional radio network due to the other New York/New Jersey area teams filling the available tri-state radio stations covering sports. This causes complications with advertising and commercial breaks that do not make a traditional radio network feasible.

WCBS began airing Islanders games starting with the 2016 playoffs, returning the team to a major market New York signal. The games moved to WNYM and WMCA in 2017 before being consolidated on WEPN in 2019.

==See also==
* List of New York Islanders draft picks
* List of Stanley Cup champions

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="4" end="22" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="50" end="55" title="New York Islanders" label="Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="76" end="86" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300920" start="101" end="117" title="Elmont, New York" label="Elmont, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="148" end="170" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116323" start="196" end="217" title="Metropolitan Division" label="Metropolitan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="225" end="243" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742753" start="278" end="287" title="UBS Arena" label="UBS Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="342" end="368" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="385" end="402" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="407" end="423" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="464" end="475" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q628927" start="502" end="506" title="1972–73 NHL season" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="576" end="600" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048921" start="630" end="663" title="Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum" label="Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q985341" start="676" end="695" title="Uniondale, New York" label="Uniondale, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="894" end="905" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579408" start="928" end="932" title="1980 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581211" start="937" end="941" title="1983 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319161" start="962" end="971" title="dynasty (sports)" label="dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990858" start="1300" end="1310" title="three-peat" label="three-peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="1543" end="1550" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054654" start="1618" end="1631" title="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2016 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="1754" end="1769" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="1796" end="1810" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="1819" end="1826" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="1831" end="1838" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="1979" end="1993" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742753" start="2020" end="2029" title="UBS Arena" label="new arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894449" start="2035" end="2047" title="Belmont Park" label="Belmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="2133" end="2152" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="2168" end="2178" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095699" start="2180" end="2193" title="Clark Gillies" label="Clark Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="2195" end="2207" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q863224" start="2209" end="2220" title="Billy Smith (ice hockey)" label="Billy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="2222" end="2236" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q705925" start="2244" end="2253" title="Al Arbour" label="Al Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911169" start="2275" end="2286" title="Bill Torrey" label="Bill Torrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q252365" start="2352" end="2366" title="Pat LaFontaine" label="Pat LaFontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="2368" end="2382" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q739886" start="2387" end="2401" title="Pierre Turgeon" label="Pierre Turgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="2510" end="2534" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727656" start="2581" end="2597" title="New York Golden Blades" label="New York Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="2602" end="2615" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048921" start="2633" end="2666" title="Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum" label="Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580540" start="2761" end="2773" title="William Shea" label="William Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2796" end="2817" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="2825" end="2838" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128779" start="3004" end="3022" title="Continental League" label="Continental League"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="3028" end="3052" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q463486" start="3061" end="3092" title="American Basketball Association" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="3281" end="3294" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="3299" end="3312" title="New York Nets" label="New York Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095380" start="3607" end="3624" title="Clarence Campbell" label="Clarence Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="3742" end="3758" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="3888" end="3909" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305240" start="3950" end="3963" title="William M. Jennings" label="Bill Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="4734" end="4758" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="4912" end="4923" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381772" start="4965" end="4972" title="Roy Boe" label="Roy Boe"/>
<link wikidata="Q463486" start="4987" end="5018" title="American Basketball Association" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="5026" end="5039" title="New York Nets" label="New York Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="5243" end="5250" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q756173" start="5256" end="5262" title="Atlanta Flames" label="Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970067" start="5369" end="5382" title="Omni Coliseum" label="Omni Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272281" start="5470" end="5486" title="press conference" label="press conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366489" start="5515" end="5532" title="Roosevelt Raceway" label="Roosevelt Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="5558" end="5572" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040873" start="5608" end="5625" title="Long Island Ducks (ice hockey)" label="Long Island Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278186" start="5643" end="5664" title="Eastern Hockey League" label="Eastern Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710598" start="5927" end="5950" title="Cherry Hill, New Jersey" label="Cherry Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q849315" start="5997" end="6020" title="California Golden Seals" label="California Golden Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911169" start="6046" end="6057" title="Bill Torrey" label="Bill Torrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q369051" start="6210" end="6221" title="Ed Westfall" label="Ed Westfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552781" start="6234" end="6244" title="Gerry Hart" label="Gerry Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q863224" start="6261" end="6272" title="Billy Smith (ice hockey)" label="Billy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q254140" start="6280" end="6300" title="1972 NHL expansion draft" label="1972 expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139013" start="6313" end="6330" title="junior ice hockey" label="junior ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q863118" start="6337" end="6349" title="Billy Harris (ice hockey, born 1952)" label="Billy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681461" start="6351" end="6364" title="Lorne Henning" label="Lorne Henning"/>
<link wikidata="Q888171" start="6370" end="6383" title="Bobby Nystrom" label="Bobby Nystrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q141023" start="6391" end="6409" title="1972 NHL amateur draft" label="1972 amateur draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085654" start="6433" end="6445" title="Phil Goyette" label="Phil Goyette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046386" start="6559" end="6574" title="Earl Ingarfield Sr." label="Earl Ingarfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825818" start="6595" end="6607" title="Aut Erickson" label="Aut Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460406" start="7203" end="7213" title="Kings Park, New York" label="Kings Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451856" start="7334" end="7347" title="New Hyde Park, New York" label="New Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="7432" end="7449" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="7889" end="7900" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="7910" end="7923" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q141073" start="8022" end="8032" title="1973 NHL amateur draft" label="1973 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="8190" end="8208" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470534" start="8231" end="8242" title="Sam Pollock" label="Sam Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="8345" end="8357" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="8397" end="8406" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="8649" end="8664" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q705925" start="8671" end="8680" title="Al Arbour" label="Al Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="8781" end="8803" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278162" start="8867" end="8880" title="East Division (NHL)" label="East Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q772468" start="8892" end="8906" title="1973–74 NHL season" label="1973–74 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q902493" start="9323" end="9333" title="1974 NHL amateur draft" label="1974 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095699" start="9370" end="9383" title="Clark Gillies" label="Clark Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="9388" end="9402" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="9451" end="9465" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1974–75 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q726421" start="9619" end="9648" title="Chico Resch" label="Glenn &amp;quot;Chico&amp;quot; Resch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="9821" end="9837" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685140" start="9875" end="9887" title="J. P. Parisé" label="J. P. Parise"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="10026" end="10045" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197680" start="10262" end="10289" title="1941–42 Toronto Maple Leafs season" label="1941–42 Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095054" start="10291" end="10310" title="2004 Boston Red Sox season" label="2004 Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616087" start="10316" end="10343" title="2009–10 Philadelphia Flyers season" label="2009–10 Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245445" start="10353" end="10378" title="2013–14 Los Angeles Kings season" label="2013–14 Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="10518" end="10529" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="10539" end="10558" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="10905" end="10912" title="1975–76 NHL season" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="11140" end="11162" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="11541" end="11545" title="1976 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092006" start="11550" end="11575" title="1977 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1977 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="11669" end="11687" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q178072" start="11832" end="11842" title="1977 NHL amateur draft" label="1977 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="11911" end="11921" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041884" start="11926" end="11939" title="Dwight Foster (ice hockey)" label="Dwight Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q793654" start="12031" end="12038" title="Checking (ice hockey)" label="checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q902860" start="12095" end="12116" title="Ontario Hockey League" label="Ontario Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q285189" start="12230" end="12244" title="1977–78 NHL season" label="1977–78 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12651" end="12659" title="1977–78 NHL season#Playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="12733" end="12752" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="12758" end="12765" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="12938" end="12958" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="12990" end="13005" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="13268" end="13289" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="14164" end="14195" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252873" start="14449" end="14461" title="John Pickett (businessman)" label="John Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="14657" end="14673" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579655" start="14702" end="14715" title="SportsChannel" label="SportsChannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11963448" start="14740" end="14753" title="Charles Dolan" label="Charles Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717771" start="15071" end="15084" title="MSG Sportsnet" label="MSG Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="15434" end="15438" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="15593" end="15604" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q719485" start="15729" end="15739" title="Dave Lewis (ice hockey)" label="Dave Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="15747" end="15764" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q428628" start="15788" end="15800" title="Butch Goring" label="Butch Goring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095699" start="16077" end="16090" title="Clark Gillies" label="Clark Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q352406" start="16142" end="16154" title="Duane Sutter" label="Duane Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q491103" start="16159" end="16172" title="Anders Kallur" label="Anders Kallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="16177" end="16200" title="Stay-at-home defenceman" label="stay-at-home defensemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229149" start="16201" end="16214" title="Dave Langevin" label="Dave Langevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584605" start="16216" end="16225" title="Gord Lane" label="Gord Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q728164" start="16231" end="16241" title="Ken Morrow" label="Ken Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9652" start="16288" end="16301" title="1980 Winter Olympics" label="1980 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="16559" end="16573" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q888171" start="16718" end="16729" title="Bob Nystrom" label="Bob Nystrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="16935" end="16954" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="17054" end="17066" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="17093" end="17105" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="17680" end="17698" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q725574" start="18051" end="18065" title="Stefan Persson (ice hockey)" label="Stefan Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q241431" start="18153" end="18173" title="50 goals in 50 games" label="50 goals in 50 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="18177" end="18181" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="18256" end="18277" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195256" start="18460" end="18465" title="Curse of 1940" label="1940!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589739" start="18576" end="18580" title="1994 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="18637" end="18644" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="18745" end="18755" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="18937" end="18956" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q359517" start="19035" end="19047" title="John Tonelli" label="John Tonelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="19161" end="19177" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="19186" end="19203" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580623" start="19237" end="19255" title="1982 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q390278" start="19345" end="19359" title="Tiger Williams" label="Tiger Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="19656" end="19671" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="19695" end="19708" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="19757" end="19764" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581211" start="19841" end="19859" title="1983 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q863224" start="19903" end="19914" title="Billy Smith (ice hockey)" label="Billy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q723807" start="20077" end="20089" title="Brent Sutter" label="Brent Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="20394" end="20406" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="20581" end="20603" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84 regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q775084" start="20836" end="20847" title="Don Maloney" label="Don Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="21048" end="21067" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="21090" end="21108" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q252365" start="21187" end="21201" title="Pat LaFontaine" label="Pat LaFontaine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21379" end="21392" title="1983–84 NHL season#Playoffs" label="1984 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="22155" end="22169" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="22821" end="22839" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="22926" end="22933" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="22938" end="22945" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="23017" end="23036" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095699" start="23305" end="23318" title="Clark Gillies" label="Clark Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="23351" end="23365" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="23405" end="23419" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518933" start="23469" end="23482" title="Terry Simpson" label="Terry Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583920" start="23514" end="23527" title="1987 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1987 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329882" start="23822" end="23833" title="Easter Epic" label="Easter Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q304395" start="23841" end="23853" title="Kelly Hrudey" label="Kelly Hrudey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="23958" end="23971" title="Easter" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="24143" end="24153" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="24187" end="24203" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="24320" end="24337" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q715566" start="24523" end="24534" title="Ray Bourque" label="Ray Bourque"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="24539" end="24550" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="24758" end="24772" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="24970" end="24986" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610805" start="25429" end="25442" title="Stephen Walsh (money manager)" label="Stephen Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151003" start="25448" end="25462" title="Paul Greenwood (money manager)" label="Paul Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="25528" end="25539" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="25699" end="25713" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="25787" end="25801" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="26079" end="26086" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130837" start="26225" end="26235" title="Randy Wood (ice hockey)" label="Randy Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q182674" start="26240" end="26253" title="Randy Hillier (ice hockey)" label="Randy Hillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="26296" end="26310" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q739886" start="26325" end="26339" title="Pierre Turgeon" label="Pierre Turgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q818115" start="26341" end="26353" title="Benoît Hogue" label="Benoit Hogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q63098" start="26355" end="26364" title="Uwe Krupp" label="Uwe Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q282577" start="26369" end="26382" title="Dave McLlwain" label="Dave McLlwain"/>
<link wikidata="Q723807" start="26414" end="26426" title="Brent Sutter" label="Brent Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954077" start="26431" end="26441" title="Brad Lauer" label="Brad Lauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="26449" end="26467" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q452878" start="26472" end="26484" title="Steve Thomas (ice hockey)" label="Steve Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807340" start="26489" end="26503" title="Adam Creighton (ice hockey)" label="Adam Creighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q937337" start="26565" end="26575" title="Derek King" label="Derek King"/>
<link wikidata="Q714025" start="26577" end="26588" title="Ray Ferraro" label="Ray Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378500" start="26594" end="26609" title="Patrick Flatley" label="Patrick Flatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26631" end="26637" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006107" start="26646" end="26663" title="Vladimir Malakhov (ice hockey)" label="Vladimir Malakhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q458564" start="26668" end="26686" title="Darius Kasparaitis" label="Darius Kasparaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q775084" start="26946" end="26957" title="Don Maloney" label="Don Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="27043" end="27059" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="27092" end="27099" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q516636" start="27370" end="27386" title="Lady Byng Trophy" label="Lady Byng Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157848" start="27761" end="27772" title="Dale Hunter" label="Dale Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="28137" end="28156" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="28227" end="28240" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="28242" end="28254" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q927970" start="28260" end="28271" title="Ron Francis" label="Ron Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="28511" end="28518" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108800" start="28687" end="28698" title="Glenn Healy" label="Glenn Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018949" start="28779" end="28790" title="David Volek" label="David Volek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="29174" end="29192" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960934" start="29515" end="29535" title="1993 NHL expansion draft" label="1993 expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900047" start="29564" end="29580" title="Mark Fitzpatrick" label="Mark Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="29588" end="29604" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345138" start="29609" end="29620" title="Ron Hextall" label="Ron Hextall"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="29793" end="29816" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="29842" end="29861" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q638541" start="30214" end="30218" title="2002 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681461" start="30293" end="30306" title="Lorne Henning" label="Lorne Henning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364380" start="30449" end="30465" title="Tommy Söderström" label="Tommy Soderstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="30623" end="30638" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="31135" end="31153" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q935070" start="31158" end="31169" title="Kirk Muller" label="Kirk Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344150" start="31174" end="31191" title="Mathieu Schneider" label="Mathieu Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="31217" end="31224" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591129" start="31246" end="31258" title="Éric Fichaud" label="Eric Fichaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="31620" end="31634" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313457" start="31668" end="31680" title="Mike Milbury" label="Mike Milbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420441" start="31950" end="31959" title="fishstick" label="fishstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174352" start="32002" end="32025" title="Gorton&amp;#x27;s of Gloucester" label="Gorton&amp;#x27;s Fisherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q913775" start="32404" end="32424" title="Bridgeport Islanders" label="Bridgeport Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="32799" end="32815" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431531" start="32839" end="32851" title="Rick Bowness" label="Rick Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="32972" end="32986" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="33144" end="33160" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="33366" end="33372" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258564" start="33385" end="33395" title="John Spano" label="John Spano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="33587" end="33594" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="34595" end="34599" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030809" start="34606" end="34615" title="30 for 30" label="30 for 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920423" start="34703" end="34718" title="Howard Milstein" label="Howard Milstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="34723" end="34738" title="Phoenix Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088423" start="34805" end="34831" title="Spectacor Management Group" label="Spectacor Management Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q739843" start="35255" end="35268" title="Todd Bertuzzi" label="Todd Bertuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q776895" start="35273" end="35285" title="Bryan McCabe" label="Bryan McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="35310" end="35323" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q394023" start="35739" end="35753" title="Žigmund Pálffy" label="Zigmund Palffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q994964" start="35802" end="35814" title="Bryan Berard" label="Bryan Berard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380418" start="35838" end="35848" title="Rich Pilon" label="Rich Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="36172" end="36196" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="36204" end="36223" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="36228" end="36244" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q600624" start="36359" end="36378" title="Computer Associates" label="Computer Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q832333" start="36390" end="36402" title="Charles Wang" label="Charles Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686131" start="36407" end="36419" title="Sanjay Kumar (business executive)" label="Sanjay Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="36698" end="36712" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q706944" start="36717" end="36729" title="Olli Jokinen" label="Olli Jokinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="36737" end="36753" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799869" start="36758" end="36769" title="Oleg Kvasha" label="Oleg Kvasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q358201" start="36774" end="36786" title="Mark Parrish" label="Mark Parrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q707646" start="36849" end="36862" title="Rick DiPietro" label="Rick DiPietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="36895" end="36905" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q440283" start="36932" end="36944" title="Dany Heatley" label="Dany Heatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="36949" end="36963" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q428628" start="37534" end="37546" title="Butch Goring" label="Butch Goring"/>
<link wikidata="Q927335" start="37681" end="37690" title="Ted Nolan" label="Ted Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="37728" end="37741" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q713383" start="37758" end="37774" title="Peter Laviolette" label="Peter Laviolette"/>
<link wikidata="Q585247" start="37883" end="37896" title="Alexei Yashin" label="Alexei Yashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="37919" end="37934" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351824" start="37959" end="37971" title="Bill Muckalt" label="Bill Muckalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q168957" start="37984" end="37995" title="Zdeno Chára" label="Zdeno Chara"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="38047" end="38057" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366634" start="38085" end="38097" title="Tim Connolly" label="Tim Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q945620" start="38102" end="38114" title="Taylor Pyatt" label="Taylor Pyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="38134" end="38148" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383180" start="38165" end="38177" title="Michael Peca" label="Michael Peca"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="38284" end="38301" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q504452" start="38313" end="38325" title="Chris Osgood" label="Chris Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345138" start="38855" end="38866" title="Ron Hextall" label="Ron Hextall"/>
<link wikidata="Q638541" start="38908" end="38933" title="2002 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2002 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="38986" end="39005" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q239137" start="39149" end="39161" title="Gary Roberts (ice hockey)" label="Gary Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342482" start="39191" end="39204" title="Kenny Jönsson" label="Kenny Jonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165737" start="39210" end="39222" title="Darcy Tucker" label="Darcy Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q611127" start="39304" end="39330" title="anterior cruciate ligament" label="anterior cruciate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="39653" end="39667" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="39771" end="39786" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347316" start="40001" end="40015" title="Steve Stirling" label="Steve Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q913775" start="40098" end="40121" title="Bridgeport Sound Tigers" label="Bridgeport Sound Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="40130" end="40146" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="40244" end="40263" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="40280" end="40299" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="2004–05 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="40403" end="40419" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="40444" end="40459" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q705474" start="40471" end="40480" title="Mike York" label="Mike York"/>
<link wikidata="Q715409" start="40572" end="40586" title="Miroslav Šatan" label="Miroslav Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379215" start="40677" end="40691" title="Alexei Zhitnik" label="Alexei Zhitnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q896827" start="40693" end="40706" title="Brad Lukowich" label="Brad Lukowich"/>
<link wikidata="Q909829" start="40711" end="40722" title="Brent Sopel" label="Brent Sopel"/>
<link wikidata="Q372618" start="40747" end="40760" title="Adrian Aucoin" label="Adrian Aucoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344640" start="40765" end="40778" title="Roman Hamrlík" label="Roman Hamrlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519755" start="40850" end="40867" title="HockeyAllsvenskan" label="HockeyAllsvenskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263007" start="41385" end="41395" title="Neil Smith (ice hockey)" label="Neil Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q927335" start="41419" end="41428" title="Ted Nolan" label="Ted Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954249" start="41471" end="41480" title="Brad Shaw" label="Brad Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q714011" start="41634" end="41644" title="Garth Snow" label="Garth Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q908787" start="41793" end="41805" title="Brendan Witt" label="Brendan Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q939096" start="41810" end="41818" title="Tom Poti" label="Tom Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381799" start="41833" end="41847" title="Mike Sillinger" label="Mike Sillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077747" start="41852" end="41863" title="Chris Simon" label="Chris Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="42124" end="42155" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q134183" start="42163" end="42176" title="Magic Johnson" label="Magic Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="42580" end="42597" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239566" start="42620" end="42631" title="Don Waddell" label="Don Waddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q739756" start="42990" end="43000" title="Ryan Smyth" label="Ryan Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="43010" end="43025" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="43286" end="43303" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="43470" end="43493" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="43502" end="43516" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q585247" start="43585" end="43598" title="Alexei Yashin" label="Alexei Yashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q739732" start="43681" end="43694" title="Viktor Kozlov" label="Viktor Kozlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342463" start="43696" end="43707" title="Jason Blake (ice hockey)" label="Jason Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q722066" start="43713" end="43727" title="Richard Zedník" label="Richard Zednik"/>
<link wikidata="Q795013" start="43792" end="43803" title="Bill Guerin" label="Bill Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706869" start="43905" end="43916" title="Mike Comrie" label="Mike Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q527802" start="43918" end="43929" title="Andy Sutton" label="Andy Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q479259" start="43934" end="43941" title="Jon Sim" label="Jon Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="44295" end="44314" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q979965" start="44505" end="44524" title="Marc-André Bergeron" label="Marc-Andre Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="44635" end="44655" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q939608" start="44774" end="44785" title="Josh Bailey" label="Josh Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q553297" start="44815" end="44826" title="Mark Streit" label="Mark Streit"/>
<link wikidata="Q928048" start="44831" end="44842" title="Doug Weight" label="Doug Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q927335" start="44874" end="44883" title="Ted Nolan" label="Ted Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260877" start="44961" end="44973" title="Scott Gordon (ice hockey)" label="Scott Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077075" start="45023" end="45036" title="Chris Campoli" label="Chris Campoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="45044" end="45059" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q349601" start="45084" end="45097" title="Dean McAmmond" label="Dean McAmmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="45106" end="45121" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="45158" end="45178" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="45215" end="45234" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="45285" end="45299" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="45550" end="45570" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q537353" start="45704" end="45716" title="John Tavares" label="John Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="45752" end="45772" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q728924" start="46052" end="46065" title="Victor Hedman" label="Victor Hedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q717078" start="46071" end="46083" title="Matt Duchene" label="Matt Duchene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378413" start="46085" end="46112" title="NHL Central Scouting Bureau" label="NHL Central Scouting Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q542445" start="46476" end="46490" title="Calvin de Haan" label="Calvin de Haan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940973" start="46530" end="46543" title="Casey Cizikas" label="Casey Cizikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753855" start="46548" end="46558" title="Anders Lee" label="Anders Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="46647" end="46661" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="46668" end="46682" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="47119" end="47123" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q688768" start="47217" end="47234" title="Nino Niederreiter" label="Nino Niederreiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925902" start="47239" end="47251" title="Brock Nelson" label="Brock Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="47297" end="47311" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260877" start="47415" end="47427" title="Scott Gordon (ice hockey)" label="Scott Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q973634" start="47468" end="47480" title="Jack Capuano" label="Jack Capuano"/>
<link wikidata="Q33700" start="47573" end="47588" title="Michael Grabner" label="Michael Grabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="47672" end="47694" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162805" start="47808" end="47832" title="Pittsburgh Penguins–New York Islanders brawl" label="Penguins–Islanders brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="47974" end="47990" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q244987" start="48135" end="48157" title="59th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="59th NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q949932" start="48249" end="48261" title="Matt Moulson" label="Matt Moulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="48584" end="48594" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116624" start="48616" end="48632" title="Griffin Reinhart" label="Griffin Reinhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="48693" end="48706" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747313" start="48878" end="48900" title="The Lighthouse Project" label="The Lighthouse Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="49022" end="49037" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="49041" end="49049" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="49065" end="49071" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="49075" end="49089" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815329" start="49095" end="49108" title="Sprint Center" label="Sprint Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="49112" end="49123" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q738388" start="49132" end="49148" title="Videotron Centre" label="Videotron Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="49152" end="49163" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="49417" end="49432" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="49436" end="49444" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="50088" end="50094" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="50132" end="50146" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="50283" end="50302" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="50443" end="50462" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q390913" start="50517" end="50531" title="Evgeni Nabokov" label="Evgeni Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="50588" end="50607" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856497" start="50634" end="50642" title="2013 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="51125" end="51139" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q44850" start="51156" end="51168" title="Thomas Vanek" label="Thomas Vanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q128225" start="51258" end="51269" title="Kyle Okposo" label="Kyle Okposo"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="51349" end="51364" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="51397" end="51415" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335305" start="51442" end="51460" title="Sebastian Collberg" label="Sebastian Collberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="51488" end="51492" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="51583" end="51591" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="51720" end="51732" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="final season"/>
<link wikidata="Q887299" start="51798" end="51812" title="Jaroslav Halák" label="Jaroslav Halak"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="51822" end="51841" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q604600" start="51960" end="51977" title="Mikhail Grabovski" label="Mikhail Grabovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q944116" start="51979" end="51994" title="Nikolai Kulemin" label="Nikolai Kulemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066274" start="52010" end="52022" title="Chad Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Chad Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702299" start="52090" end="52104" title="Johnny Boychuk" label="Johnny Boychuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="52114" end="52127" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="52167" end="52171" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985505" start="52227" end="52237" title="Nick Leddy" label="Nick Leddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="52247" end="52265" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078050" start="52291" end="52302" title="Ville Pokka" label="Ville Pokka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511910" start="52304" end="52317" title="T. J. Brennan" label="T. J. Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q491204" start="52336" end="52350" title="Anders Nilsson (ice hockey)" label="Anders Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17580621" start="52429" end="52440" title="Jon Ledecky" label="Jon Ledecky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378097" start="52445" end="52460" title="Scott D. Malkin" label="Scott D. Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="52832" end="52845" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="52962" end="52983" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q942250" start="53914" end="53929" title="Cal Clutterbuck" label="Cal Clutterbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="54140" end="54150" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385625" start="54218" end="54231" title="Mathew Barzal" label="Mathew Barzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065960" start="54236" end="54255" title="Anthony Beauvillier" label="Anthony Beauvillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q20476183" start="54328" end="54339" title="Andong Song" label="Andong Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="54500" end="54515" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="54566" end="54584" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q713347" start="54586" end="54600" title="Artem Anisimov" label="Artem Anisimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q762612" start="54912" end="54926" title="Travis Hamonic" label="Travis Hamonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="55173" end="55189" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q72467" start="55202" end="55215" title="Thomas Greiss" label="Thomas Greiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="55269" end="55284" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657643" start="55448" end="55458" title="Alan Quine" label="Alan Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="56284" end="56298" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="56300" end="56317" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="56323" end="56342" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q505814" start="56382" end="56393" title="Andrew Ladd" label="Andrew Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="56403" end="56421" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q939254" start="56426" end="56439" title="Jason Chimera" label="Jason Chimera"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="56449" end="56468" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="56545" end="56559" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q928048" start="56683" end="56694" title="Doug Weight" label="Doug Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165507" start="57189" end="57209" title="Jean-François Bérubé" label="Jean-Francois Berube"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="57368" end="57382" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="57795" end="57802" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q383983" start="58037" end="58049" title="Gary Bettman" label="Gary Bettman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894449" start="58286" end="58298" title="Belmont Park" label="Belmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385625" start="58662" end="58675" title="Mathew Barzal" label="Mathew Barzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691516" start="58759" end="58769" title="Joe Malone" label="Joe Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q311280" start="59078" end="59091" title="Sidney Crosby" label="Sidney Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="59207" end="59221" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q994964" start="59504" end="59516" title="Bryan Berard" label="Bryan Berard"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="59623" end="59633" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="59663" end="59675" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="59748" end="59765" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="59770" end="59789" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q126912" start="59806" end="59820" title="Lou Lamoriello" label="Lou Lamoriello"/>
<link wikidata="Q714011" start="60008" end="60018" title="Garth Snow" label="Garth Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q608839" start="60034" end="60045" title="Barry Trotz" label="Barry Trotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742753" start="60679" end="60691" title="UBS Arena" label="Belmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300920" start="60695" end="60701" title="Elmont, New York" label="Elmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q62004249" start="61047" end="61060" title="2019 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2019 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="61157" end="61176" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374139" start="61201" end="61237" title="Empire State Development Corporation" label="Empire State Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742753" start="61462" end="61471" title="UBS Arena" label="UBS Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="61570" end="61587" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="61880" end="61896" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="61955" end="61980" title="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="62018" end="62037" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="62117" end="62136" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588797" start="62303" end="62316" title="1993 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1993 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="62378" end="62397" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q832333" start="62526" end="62548" title="Charles Wang" label="estate of Charles Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742753" start="62846" end="62855" title="UBS Arena" label="UBS Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q939608" start="63126" end="63137" title="Josh Bailey" label="Josh Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753855" start="63155" end="63165" title="Anders Lee" label="Anders Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229469" start="63189" end="63200" title="Adam Pelech" label="Adam Pelech"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065960" start="63202" end="63221" title="Anthony Beauvillier" label="Anthony Beauvillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q525975" start="63227" end="63238" title="Andy Greene" label="Andy Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="63313" end="63327" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q686075" start="63347" end="63362" title="Brad Richardson" label="Brad Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925902" start="63413" end="63425" title="Brock Nelson" label="Brock Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q139368" start="63583" end="63594" title="Zach Parise" label="Zach Parise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379737" start="63840" end="63852" title="Lane Lambert" label="Lane Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="63861" end="63872" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q117074617" start="63992" end="64005" title="2023 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2023 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="64118" end="64129" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125220378" start="64289" end="64302" title="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2024 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="64465" end="64471" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="64476" end="64483" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q985341" start="64774" end="64783" title="Uniondale, New York" label="Uniondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="64830" end="64844" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174352" start="65217" end="65240" title="Gorton&amp;#x27;s of Gloucester" label="Gorton&amp;#x27;s fisherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="65250" end="65266" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420441" start="65323" end="65333" title="fish finger" label="fishsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785065" start="65458" end="65474" title="Third jersey" label="alternate jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="65483" end="65490" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="65531" end="65538" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="65711" end="65718" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542190" start="66086" end="66105" title="2014 NHL Stadium Series" label="2014 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="66577" end="66591" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="66607" end="66621" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904488" start="67022" end="67040" title="Montauk Lighthouse" label="Montauk Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="67367" end="67381" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785065" start="67451" end="67477" title="Third jersey" label="third (and fourth) jerseys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="67791" end="67805" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="67820" end="67834" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="68174" end="68181" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="68307" end="68321" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="68332" end="68346" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954087" start="68425" end="68436" title="Reebok Edge" label="Reebok Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="69006" end="69020" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="69164" end="69169" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542190" start="69701" end="69720" title="2014 NHL Stadium Series" label="2014 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="70213" end="70227" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="70403" end="70419" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="70992" end="70998" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q119774406" start="72120" end="72139" title="2024 NHL Stadium Series" label="2024 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72394" end="72411" title="List of NHL mascots#Sparky the Dragon" label="Sparky the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="72471" end="72492" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603547" start="72500" end="72516" title="New York Dragons" label="New York Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="72836" end="72850" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="73022" end="73041" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73049" end="73065" title="List of NHL mascots#Carlton the Bear" label="Carlton the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q588260" start="73794" end="73828" title="List of New York Islanders seasons" label="List of New York Islanders seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="74097" end="74116" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="74119" end="74129" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095699" start="74131" end="74144" title="Clark Gillies" label="Clark Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252365" start="74146" end="74160" title="Pat LaFontaine" label="Pat LaFontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="74162" end="74176" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="74178" end="74190" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q863224" start="74192" end="74203" title="Billy Smith (ice hockey)" label="Billy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="74205" end="74219" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q739886" start="74224" end="74238" title="Pierre Turgeon" label="Pierre Turgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911169" start="74441" end="74452" title="Bill Torrey" label="Bill Torrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q705925" start="74457" end="74466" title="Al Arbour" label="Al Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q126912" start="74513" end="74527" title="Lou Lamoriello" label="Lou Lamoriello"/>
<link wikidata="Q887819" start="74738" end="74748" title="Bob Bourne" label="Bob Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q728164" start="75097" end="75107" title="Ken Morrow" label="Ken Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378500" start="75139" end="75154" title="Patrick Flatley" label="Patrick Flatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q723807" start="75420" end="75432" title="Brent Sutter" label="Brent Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q705925" start="75556" end="75565" title="Al Arbour" label="Al Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911169" start="75648" end="75659" title="Bill Torrey" label="Bill Torrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="75938" end="75951" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="75998" end="76020" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q369051" start="76107" end="76118" title="Ed Westfall" label="Ed Westfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="76128" end="76149" title="Bill Masterton Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383180" start="76172" end="76184" title="Michael Peca" label="Michael Peca"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="76198" end="76219" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="76230" end="76244" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="76342" end="76354" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q776895" start="76435" end="76447" title="Bryan McCabe" label="Bryan McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="76546" end="76563" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q795013" start="76592" end="76603" title="Bill Guerin" label="Bill Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="76621" end="76640" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="76652" end="76666" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753855" start="76714" end="76724" title="Anders Lee" label="Anders Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="76865" end="76879" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378500" start="76903" end="76918" title="Patrick Flatley" label="Patrick Flatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="76955" end="76969" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342482" start="77007" end="77020" title="Kenny Jönsson" label="Kenny Jonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q369051" start="77076" end="77087" title="Ed Westfall" label="Ed Westfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095699" start="77101" end="77114" title="Clark Gillies" label="Clark Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="77128" end="77140" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q723807" start="77154" end="77166" title="Brent Sutter" label="Brent Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378500" start="77180" end="77195" title="Patrick Flatley" label="Patrick Flatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q776895" start="77209" end="77221" title="Bryan McCabe" label="Bryan McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="77235" end="77248" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342482" start="77262" end="77275" title="Kenny Jönsson" label="Kenny Jonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383180" start="77289" end="77301" title="Michael Peca" label="Michael Peca"/>
<link wikidata="Q585247" start="77315" end="77328" title="Alexei Yashin" label="Alexei Yashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q795013" start="77342" end="77353" title="Bill Guerin" label="Bill Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q928048" start="77367" end="77378" title="Doug Weight" label="Doug Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q553297" start="77392" end="77403" title="Mark Streit" label="Mark Streit"/>
<link wikidata="Q537353" start="77417" end="77429" title="John Tavares" label="John Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753855" start="77443" end="77453" title="Anders Lee" label="Anders Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q126912" start="77515" end="77529" title="Lou Lamoriello" label="Lou Lamoriello"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="77630" end="77641" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="77714" end="77728" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="77863" end="77873" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="77878" end="77890" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q937337" start="77985" end="77995" title="Derek King" label="Derek King"/>
<link wikidata="Q939608" start="78027" end="78038" title="Josh Bailey" label="Josh Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="78573" end="78583" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="78589" end="78596" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="78627" end="78641" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="78647" end="78654" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="78684" end="78694" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="78701" end="78708" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963486" start="78747" end="78759" title="Brian Curran" label="Brian Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="78766" end="78773" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q176314" start="78819" end="78831" title="Denis Potvin" label="Denis Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="78838" end="78845" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q471847" start="78885" end="78899" title="Bryan Trottier" label="Bryan Trottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="78905" end="78912" title="1975–76 NHL season" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q887299" start="78956" end="78970" title="Jaroslav Halák" label="Jaroslav Halak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="78976" end="78983" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717771" start="79070" end="79083" title="MSG Sportsnet" label="MSG Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18022193" start="79097" end="79110" title="Brendan Burke (sportscaster)" label="Brendan Burke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79130" end="79152" title="Sports commentator#Main/Play-by-play commentator" label="play-by-play announcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q428628" start="79184" end="79196" title="Butch Goring" label="Butch Goring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79206" end="79219" title="Sports commentator#Analyst/Color commentator" label="color analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955053" start="79370" end="79374" title="WRHU" label="WRHU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358175" start="79388" end="79397" title="Hempstead (village), New York" label="Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564667" start="79442" end="79446" title="WEPN (AM)" label="WEPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954925" start="79468" end="79475" title="WRCN-FM" label="WRCN-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="79479" end="79488" title="Riverhead, New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623314" start="79527" end="79545" title="Hofstra University" label="Hofstra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106511" start="80055" end="80059" title="WFAN (AM)" label="WFAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="80175" end="80181" title="Audacy" label="Audacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953684" start="80310" end="80314" title="WNYE (FM)" label="WNYE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450606" start="80816" end="80820" title="WCBS (AM)" label="WCBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953694" start="80956" end="80960" title="WNYM" label="WNYM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564725" start="80965" end="80969" title="WMCA (AM)" label="WMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q241896" start="81037" end="81075" title="List of New York Islanders draft picks" label="List of New York Islanders draft picks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783598" start="81078" end="81107" title="List of Stanley Cup champions" label="List of Stanley Cup champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66881" wikidata="Q188984" url="?curid=66881" title="New York Rangers">
<text>The New York Rangers are a professional ice hockey team based in New York City. The Rangers compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Metropolitan Division in the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at Madison Square Garden, an arena they share with the New York Knicks of the National Basketball Association (NBA). They are one of three NHL franchises located in the New York metropolitan area; the others being the New Jersey Devils and New York Islanders.

Founded in 1926 by Tex Rickard, the Rangers are one of the Original Six teams that competed in the NHL before its 1967 expansion, along with the Boston Bruins, Chicago Blackhawks, Detroit Red Wings, Montreal Canadiens and Toronto Maple Leafs. The team attained success early on under the guidance of Lester Patrick, who coached a team containing Frank Boucher, Murray Murdoch, and Bun and Bill Cook to win the Stanley Cup in only their second season. They were the first NHL franchise in the United States to win the trophy, and are still the fastest true expansion team in NHL history to do so. The team won two more Stanley Cups in 1933 and 1940.

Following this initial grace period, the franchise struggled between the 1940s and 1960s, wherein playoff appearances and successes were infrequent. The team enjoyed a mini-renaissance in the 1970s, where they made the Stanley Cup Finals twice, losing to the Bruins in 1972 and the Canadiens in 1979. The Rangers subsequently embraced a rebuild for much of the 1980s and early 1990s, which eventually paid dividends in 1994, where the team, led by Mark Messier, Brian Leetch, Adam Graves, and Mike Richter, captured their fourth Stanley Cup.

The team was unable to duplicate that success in the years that followed, and entered into another period of mediocrity. They endured a franchise-record seven-year postseason drought from 1998 to 2005 and languished for the majority of the 2000s before enjoying another period of prosperity after the 2004–05 NHL Lockout. After the arrival of goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, the Rangers thrived, missing the playoffs just once between 2006 and 2017. They reached the Stanley Cup Finals in 2014, falling to the Los Angeles Kings in five games.

Several former members of the Rangers have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame, four of whom – Buddy O&#x27;Connor, Chuck Rayner, Andy Bathgate, and Messier – have won the Hart Memorial Trophy while playing for the team. 
==History==

===Early years (1926–1967)===
George Lewis &quot;Tex&quot; Rickard, president of Madison Square Garden, was awarded an NHL franchise for the 1926–27 season to compete with the New York Americans, who had begun play at the Garden the previous season. The Americans&#x27; early success in their inaugural season exceeded expectations, leading Rickard to pursue a second team for the Garden despite promising the Amerks that they were going to be the only hockey team to play there. The new team was quickly nicknamed &quot;Tex&#x27;s Rangers&quot;.

Rickard&#x27;s franchise began play in the 1926–27 season. The first team crest was a horse sketched in blue carrying a cowboy waving a hockey stick aloft, before being changed to the familiar &quot;RANGERS&quot; in diagonal. Future Toronto Maple Leafs owner Conn Smythe was hired to assemble the team, however he had a falling-out with Rickard&#x27;s hockey man, Col. John S. Hammond, and was fired as manager-coach on the eve of the first season – he was paid a then-hefty $2,500 to leave. Smythe was replaced by Pacific Coast Hockey Association co-founder Lester Patrick. The new team Smythe assembled turned out to be a winner. The Rangers won the American Division title their first year but lost to the Boston Bruins in the playoffs.

The team&#x27;s early success led to players becoming minor celebrities and fixtures in New York City&#x27;s Roaring Twenties nightlife. It was during this time, playing at the Garden on 49th Street, blocks away from Times Square, that the Rangers obtained their nickname &quot;The Broadway Blueshirts&quot;. On December 13, 1929, the Rangers became the first team in the NHL to travel by plane when they hired the Curtiss-Wright Corporation to fly them to Toronto for a game against the Maple Leafs, which they lost 7–6.

In only the second season, they won the 1928 Stanley Cup, defeating the Montreal Maroons three games to two. One of the most memorable stories that emerged from the finals involved Patrick playing in goal at the age of 44. At the time, teams were not required to dress a backup goaltender. When the Rangers&#x27; starting goaltender, Lorne Chabot, left a game with an eye injury, Maroons head coach Eddie Gerard vetoed Patrick&#x27;s original choice for an emergency replacement, Alex Connell of the Ottawa Senators, who was in attendance. An angry Patrick lined up between the pipes for two periods in game 2 of the finals, allowing one goal to Maroons center Nels Stewart. Frank Boucher scored the game-winning goal in overtime for New York.

After a loss to the Bruins in the 1929 Stanley Cup Finals and an early struggle in the early 1930s, the Rangers, led by brothers Bill and Bun Cook on the right and left wings, respectively, and Frank Boucher at center, defeated the Maple Leafs in the 1933 Stanley Cup Finals to win their second Stanley Cup. The Rangers spent the rest of the 1930s playing close to 0.500 hockey until their next Cup win. Lester Patrick stepped down as head coach and was replaced by Frank Boucher.
In the 1939–40 season, the Rangers finished the regular season in second place behind Boston. The two teams then met in the first round of the playoffs. The Bruins gained a two-games-to-one series lead from New York, but the Rangers recovered to win three-straight games, defeating the first-place Bruins four games to two. The Rangers&#x27; first-round victory gave them a bye until the finals. The Detroit Red Wings defeated the New York Americans in their first-round best-of-three series two games to one, and the Toronto Maple Leafs ousted the Chicago Black Hawks two games to none. The Maple Leafs then swept Detroit a best-of-three series to advance to the finals. The 1940 Stanley Cup Finals commenced in Madison Square Garden. In game 1, the Rangers needed overtime to gain a 1–0 series lead, but they won game two more easily with a 6–2 victory. The series then shifted to Toronto, where the Maple Leafs won the next two games, tying the series at two games apiece. In games 5 and 6, the Rangers won in overtime, taking the series four games to two to earn their third Stanley Cup.

However, the Rangers collapsed by the mid-1940s, losing games by scores as lopsided as 15–0. In 1943–44, goaltender Ken McAuley led the league with 39 losses and 310 goals allowed in 50 games played; his 6.24 goals-against average that year remains the worst in NHL history by a goaltender playing at least 25 games in a season. They missed the playoffs for five consecutive seasons before earning the fourth and final playoff spot in 1947–48. They lost in the first round and missed the playoffs again in 1948–49. In the 1950 Stanley Cup Finals, the Rangers were forced to play all of their games, including &quot;home&quot; games, in Toronto, while the circus was held at the Garden. They lost to the Detroit Red Wings in overtime in the seventh game of the finals.

During this time, Red Wings owner James E. Norris became the largest stockholder in the Garden. However, he did not buy controlling interest in the arena, which would have violated the NHL&#x27;s rule against one person owning more than one team. Nonetheless, he had enough support on the board to exercise de facto control. The Rangers remained a mark of futility in the NHL for most of the remainder of the Original Six era, missing the playoffs in 12 of the next 16 years. However, the team was rejuvenated in the late 1960s, symbolized by moving into the fourth version of Madison Square Garden in 1968. A year earlier, they made the playoffs for the first time in five years on the strength of rookie goaltender Eddie Giacomin and 37-year-old former 1950s Montreal Canadiens star right wing Bernie &quot;Boom Boom&quot; Geoffrion, signed out of retirement in 1966.

===Post-Original Six era (1967–1993)===

The Rangers made the finals twice in the 1970s, but lost both times to two 1970s powerhouses; in six games to the Boston Bruins in 1972, who were led by such stars as Bobby Orr, Phil Esposito, Ken Hodge, Johnny Bucyk and Wayne Cashman; and in five games to the Canadiens in 1979, who had Bob Gainey, Guy Lafleur, Larry Robinson, Ken Dryden, Guy Lapointe and Serge Savard.

The Rangers reached the 1972 Stanley Cup Finals despite losing high-scoring center Jean Ratelle (who had been on pace over Bruin Phil Esposito to become the first Ranger since Bryan Hextall in 1942 to lead the NHL in scoring) to injury during the stretch drive of the regular season. The strength of players such as Brad Park, Jean Ratelle, Vic Hadfield and Rod Gilbert (the last three constructing the famed &quot;GAG line&quot;, standing for &quot;goal-a-game&quot;) carried them through the playoffs. They defeated the defending-champion Canadiens in the first round and the Chicago Black Hawks in the second, but lost to the Bruins in the finals.

In the 1972 playoffs, with Ratelle sidelined with a broken ankle and Gilbert hampered by injuries, Walt Tkaczuk played a key role as the Rangers defeated the defending champion Canadiens and the previous year&#x27;s finalists, the Black Hawks, to reach the Stanley Cup Finals. While the Rangers lost to the Boston Bruins in six games, Tkaczuk earned much respect for holding the Bruins&#x27; Phil Esposito without a goal in the series.

The Rangers played a legendary conference semifinals series against the Philadelphia Flyers in the 1974 playoffs, losing in seven games and becoming the first Original Six club to lose a playoff series to a 1967 expansion team. This series was noted for a game 7 fight between Dale Rolfe of the Rangers and Dave Schultz of the Flyers. The Rangers&#x27; new rivals, the New York Islanders, who entered the League in 1972–73 after paying a hefty territorial fee – some $4 million – to the Rangers, were their first-round opponents in the 1975 playoffs. After splitting the first two games, the Islanders defeated the more-established Rangers 11 seconds into overtime of the deciding game 3, establishing a rivalry that continued to grow for years.

In a blockbuster trade with the Boston Bruins, the Rangers acquired Esposito and Carol Vadnais from the Bruins for Park, Ratelle and Joe Zanussi in 1975, while Swedish stars Anders Hedberg and Ulf Nilsson jumped to the Rangers from the League&#x27;s rival, the World Hockey Association (WHA) in 1978. In the 1979 Stanley Cup playoffs, New York defeated the surging Islanders in the conference semifinals and advanced to the 1979 Stanley Cup Finals, losing to the Canadiens. In the three consecutive 1982 through 1984 playoffs, the Rangers were eliminated by the rival Islanders, who went on to win the Stanley Cup each of those years.
The Rangers stayed competitive through the 1980s and early 1990s, making the playoffs each year. In the 1986 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Rangers, behind the play of rookie goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck, upended the Patrick Division-winning Flyers in five games followed by a six-game win over the Washington Capitals in the Patrick Division finals. Montreal, however, disposed of the Rangers in the Wales Conference finals behind a rookie goaltender of their own, Patrick Roy. For the 1986–87 season, the team acquired superstar center Marcel Dionne after almost 12 years with the Los Angeles Kings. In 1988, while a Ranger, Dionne moved into third place in NHL career goals scored. Dionne spent nine games in the minors before retiring during the 1988–89 season.

Frustration was at its peak when the 1991–92 Rangers captured the Presidents&#x27; Trophy. They took a 2–1 series lead on the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins and then faltered in three-straight (some observers note a Ron Francis slapshot from outside the blue line that eluded goaltender Mike Richter as the series&#x27; turning point). The following year, injuries and a 1–11 regular season finish landed the Rangers at the bottom of the Patrick Division after being in a playoff position for much of the season. Head coach Roger Neilson did not finish the season.

During this period, the Rangers were owned by Gulf+Western, which was renamed to Paramount Communications in 1989, and sold to Viacom in 1994. Viacom then sold the team to ITT Corporation and Cablevision, and a couple of years later, ITT sold their ownership stake to Cablevision, who owned the team until 2010, when they spun off the MSG properties as their own company.

===Ending the curse (1993–94)===
The 1993–94 New York Rangers season was their most successful in 54 years, as Mike Keenan coached the Rangers to the 1994 Stanley Cup championship, winning their fourth Cup. By the 1993–94 season, the Rangers had acquired seven players who had been part of the Edmonton Oilers&#x27; Cup-winning teams: Oilers captain (and new Rangers captain) Mark Messier, Adam Graves, Kevin Lowe, Jeff Beukeboom, Esa Tikkanen, Craig MacTavish and Glenn Anderson. Graves set a team record with 52 goals, breaking the prior record of 50 held by Vic Hadfield. The Rangers clinched the Presidents&#x27; Trophy by finishing with the best record in the NHL at 52–24–8, setting a franchise record with 112 points earned.

The Rangers successfully made it past the first two rounds of the playoffs, sweeping the New York Islanders, and then defeating the Washington Capitals in five games. However, in the conference finals against the third-seeded New Jersey Devils, the Rangers lost the series opener at home in double overtime, but won the next two games before the Devils defeated them 3–1 and 4–1. The series headed back to the Meadowlands for the sixth game, in which Messier, who had guaranteed a win to the press, scored three times in the final period to lead the Rangers to a 4–2 win and set up a seventh game back at Madison Square Garden. The Rangers won game 7, 2–1, when Stephane Matteau scored a goal in double overtime, leading the team to the finals for the first time since 1979.
Up against the Vancouver Canucks, the Rangers again lost the series opener at home in overtime. The Rangers bounced back and they won the next three games, allowing the Canucks just four goals. However, the Canucks won the next two 6–3 and 4–1 to set up a seventh game, for the second consecutive series, at home. In the seventh game, the Rangers took a 2–0 first period lead, with Messier scoring later to put the Rangers up 3–1, the eventual Cup winning goal as the home team won 3–2, becoming the first (and to this date, only) player to captain two teams to the Stanley Cup. Brian Leetch became the first American-born player to win the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoff MVP, while Alexander Karpovtsev, Alexei Kovalev, Sergei Nemchinov and Sergei Zubov became the first Russians to have their names engraved on the Cup.

===Expensive acquisitions and postseason drought (1995–2005)===
Despite having coached the Rangers to a regular season first-place finish and the Stanley Cup victory, head coach Mike Keenan left after a dispute with general manager Neil Smith. During the lockout-shortened 1994–95 season, the Rangers won their first-round series with the Quebec Nordiques, but lost in the second round of the playoffs to the Philadelphia Flyers in four games with succeeding head coach Colin Campbell. General manager Neil Smith orchestrated a deal that sent Sergei Zubov and center Petr Nedved to Pittsburgh in exchange for defenseman Ulf Samuelsson and left-winger Luc Robitaille in the summer of 1995. The Rangers defeated the Canadiens in six games in the 1996 playoffs, but lost their second-round series to the Penguins in five games.

The Rangers then acquired Wayne Gretzky in 1996. Gretzky&#x27;s greatest accomplishment with the Rangers was leading them to the 1997 conference finals, where they lost 4–1 to the Flyers, who were then led by Eric Lindros. Mark Messier, a former Oiler teammate of Gretzky&#x27;s, left in the summer of 1997 and the team failed in a bid to replace him with Colorado Avalanche superstar Joe Sakic. The Rangers missed the playoffs for seven consecutive seasons, finishing no higher than fourth in their division. Gretzky retired at the end of the 1998–99 season.

In March 2000, Smith was fired along with head coach John Muckler, and that summer, James Dolan hired Glen Sather to replace him. By the end of the 2000–01 season, the Rangers had landed a significant amount of star power. Messier had returned to New York, Theoren Fleury joined the Rangers after spending most of his career with the Calgary Flames and Eric Lindros was traded to the Rangers by the Flyers. The Rangers also acquired Pavel Bure late in 2001–02 from the Florida Panthers. It was also the rookie season of goalie Dan Blackburn, who made the NHL All-Rookie Team even as the Rangers fell back to last place in the Conference, and finished out of the playoffs. Later years saw other stars such as Alexei Kovalev, Jaromir Jagr, Martin Rucinsky and Bobby Holik added, but in 2002–03 and 2003–04, the team again missed the playoffs. Blackburn started strongly in 2002–03, but burned out after 17 games. He missed 2003–04 due to mononucleosis and a damaged nerve in his left shoulder. Blackburn could not rehabilitate the damaged nerve, and was forced to retire at the age of 22. Towards the end of the 2003–04 season, general manager Glen Sather finally gave in to a rebuilding process by trading away Brian Leetch, Alexei Kovalev, and eight others for numerous prospects and draft picks. With the retirements of Pavel Bure and Mark Messier, as well as Eric Lindros signing with the Toronto Maple Leafs, the post-lockout Rangers, under new head coach Tom Renney, moved away from high-priced veterans towards a group of talented young players, such as Petr Prucha, Dominic Moore and Blair Betts.

===Henrik Lundqvist era (2005–2020)===

====Return to the playoffs (2005–2011)====
The Rangers were expected to struggle during the 2005–06 season, but behind stellar performances by Swedish rookie goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, the Rangers finished the season with a record of 44–26–12, their best record since 1993–94. Jagr broke the Rangers&#x27; single-season points record with a first-period assist in a 5–1 win against the New York Islanders on March 29, 2006. The assist gave him 110 points on the season, breaking Jean Ratelle&#x27;s record. Less than two weeks later, on April 8, Jagr scored his 53rd goal of the season against the Boston Bruins, breaking the club record previously held by Adam Graves. Two games prior, on April 4, the Rangers defeated the Philadelphia Flyers 3–2, in a shootout, to clinch a playoff spot for the first time since 1996–97. In the 2006 conference quarterfinals, the Rangers drew a matchup with the Devils and were defeated in a four-game sweep. Jagr fell two points short of winning his sixth Art Ross Trophy as scoring champion in 2005–06, but did win his third Pearson Award as the players&#x27; choice for the most outstanding player.
Realizing that the team had trouble scoring goals in the 2005–06 campaign, the Rangers signed Triple Gold Club winner and 12-time 30-goal scorer Brendan Shanahan to a one-year contract. On October 5, 2006, opening night of the 2006–07 season, Jagr was named the first team captain since Mark Messier&#x27;s retirement. Though the Rangers started slow in the first half of the 2006–07 season, the second half was dominated by the stellar goaltending of Henrik Lundqvist. On February 5, 2007, the Rangers acquired agitating forward Sean Avery in a trade with the Los Angeles Kings, which brought further intensity to the team. Despite losing several players to injury in March, the Rangers went 10–2–3 in the month and clinched a playoff berth for the second consecutive season. Facing the Atlanta Thrashers in the first round of the 2007 playoffs, the Rangers swept the series. However, they were eliminated in the next round by the Buffalo Sabres.

At the 2007 NHL entry draft, the Rangers chose Alexei Cherepanov 17th overall, who had been ranked by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau as the number one European skater. Despite the departure of Michael Nylander, the 2007 free agency season started with a bang for the Rangers, with the signing of two high-profile centerman; Scott Gomez on a seven-year contract, as well as Chris Drury on a five-year deal. The moves, along with retaining most other key players, had been met favorably, and the Rangers made the playoffs for the third consecutive season and the second round for the second season in a row. Despite these streaks, the Rangers failed to meet expectations, losing their second-round series to the Pittsburgh Penguins. The following off-season saw the departures of captain Jaromir Jagr to the KHL, and alternate captains Martin Straka and Brendan Shanahan, who left to play in the Czech Republic and with the New Jersey Devils, respectively.
Following Jagr&#x27;s departure, Chris Drury was named captain on October 3, 2008. The Rangers were one of four NHL teams to open the 2008–09 season in Europe, being featured in the Victoria Cup final, defeating the European Champions Cup winner Metallurg Magnitogorsk in Bern, Switzerland. This was followed by two NHL regular season games against Tampa Bay in Prague on October 4 and 5, and the Rangers won both games. The Rangers tied the 1983–84 Rangers for the best start in franchise history with a 5–0 record, and set the franchise record for best start in a season through the first 13 games by going 10–2–1 for 21 points, with the 10 wins and 21 points each becoming franchise records. A successful start to the season, however, was tempered with by the news of the sudden death of 2007 first-round pick Alexei Cherepanov, which occurred during a KHL game in Russia on October 13. A disappointing second half of the season followed. After the Rangers went 2–7–3 in 12 games, coach Tom Renney was fired, with 2004 Stanley Cup and Jack Adams Award winner John Tortorella named as his replacement. The Rangers made the 2009 playoffs, but lost their opening-round series to the Washington Capitals four games to three.
On June 30, 2009, the Rangers traded Scott Gomez, Tom Pyatt, and Michael Busto to the Montreal Canadiens for Ryan McDonagh, Chris Higgins, Pavel Valentenko, and Doug Janik. With Gomez&#x27;s salary cap hit gone, the Rangers signed superstar Marian Gaborik on the first day of free agency. In the 2009–10 season, the Rangers failed to make the playoffs for the first time in five years. There was some criticism that the off-season acquisition of Gaborik had not paid off, despite Gaborik scoring 42 goals and 86 points in the season. The final two games of the season were a home-and-home against the Philadelphia Flyers, with both teams competing for the same playoff spot. The Rangers skated away with the victory in the first game, keeping their postseason hopes alive. In the second game, the Flyers peppered Henrik Lundqvist with 47 shots, but scored only once. The game went to a shootout, and the Flyers prevailed to move on to the playoffs.
For the 2010–11 season, the team waived defenseman Wade Redden and brought in several players to achieve more balanced scoring. On November 12, the Rangers unveiled the new Heritage Jersey for the first time at the ice rink at Rockefeller Center in a special ceremony featuring Rangers alumni and current players discussing the history of the storied franchise. The club wore the jersey for the first time on November 17 when they played the Boston Bruins at Madison Square Garden. The Rangers&#x27; playoff chances came down to the final day of the regular season for the second-straight year. The team defeated the New Jersey Devils and passed the Carolina Hurricanes in the standings, putting the Rangers in the playoffs after missing out the previous season. The Rangers faced Washington in the first round and lost the series in five games. It was the second time in three years that the Capitals eliminated the Rangers from the playoffs, fueling a rivalry that lasted several seasons.

On May 13, 2011, Rangers forward Derek Boogaard was found dead in his Minnesota apartment. On June 29, the Rangers bought out captain Chris Drury&#x27;s contract. On July 3, the Rangers signed free agent Brad Richards to a nine-year contract. On September 12, Ryan Callahan was named the 26th captain in the Rangers&#x27; history. He became the fifth-youngest captain in team history. Brad Richards and Marc Staal were named alternate captains on the same day.

====Return to the Finals and third Presidents&#x27; Trophy (2011–2016)====
In the 2011–12 season, the team finished as the top seed in the Eastern Conference, recording 51 wins and 109 points. Their leading scorer was Marian Gaborik, who finished the season with 41 goals and 76 points while playing all 82 games. In the first round of the playoffs, the Rangers faced the eighth-seeded Ottawa Senators. After falling behind 3–2 in the series, the Rangers bounced back to win game 6 in Ottawa as well as game 7 at home. In the next round, the Rangers once again faced the Capitals. In game 3, Gaborik scored to win 14:41 into the third overtime, giving the Rangers a 2–1 lead in the series, but Washington came back to tie the series 2–2 in game 4. Washington was up by one during the final minutes of game 5 when Joel Ward committed a high-sticking double-minor. Richards scored to tie with just 6.6 seconds remaining, and in overtime, defenseman Marc Staal scored on the second penalty of the double-minor just 1:35 into overtime. Rangers went on to win the series 4–3, sending them to the conference finals for the first time since 1997. In the conference finals, they faced the New Jersey Devils, a major divisional rival. After leading the series 2–1, the Rangers lost three games in a row, losing game 6 in New Jersey with a goal by Devils forward Adam Henrique at 1:03 in overtime, giving the Devils a 4–2 series win and ending the Rangers&#x27; season.

On July 23, 2012, the Rangers traded Brandon Dubinsky, Artem Anisimov, Tim Erixon and a 2013 first-round draft pick to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for Rick Nash, Steven Delisle, and a 2013 conditional third-round pick. At the 2013 NHL trade deadline on April 3, the Rangers then traded Marian Gaborik and Steven Delisle to Columbus for Derick Brassard, Derek Dorsett, John Moore, and a 2014 sixth-round draft pick. After the Rangers were eliminated in the second round of the playoffs by Boston, management fired head coach John Tortorella, and on June 21, 2013, general manager Glen Sather formally introduced former Canucks head coach Alain Vigneault as Tortorella&#x27;s replacement.
A trade late in the 2013–14 season contributed to the Rangers reaching the 2014 Stanley Cup Finals. On March 5, 2014, the Rangers traded their captain Ryan Callahan, along with a first-round draft pick in 2015, a conditional second-round pick in 2014, and a conditional seventh-round pick in 2015, for Tampa Bay captain Martin St. Louis. The trade occurred both due to the Rangers&#x27; and Callahan&#x27;s inability to reach a contract extension, as well as St. Louis&#x27; growing tension with the Lightning organization and subsequent request to be traded to New York. The 2013–14 Rangers were already a strong team, setting a new franchise record of 25 road game wins. New York defeated Philadelphia in seven games in the first round of the 2014 playoffs, and in the next round rallied from a 3–1 series deficit for the first time in their history to defeat Pittsburgh in seven games. They then defeated the Montreal Canadiens in six games to become the Eastern Conference champions, moving on to the Cup Finals, their first visit in 20 years, to face 2012 champions Los Angeles Kings. The Rangers led the first two games by two goals but lost each game in overtime, and were then shut-out at home 3–0 in game 3. The Kings outshot the Rangers in game 4, but the Rangers staved off elimination by winning the game 2–1. They had another lead in game 5, but after the game was tied and subsequently sent to overtime, Kings defenseman Alec Martinez scored with 5:17 left in the second overtime period to win the game for Los Angeles, 3–2, as well as the Stanley Cup.

On June 20, 2014, a week after their season ended, the Rangers bought-out the remaining six years of Brad Richards&#x27; contract in order to free up salary cap space. On October 6, defenseman Ryan McDonagh was named the Rangers&#x27; 27th captain in team history, with Derek Stepan, Dan Girardi, Marc Staal and Martin St. Louis serving as alternates. In 2014–15, the Rangers won the Presidents&#x27; Trophy for the third time in franchise history and their seventh division title by finishing with the best record in the NHL at 53–22–7. The 53 wins and 113 points both set franchise records. The team also won 28 road games in the regular season, breaking the franchise record set the previous season. In the 2015 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Rangers dispatched the Pittsburgh Penguins in five games in the first round. The Rangers then came back from a 3–1 series deficit to win their second-round series against the Capitals in seven games, becoming the first team in NHL history to battle back from a 3–1 deficit in back-to-back seasons and sending the Rangers to the conference finals for the third time in four years. However, after winning the first game against the Tampa Bay Lightning, the Rangers lost game 2 by four goals. The two teams split the first four games of the series, but the Rangers lost game 5 by a 2–0 scoreline at home. In game 6, Derick Brassard scored a hat-trick and assisted on two other goals in an emphatic 7–3 victory to force game 7 in New York. There, the Lightning shutout the Rangers 2–0, ending the Rangers&#x27; season, and marking the first occasion the Rangers had ever lost a game 7 at home in franchise history as well as the first time they lost an elimination game at home since they lost to Buffalo in 2007.

On June 27, 2015, the Rangers traded Carl Hagelin to the Anaheim Ducks, Cam Talbot and a draft pick to the Edmonton Oilers, and prospect Ryan Haggerty to the Chicago Blackhawks for Antti Raanta, who replaced Talbot as Lundqvist&#x27;s backup goaltender. Subsequently, on July 1, Glen Sather resigned as the general manager, with Jeff Gorton taking his place to become the 11th general manager in team history. On July 2, Martin St. Louis announced his retirement. The team then re-signed Jesper Fast, J. T. Miller, and Derek Stepan.

The Rangers started the 2015–16 season with a 14–2–2 record after 18 games, including a nine-game winning streak. However, the team lost their momentum and floundered, posting a 4–7–2 record in December for only ten points. After the holiday break, the team gradually improved their play, going on a 10–3–1 run without any back-to-back losses in February. The Rangers finished the season with 101 points for back-to-back 100+ point seasons. Despite high hopes, the Rangers were eliminated in the first round of the 2016 Stanley Cup playoffs by a Penguins team that would go on to win the Stanley Cup. That summer, the Rangers extended Antti Raanta&#x27;s contract, signed Pavel Buchnevich to an entry-level contract, and re-signed J. T. Miller, Chris Kreider, and Kevin Hayes.

====Rebuilding (2016–2020)====
On July 18, 2016, the Rangers traded Derick Brassard and a 2018 seventh-round draft pick in exchange for Mika Zibanejad and a 2018 second-round draft pick. The team also signed Michael Grabner to a two-year deal and the much-anticipated college sensation Jimmy Vesey to a two-year entry-level contract. The Rangers finished 2016–17 in fourth place in the Metropolitan Division with 102 points. In the first round of the 2017 Stanley Cup playoffs, they won their series with the Montreal Canadiens in six games. In the second game of their second-round series with the Ottawa Senators, the Rangers held a two-goal lead on three different occasions, but lost in double overtime, putting themselves in a 2–0 series deficit. The team responded with consecutive 4–1 home wins in games 3 and 4 to tie the series at two games apiece. However, the Rangers lost the next two games and were eliminated by the Senators.

On June 14, 2017, the Rangers announced a buyout of Dan Girardi&#x27;s contract. Just over a week later, the Rangers traded Derek Stepan and Antti Raanta to the Arizona Coyotes in exchange for a first-round draft pick (seventh overall) and former first-round pick Tony DeAngelo. The Rangers&#x27; management was also successful in signing top free agent defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk on July 1, to a four-year deal. With injuries sidelining Shattenkirk, Kreider, and Zibanejad, the Rangers struggled to compete. By February 8, 2018, the team had a 25–24–5 record, leading the front office to issue a letter to fans announcing the Rangers would be committing to a rebuild and may &quot;lose some familiar faces&quot; in the process. Rick Nash was traded the day before the 2018 NHL trade deadline to the Bruins for a 2018 first-round pick, a 2019 seventh-round pick, Matt Beleskey, Ryan Spooner and Ryan Lindgren. The following day, the Rangers traded captain Ryan McDonagh and J. T. Miller to the Tampa Bay Lightning for Vladislav Namestnikov, prospects Brett Howden and Libor Hajek, and multiple draft picks. With the team missing the playoffs for the first time since 2010, finishing under .500 for the first time since 2004, and placing last in the Metropolitan Division, head coach Vigneault was fired after the conclusion of the season.

On May 23, David Quinn was hired as the team&#x27;s new head coach. During the off-season, Hayes, Vesey, Brady Skjei and Spooner all filed for salary arbitration and all of them were re-signed. Despite a mediocre 2018–19 season, Gorton and his team remained committed to rebuilding the franchise. 2017 first-round draft pick Filip Chytil made his NHL debut, and early in the season Ryan Spooner was traded to Edmonton for Ryan Strome. With the trade deadline approaching and their playoff chances slim, the Rangers once again traded away veteran players, with fan-favorite Mats Zuccarello being sent to the Dallas Stars in exchange for two draft picks and Kevin Hayes going to Winnipeg in exchange for a first-round pick, a conditional pick, and forward Brendan Lemieux.

The Rangers received the second overall pick in the 2019 NHL entry draft, and subsequently used it to select forward Kaapo Kakko. On May 17, 2019, former Ranger goaltender and broadcaster John Davidson resigned from his position as president of the Columbus Blue Jackets and returned to New York to become the organization&#x27;s new president. Davidson and Gorton addressed the team&#x27;s defensive woes by acquiring top prospect Adam Fox from Carolina for a pair of picks, as well as veteran defenseman Jacob Trouba. The team also signed free agent Artemi Panarin to a seven-year deal on July 1. To help with salary cap restrictions, the Rangers then traded Jimmy Vesey and bought out the last two years of Shattenkirk&#x27;s contract.
The 2019–20 season was a step forward for the rebuilding Rangers; Panarin lived up expectations and earned a Hart Trophy nomination, rookie goaltender Igor Shesterkin proved to be a worthy successor to aging superstar Henrik Lundqvist, Chris Kreider signed a seven-year contract extension, and Mika Zibanejad emerged as an elite forward, recording a 5-goal-game against Washington on March 5 and ending up with 41 goals in 57 games played. By early March 2020, the Rangers were within striking distance of the second wild-card position when the coronavirus pandemic halted the regular season. In May 2020, the league announced a 24-team playoff tournament to complete the season, where the Rangers were seeded 11th and faced the Carolina Hurricanes; the Hurricanes swept the Rangers. After being eliminated from the playoffs the Rangers were entered into the second phase of the NHL draft lottery where the team won the lottery and were awarded the first pick in the 2020 NHL entry draft, which Gorton used to select Alexis Lafreniere. Later in the off-season, the team traded veteran defenseman Marc Staal to the Red Wings.

In September 2020, the Rangers bought out the final year of Henrik Lundqvist&#x27;s contract, ending his tenure in New York after 15 years.

===The Drury years (2020–present)===
====Continued team struggles (2020–2021)====
On January 31, 2021, defenseman Tony DeAngelo was placed on waivers, following reports that he had an altercation with teammate Alexandar Georgiev following an overtime loss. According to &quot;The Athletic,&quot; his continued &quot;maturity&quot; issues, combined with a marked decline in his play, led the Rangers to put him on the market; there were no takers.

In a game against the Washington Capitals on May 3, 2021, Capitals forward Tom Wilson cross-checked Pavel Buchnevich in the head and slammed Artemi Panarin into the ice, ending his season. Wilson, a repeat offender, was fined the league maximum of $5,000 for the incident. The Rangers organization released a statement expressing disappointment in this decision, calling head of player safety George Parros &quot;unfit to continue in his current role&quot;. The NHL subsequently fined the Rangers $250,000 for their comments. Two days later, Rangers owner James Dolan fired president John Davidson and general manager Jeff Gorton. Despite the timing, Dolan stated the firings were not related to the Wilson incident and statement, citing &quot;culture&quot; issues within the organization. Chris Drury was then announced as the Rangers&#x27; new president and general manager. On May 12, Drury fired head coach David Quinn, and replaced him with Gerard Gallant. Despite a tumultuous season, a major bright spot was the play of Adam Fox; he led NHL defensemen with 42 assists, finished second in points with 47, and won the James Norris Memorial Trophy.

====Playoff return and fourth Presidents&#x27; Trophy (2021–present)====
In the 2021–22 season, the Rangers finished the regular season with a record of 52–24–6, making the playoffs for the first time since 2020. For the third time in franchise history, the Rangers overcame a 3–1 series deficit, this time against the Pittsburgh Penguins in a first round matchup that concluded with a game-winning overtime goal from Artemi Panarin. In the next round, they defeated the Carolina Hurricanes in seven games after trailing in the series 2–0 and 3–2, advancing to their first conference finals since 2015. There they faced the back-to-back defending champions, the Tampa Bay Lightning, and lost the series in six games despite having a 2–0 series lead. Igor Shesterkin was named the Vezina Trophy winner following the season.

By the end of the following season, the Rangers had acquired Vladimir Tarasenko and Niko Mikkola from the St. Louis Blues and Patrick Kane from the Blackhawks. The team made the playoffs, finishing third in their division, but lost to their river rivals, the New Jersey Devils in seven games, despite a 2–0 series lead. As a result, Gallant was fired as head coach. He was replaced with Peter Laviolette following the season.

In the 2023–24 season, the Rangers clinched their fourth Presidents&#x27; Trophy. During the 2024 playoffs, they swept the Washington Capitals in the first round, then defeated the Carolina Hurricanes in the second round, but lost to the eventual Stanley Cup champion Florida Panthers in the conference finals.

==Uniforms==

The classic Rangers sweater has been in use since the franchise&#x27;s foundation, with several alterations along the way. The current blue uniform has the serifed word &quot;RANGERS&quot; in red and white drop shadow arranged diagonally, with red and white stripes on the sleeves and tail. Originally, the uniform was light blue, before it switched to a darker classic Rangers &quot;Broadway Blue&quot; in 1929. In addition, the original versions neither had a drop shadow nor were serifed. During the 1946–47 season, the word &quot;RANGERS&quot; was arranged in an arch form above the sweater number. It adopted its current form the next season, along with dropshadowed numbers, except for a brief period where the city name was used, a tie-down collar was not used and the tail and sleeve stripes were separated by thin blue stripes. Red pants have been used with the uniform since the 1929–30 season.

The white jerseys were first unveiled in the 1951–52 season, as part of a mandate that regulated NHL teams to have a dark home jersey and a light away jersey. The serifed word &quot;RANGERS&quot; is also arranged diagonally, but in blue with red drop shadow. A quinticolor of blue, white and red stripes accentuate the tail and sleeves, while a blue shoulder yoke with white and red stripes completes the look. The white sweaters, with minor changes such as a tie-down collar and arched player names, have remained virtually unchanged since.

During the tenure of general manager John Ferguson Sr., he sought to modernize the Rangers sweater by featuring rounded numbers, a darker shade of blue and the shield logo, which was unveiled in the 1976–77 season. A blue and red stripe (white and red stripe in the blue sweaters) extend from the yoke to the sleeves, while blue pants were used. However, it proved unpopular with the fans, and following the 1977–78 season it was replaced by an updated version of their classic uniforms. Ferguson used this similar design when he became general manager of the original Winnipeg Jets.
The modernized classic uniforms introduced in 1978 featured some subtle changes. Both jerseys featured a V-neck collar in a red-white-red pattern, and bolder stripes on the sleeves and waistline. On the blue jersey, the red and white stripes were separated by thin blue stripes, along with the waistline stripes being raised above the hemline so that the patterns on both jerseys matched. From 1978 to 1987, the blue jersey (then the road jersey) featured &quot;NEW YORK&quot; diagonally across the front instead of the traditional &quot;RANGERS&quot; wordmark, similar to their 2010s heritage alternate jerseys. In 1997, the Rangers reverted the blue jersey&#x27;s design, restoring the old striping pattern, and becoming the first team to re-introduce lace-up collars. The white jerseys followed suit in 1999, and the design was carried over to the Reebok Edge template in 2007.

On October 7, 2001, the Rangers wore a modified version of their blue jerseys in a home game against the Buffalo Sabres. This design combined the current/traditional striping with the &quot;NEW YORK&quot; wordmark of the 1978–1987 uniforms. The uniforms were worn in the wake of the September 11 attacks.

The Rangers previously had a navy alternate jersey featuring the head of the Statue of Liberty with the team abbreviation (NYR) below in a futuristic script. Silver was used as an accent color, but the player names and numbers retain the same color schemes as the regular jerseys, except for a darker shade of blue. Other than a white version used in the 1998–99 season, this jersey was used from 1996 to 2007, and proved to be highly popular with fans.

During the 2010–11 season, the Rangers debuted a heritage blue jersey as their new alternate uniform. The jersey featured a darker shade of blue, as well as a cream trim. Unlike the regular jerseys, the font of the alternate was sans-serif and did not feature a dropshadow, much like the original Rangers jersey. The Rangers wore the jerseys at home on Saturdays and when they played against Original Six teams. For the 2017–18 season, the heritage jersey was retired because of the league-wide switch to the Adidas uniform format.

In the 2012 Winter Classic, the Rangers wore a cream jersey combining classic and current styles. A different version of the shield logo was used, while the player names were arranged in a straight line. The stripes were also lessened, giving it a minimalist, vintage look, as most Winter Classic jerseys are.

For the 2014 Stadium Series, the Rangers used white jerseys with the city name in navy, silver and red. In addition, they feature diagonal stripes and sleeve numbers, and enlarged numbers on the back to make them more readable to spectators. The chrome version of the shield logo is placed in the left shoulder. Like the Winter Classic sweaters, player names are in a straight position.

The 2018 Winter Classic saw the Rangers wear a navy jersey with a combination of elements from prior uniform designs. The striping design was inspired from their current uniforms, while the white &quot;RANGERS&quot; wordmark was a nod from the team&#x27;s late 1920s jerseys. A white silhouette of the Rangers&#x27; shield logo contained either the abbreviation &quot;N.Y.&quot; or the alternate captain &quot;A&quot; and captain &quot;C&quot; designations. Player names are arranged in a straight position.

During the 2020–21 season, the Rangers released a &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniform in collaboration with Adidas. The uniform featured the &quot;Lady Liberty&quot; design worn from 1996 to 2007, but with a few changes in the striping. This same design was again used for their 2022–23 &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform, but the lighter Broadway Blue served as the base color while the lower sleeves were recolored red with white and navy stripes.

Introduced in the 2023–24 season, the Rangers began wearing a new third jersey, bringing back the shield logo as the main crest for the first time since the 1976–1978 redesign. The navy blue-based jersey features thin white, red and Broadway blue stripes on the sleeves, waist and socks, along with white letters.

For the 2024 Stadium Series, the Rangers wore white jerseys with an enlarged &quot;NYR&quot; diagonal lettering in red with blue drop shadows. Enlarged numbers also employ the same color scheme as the &quot;NYR&quot; wordmark, along with thick alternating blue and red sleeve stripes.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Rangers. For the full season-by-season history, see List of New York Rangers seasons.&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime/shootout losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players and personnel==

===Current roster===
===Team captains===
* Bill Cook, 1926–1937
* Art Coulter, 1937–1942
* Ott Heller, 1942–1945
* Neil Colville, 1945–1948
* Buddy O&#x27;Connor, 1949–1950
* Frank Eddolls, 1950–1951
* Allan Stanley, 1951–1953
* Don Raleigh, 1953–1955
* Harry Howell, 1955–1957
* George Sullivan, 1957–1961
* Andy Bathgate, 1961–1964
* Camille Henry, 1964–1965
* Bob Nevin, 1965–1971
* Vic Hadfield, 1971–1974
* Brad Park, 1974–1975
* Phil Esposito, 1975–1978
* Dave Maloney, 1978–1980
* Walt Tkaczuk, 1980–1981
* Barry Beck, 1981–1986
* Ron Greschner, 1986–1987
* Kelly Kisio, 1987–1991
* Mark Messier, 1991–1997
* Brian Leetch, 1997–2000
* Mark Messier, 2000–2004
* Jaromir Jagr, 2006–2008
* Chris Drury, 2008–2011
* Ryan Callahan, 2011–2014
* Ryan McDonagh, 2014–2018
* Jacob Trouba, 2022–2024
===General managers===

The current general manager is Chris Drury, who had been named on May 5, 2021.

===Head coaches===

The current head coach is Peter Laviolette who was hired on June 13, 2023.

==Team and league honors==

===Awards and trophies===

The following lists the league awards which have been won by the Rangers team and its players and alumni:

Stanley Cup
* 1927–28, 1932–33, 1939–40, 1993–94

Victoria Cup
* 2008 Victoria Cup

Presidents&#x27; Trophy
* 1991–92, 1993–94, 2014–15, 2023–24

Prince of Wales Trophy
* 1931–32, 1941–42, 1993–94, 2013–14

O&#x27;Brien Cup
* 1949–50

Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy
* Jean Ratelle: 1970–71
* Rod Gilbert: 1975–76
* Anders Hedberg: 1984–85
* Adam Graves: 2000–01
* Dominic Moore: 2013–14

Calder Memorial Trophy
* Kilby MacDonald: 1939–40
* Grant Warwick: 1941–42
* Edgar Laprade: 1945–46
* Pentti Lund: 1948–49
* Gump Worsley: 1952–53
* Camille Henry: 1953–54
* Steve Vickers: 1972–73
* Brian Leetch: 1988–89

Conn Smythe Trophy
* Brian Leetch: 1993–94

Hart Memorial Trophy
* Buddy O&#x27;Connor: 1947–48
* Chuck Rayner: 1949–50
* Andy Bathgate: 1958–59
* Mark Messier: 1991–92

James Norris Memorial Trophy
* Doug Harvey: 1961–62
* Harry Howell: 1966–67
* Brian Leetch: 1991–92, 1996–97
* Adam Fox: 2020–21

King Clancy Memorial Trophy
* Adam Graves: 1993–94

Lady Byng Memorial Trophy
* Frank Boucher: 1927–28, 1928–29, 1929–30, 1930–31, 1932–33, 1933–34, 1934–35
* Clint Smith: 1938–39
* Buddy O&#x27;Connor: 1947–48
* Edgar Laprade: 1949–50
* Andy Hebenton: 1956–57
* Camille Henry: 1957–58
* Jean Ratelle: 1971–72, 1975–76
* Wayne Gretzky: 1998–99
Lester Patrick Trophy
* John Kilpatrick &amp; Tommy Lockhart: 1967–68
* William M. Jennings &amp; Terry Sawchuk: 1970–71
* Murray Murdoch: 1973–74
* Bill Chadwick: 1974–75
* Phil Esposito: 1977–78
* Fred Shero: 1979–80
* Emile Francis: 1981–82
* Lynn Patrick: 1988–89
* Rod Gilbert: 1990–91
* Frank Boucher: 1992–93
* Wayne Gretzky: 1993–94
* Brian Mullen: 1994–95
* Pat LaFontaine: 1996–97
* Craig Patrick: 1999–00
* Herb Brooks &amp; Larry Pleau: 2001–02
* John Davidson: 2003–04
* Red Berenson &amp; Marcel Dionne: 2005–06
* Brian Leetch &amp; John Halligan: 2006–07
* Mark Messier &amp; Mike Richter: 2008–09
* Bob Crocker: 2014–15
* Jack Blatherwick: 2018–19

Lester B. Pearson Award
* Jean Ratelle: 1971–72
* Mark Messier: 1991–92
* Jaromir Jagr: 2005–06

NHL Plus-Minus Award
* Michal Rozsival: 2005–06 

Vezina Trophy
* Dave Kerr: 1939–40
* Eddie Giacomin &amp; Gilles Villemure: 1970–71
* John Vanbiesbrouck: 1985–86
* Henrik Lundqvist: 2011–12
* Igor Shesterkin: 2021–22
===First-round draft picks===
* 1963: Al Osborne (4th overall)
* 1964: Bob Graham (3rd overall)
* 1965: Andre Veilleux (1st overall)
* 1966: Brad Park (2nd overall)
* 1967: Bob Dickson (6th overall)
* 1969: Andre Dupont (8th overall) &amp; Pierre Jarry (12th)
* 1970: Norm Gratton (11th overall)
* 1971: Steve Vickers (10th overall) &amp; Steve Durbano (13th)
* 1972: Al Blanchard (10th overall) &amp; Bob MacMillan (15th)
* 1973: Rick Middleton (14th overall)
* 1974: Dave Maloney (14th overall)
* 1975: Wayne Dillon (12th overall)
* 1976: Don Murdoch (6th overall)
* 1977: Lucien DeBlois (8th overall) &amp; Ron Duguay (13th)
* 1979: Doug Sulliman (13th overall)
* 1980: Jim Malone (14th overall)
* 1981: James Patrick (9th overall)
* 1982: Chris Kontos (15th overall)
* 1983: Dave Gagner (12th overall)
* 1984: Terry Carkner (14th overall)
* 1985: Ulf Dahlen (7th overall)
* 1986: Brian Leetch (9th overall)
* 1987: Jayson More (10th overall)
* 1989: Steven Rice (20th overall)
* 1990: Michael Stewart (13th overall)
* 1991: Alexei Kovalev (15th overall)
* 1992: Peter Ferraro (24th overall)
* 1993: Niklas Sundstrom (8th overall)
* 1994: Dan Cloutier (26th overall)
* 1996: Jeff Brown (22nd overall)
* 1997: Stefan Cherneski (19th overall)
* 1998: Manny Malhotra (7th overall)
* 1999: Pavel Brendl (4th overall) &amp; Jamie Lundmark (9th)
* 2001: Dan Blackburn (10th overall)
* 2003: Hugh Jessiman (12th overall)
* 2004: Al Montoya (6th overall) &amp; Lauri Korpikoski (19th)
* 2005: Marc Staal (12th overall)
* 2006: Bob Sanguinetti (21st overall)
* 2007: Alexei Cherepanov (17th overall)
* 2008: Michael Del Zotto (20th overall)
* 2009: Chris Kreider (19th overall)
* 2010: Dylan McIlrath (10th overall)
* 2011: J. T. Miller (15th overall)
* 2012: Brady Skjei (28th overall)
* 2017: Lias Andersson (7th overall) &amp; Filip Chytil (21st)
* 2018: Vitali Kravtsov (9th overall), K&#x27;Andre Miller (22nd) &amp; Nils Lundkvist (28th)
* 2019: Kaapo Kakko (2nd overall)
* 2020: Alexis Lafreniere (1st overall) &amp; Braden Schneider (19th)
* 2021: Brennan Othmann (16th overall)
* 2023: Gabe Perreault (23rd overall)
* 2024: E. J. Emery (30th overall)
===Hall of Famers===
The New York Rangers acknowledge an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame. Rangers inductees include 53 former players and ten builders of the sport. The nine individuals recognized as builders by the Hall of Fame includes former Rangers executives, general managers, head coaches, and owners. In addition to players and builders, several broadcasters were also awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame. Sal Messina, a color commentator, was the first Rangers broadcaster to be awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award. Other Rangers broadcasters awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award include John Davidson (awarded in 2009), and Sam Rosen (awarded in 2016).

Players

* Glenn Anderson
* Andy Bathgate
* Doug Bentley
* Max Bentley
* Frank Boucher
* Johnny Bower
* Pavel Bure
* Neil Colville
* Bill Cook
* Bun Cook
* Art Coulter
* Marcel Dionne
* Dick Duff
* Phil Esposito
* Bill Gadsby
* Mike Gartner
* Bernie Geoffrion
* Eddie Giacomin
* Rod Gilbert
* Wayne Gretzky
* Doug Harvey
* Bryan Hextall
* Tim Horton
* Harry Howell
* Ching Johnson
* Jari Kurri
* Guy Lafleur
* Pat LaFontaine
* Edgar Laprade
* Brian Leetch
* Eric Lindros
* Kevin Lowe
* Harry Lumley
* Henrik Lundqvist
* Mark Messier
* Howie Morenz
* Vaclav Nedomansky
* Buddy O&#x27;Connor
* Brad Park
* Lynn Patrick
* Jacques Plante
* Babe Pratt
* Jean Ratelle
* Chuck Rayner
* Luc Robitaille
* Earl Seibert
* Brendan Shanahan
* Allan Stanley
* Babe Siebert
* Clint Smith
* Terry Sawchuk
* Martin St. Louis
* Gump Worsley
* Sergei Zubov
Builders

* Herb Brooks
* Colin Campbell
* Emile Francis
* William M. Jennings
* Roger Neilson
* Craig Patrick
* Lester Patrick
* Lynn Patrick
* Glen Sather
* Fred Shero
===Retired numbers===

The Rangers have retired nine numbers for eleven players in their history, and the NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.
Notes:
* 1 The number was retired in honor of two different players.

==Franchise records==

===Scoring leaders===
These are the top-ten-point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.

* – current Rangers player




===Single-season records===
* Points – Jaromir Jagr, 123 (2005–06)
* Goals – Jaromir Jagr, 54 (2005–06)
* Assists – Brian Leetch, 80 (1991–92)
* Power play goals – Chris Kreider, 26 (2021–22)
* Power play points – Brian Leetch, 53 (1993–94)
* Power play assists – Brian Leetch, 45 (1990–91)
* Short-handed goals – Theoren Fleury, 7 (2000–01)
* Short-handed points – Mark Messier, 11 (1996–97)
* Short-handed assists – Mark Messier, 7 (1993–94)
* Even strength goals – Jean Ratelle, 40 (1971–72)
* Even strength points – Jean Ratelle, 82 (1971–72)
* Even strength assists – 46, Mark Messier (1991–92), Wayne Gretzky (1996–97) and Artemi Panarin (2019–20)
* Game-winning goals – Chris Kreider, 11 (2021–22)
* Overtime goals – 3, Tomas Sandstrom (1986–87), Adam Graves (1998–99) and Marian Gaborik (2011–12)
* Empty net goals – Michael Grabner, 7 (2017–18)
* Plus/minus – Brad Park, +63 (1971–72); Ron Greschner, –50 (1975–76)
* Shots on goal – Jaromir Jagr, 368 (2005–06)
* Penalty minutes – Troy Mallette, 305 (1989–90)
* Hat-tricks – Tomas Sandstrom, 4 (1986–87)
* Goaltending wins – Mike Richter, 42 (1993–94)
* Goaltending shutouts – John Ross Roach, 13 (1928–1929)
* Goaltending saves – Gump Worsley, 2,376 (1955–1956)

Source:

==See also==
* Emile Francis Award
* Ice Hockey in Harlem

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Rangers&#x27; Biggest Trades Since 1990&quot; (October 6, 2006)

==External links==
* Madison Square Garden
* MSG Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="4" end="20" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="40" end="50" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="65" end="78" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="107" end="129" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116323" start="155" end="176" title="Metropolitan Division" label="Metropolitan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="184" end="202" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="237" end="258" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="289" end="304" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="312" end="343" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="403" end="429" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="452" end="469" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="474" end="492" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q713459" start="514" end="525" title="Tex Rickard" label="Tex Rickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q256308" start="554" end="566" title="Original Six" label="Original Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="609" end="623" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="1967 expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="640" end="653" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="655" end="673" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="675" end="692" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="694" end="712" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="717" end="736" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="795" end="809" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354316" start="841" end="854" title="Frank Boucher" label="Frank Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328209" start="856" end="870" title="Murray Murdoch" label="Murray Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q539139" start="876" end="879" title="Bun Cook" label="Bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q709650" start="884" end="893" title="Bill Cook" label="Bill Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="905" end="916" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="1364" end="1382" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="1593" end="1605" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="1607" end="1619" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q349569" start="1621" end="1632" title="Adam Graves" label="Adam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933497" start="1638" end="1650" title="Mike Richter" label="Mike Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="1989" end="2008" title="2004–05 NHL Lockout" label="2004–05 NHL Lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q362157" start="2042" end="2058" title="Henrik Lundqvist" label="Henrik Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="2195" end="2212" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="2295" end="2314" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q360846" start="2331" end="2350" title="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q730897" start="2352" end="2364" title="Chuck Rayner" label="Chuck Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q525300" start="2366" end="2379" title="Andy Bathgate" label="Andy Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="2408" end="2428" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q713459" start="2501" end="2537" title="Tex Rickard" label="George Lewis &amp;quot;Tex&amp;quot; Rickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728098" start="2552" end="2573" title="Madison Square Garden (1925)" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q120467" start="2612" end="2626" title="1926–27 NHL season" label="1926–27 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543977" start="2647" end="2665" title="New York Americans" label="New York Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="3252" end="3271" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126138" start="3278" end="3289" title="Conn Smythe" label="Conn Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866363" start="3383" end="3403" title="John S. Hammond" label="Col. John S. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381725" start="3534" end="3566" title="Pacific Coast Hockey Association" label="Pacific Coast Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="3578" end="3592" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q463914" start="3671" end="3688" title="American Division (NHL)" label="American Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="3728" end="3741" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="3869" end="3885" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="3977" end="3989" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138291" start="4175" end="4201" title="Curtiss-Wright Corporation" label="Curtiss-Wright Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="4217" end="4224" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q939682" start="4295" end="4308" title="1927–28 NHL season" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652826" start="4323" end="4339" title="1928 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1928 Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q546280" start="4355" end="4371" title="Montreal Maroons" label="Montreal Maroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="4561" end="4571" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q712164" start="4617" end="4629" title="Lorne Chabot" label="Lorne Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681162" start="4651" end="4661" title="eye injury" label="eye injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137576" start="4671" end="4681" title="coach (ice hockey)" label="head coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q984282" start="4682" end="4694" title="Eddie Gerard" label="Eddie Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q466275" start="4763" end="4775" title="Alex Connell" label="Alex Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753100" start="4783" end="4798" title="Ottawa Senators (original)" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970185" start="4944" end="4956" title="Nels Stewart" label="Nels Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354316" start="4958" end="4971" title="Frank Boucher" label="Frank Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562469" start="5062" end="5085" title="1929 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1929 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q709650" start="5157" end="5161" title="Bill Cook" label="Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q539139" start="5166" end="5174" title="Bun Cook" label="Bun Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563274" start="5279" end="5302" title="1933 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1933 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888004" start="5516" end="5530" title="1939–40 NHL season" label="1939–40 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="5909" end="5926" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="6058" end="6077" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564771" start="6185" end="6208" title="1940 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1940 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889064" start="6698" end="6705" title="1943–44 NHL season" label="1943–44"/>
<link wikidata="Q933902" start="6718" end="6729" title="Ken McAuley" label="Ken McAuley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754481" start="7037" end="7044" title="1947–48 NHL season" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557797" start="7108" end="7115" title="1948–49 NHL season" label="1948–49"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566916" start="7124" end="7147" title="1950 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1950 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="7257" end="7263" title="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161306" start="7405" end="7420" title="James E. Norris" label="James E. Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q256308" start="7780" end="7792" title="Original Six" label="Original Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="7930" end="7969" title="Madison Square Garden" label="fourth version of Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q731240" start="8088" end="8102" title="Eddie Giacomin" label="Eddie Giacomin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="8132" end="8150" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q826558" start="8167" end="8205" title="Bernie Geoffrion" label="Bernie &amp;quot;Boom Boom&amp;quot; Geoffrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="8397" end="8410" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575159" start="8414" end="8418" title="1972 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="8450" end="8459" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="8461" end="8474" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q362701" start="8476" end="8485" title="Ken Hodge" label="Ken Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051033" start="8487" end="8499" title="Johnny Bucyk" label="Johnny Bucyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q731201" start="8504" end="8517" title="Wayne Cashman" label="Wayne Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578870" start="8557" end="8561" title="1979 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q887935" start="8571" end="8581" title="Bob Gainey" label="Bob Gainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q553249" start="8583" end="8594" title="Guy Lafleur" label="Guy Lafleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806113" start="8596" end="8610" title="Larry Robinson" label="Larry Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q739820" start="8612" end="8622" title="Ken Dryden" label="Ken Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q356285" start="8624" end="8636" title="Guy Lapointe" label="Guy Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q569178" start="8641" end="8653" title="Serge Savard" label="Serge Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575159" start="8680" end="8703" title="1972 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1972 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="8739" end="8751" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="8785" end="8798" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q359645" start="8832" end="8845" title="Bryan Hextall" label="Bryan Hextall"/>
<link wikidata="Q719276" start="8972" end="8981" title="Brad Park" label="Brad Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q978691" start="8997" end="9009" title="Vic Hadfield" label="Vic Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q265683" start="9014" end="9025" title="Rod Gilbert" label="Rod Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512823" start="9071" end="9079" title="GAG line" label="GAG line"/>
<link wikidata="Q827516" start="9407" end="9419" title="Walt Tkaczuk" label="Walt Tkaczuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="9817" end="9836" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q772468" start="9844" end="9857" title="1973–74 NHL season" label="1974 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210606" start="10022" end="10032" title="Dale Rolfe" label="Dale Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173334" start="10052" end="10064" title="Dave Schultz (ice hockey)" label="Dave Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="10114" end="10132" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q628927" start="10160" end="10167" title="1972–73 NHL season" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="10281" end="10294" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1975 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="10524" end="10537" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939852" start="10573" end="10586" title="Carol Vadnais" label="Carol Vadnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180220" start="10625" end="10636" title="Joe Zanussi" label="Joe Zanussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="10640" end="10644" title="1975–76 NHL season" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q491024" start="10666" end="10680" title="Anders Hedberg" label="Anders Hedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373886" start="10685" end="10696" title="Ulf Nilsson (ice hockey)" label="Ulf Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="10753" end="10777" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="10787" end="10791" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q16678662" start="10800" end="10825" title="1979 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1979 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578870" start="10916" end="10939" title="1979 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1979 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964390" start="10991" end="10995" title="1982 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964388" start="11004" end="11008" title="1984 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583229" start="11231" end="11256" title="1986 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1986 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q734620" start="11308" end="11326" title="John Vanbiesbrouck" label="John Vanbiesbrouck"/>
<link wikidata="Q250601" start="11340" end="11356" title="Patrick Division" label="Patrick Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="11422" end="11441" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="11524" end="11540" title="Wales Conference" label="Wales Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="11589" end="11600" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="11610" end="11624" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="11661" end="11674" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="11706" end="11723" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q783410" start="11783" end="11806" title="List of NHL players with 500 goals" label="NHL career goals scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="11873" end="11887" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587404" start="11927" end="11942" title="1991–92 New York Rangers season" label="1991–92 Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="11956" end="11979" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="12035" end="12054" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q927970" start="12114" end="12125" title="Ron Francis" label="Ron Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933497" start="12185" end="12197" title="Mike Richter" label="Mike Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="12422" end="12435" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111140" start="12510" end="12522" title="Gulf+Western" label="Gulf+Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="12591" end="12597" title="Viacom (1952–2006)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q582418" start="12636" end="12651" title="ITT Corporation" label="ITT Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739587" start="12656" end="12667" title="Cablevision" label="Cablevision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465427" start="12874" end="12905" title="1993–94 New York Rangers season" label="1993–94 New York Rangers season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589739" start="12987" end="13016" title="1994 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1994 Stanley Cup championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="13131" end="13146" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="13213" end="13225" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q349569" start="13227" end="13238" title="Adam Graves" label="Adam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="13240" end="13250" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q436290" start="13252" end="13266" title="Jeff Beukeboom" label="Jeff Beukeboom"/>
<link wikidata="Q725787" start="13268" end="13280" title="Esa Tikkanen" label="Esa Tikkanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138597" start="13282" end="13297" title="Craig MacTavish" label="Craig MacTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q725700" start="13302" end="13316" title="Glenn Anderson" label="Glenn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q978691" start="13398" end="13410" title="Vic Hadfield" label="Vic Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="13796" end="13813" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q538218" start="13980" end="13991" title="Meadowlands Arena" label="Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14069" end="14087" title="Hat trick#Hockey" label="scored three times"/>
<link wikidata="Q350132" start="14232" end="14248" title="Stéphane Matteau" label="Stephane Matteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578870" start="14339" end="14343" title="1979 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="14360" end="14377" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="14924" end="14936" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="14986" end="15004" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q976337" start="15027" end="15047" title="Alexander Karpovtsev" label="Alexander Karpovtsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q739944" start="15049" end="15063" title="Alexei Kovalev" label="Alexei Kovalev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373969" start="15065" end="15081" title="Sergei Nemchinov" label="Sergei Nemchinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q606201" start="15086" end="15098" title="Sergei Zubov" label="Sergei Zubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q263007" start="15399" end="15409" title="Neil Smith (ice hockey)" label="Neil Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590028" start="15422" end="15429" title="1994–95 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="15440" end="15454" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="15506" end="15522" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144961" start="15637" end="15651" title="Colin Campbell (ice hockey executive)" label="Colin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374123" start="15734" end="15745" title="Petr Nedvěd" label="Petr Nedved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390152" start="15787" end="15801" title="Ulf Samuelsson" label="Ulf Samuelsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q661592" start="15818" end="15832" title="Luc Robitaille" label="Luc Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653025" start="15911" end="15924" title="1996 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1996 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="16019" end="16032" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592812" start="16122" end="16144" title="1997 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1997 conference finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q960614" start="16202" end="16214" title="Eric Lindros" label="Eric Lindros"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="16349" end="16367" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q316190" start="16378" end="16387" title="Joe Sakic" label="Joe Sakic"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="16537" end="16551" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701155" start="16607" end="16619" title="John Muckler" label="John Muckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137546" start="16638" end="16649" title="James L. Dolan" label="James Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="16656" end="16667" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="16702" end="16716" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q677434" start="16811" end="16825" title="Theoren Fleury" label="Theoren Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="16888" end="16902" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="16987" end="16997" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="17006" end="17013" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="17023" end="17039" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159001" start="17081" end="17094" title="Dan Blackburn" label="Dan Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960831" start="17109" end="17128" title="NHL All-Rookie Team" label="NHL All-Rookie Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="17278" end="17290" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904899" start="17292" end="17307" title="Martin Ručinský" label="Martin Rucinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q888570" start="17312" end="17323" title="Bobby Holík" label="Bobby Holik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="17338" end="17345" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="17350" end="17357" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="17490" end="17503" title="Infectious mononucleosis" label="mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363" start="17536" end="17544" title="shoulder" label="shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="17664" end="17678" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q358613" start="18013" end="18023" title="Tom Renney" label="Tom Renney"/>
<link wikidata="Q932789" start="18113" end="18124" title="Petr Průcha" label="Petr Prucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q368327" start="18126" end="18139" title="Dominic Moore" label="Dominic Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q881159" start="18144" end="18155" title="Blair Betts" label="Blair Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="18290" end="18304" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q362157" start="18367" end="18383" title="Henrik Lundqvist" label="Henrik Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="18679" end="18691" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="19014" end="19021" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968228" start="19030" end="19059" title="2006 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2006 conference quarterfinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="19192" end="19207" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="19262" end="19275" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Pearson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357311" start="19431" end="19447" title="Triple Gold Club" label="Triple Gold Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q739144" start="19482" end="19498" title="Brendan Shanahan" label="Brendan Shanahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="19564" end="19578" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q725726" start="19867" end="19877" title="Sean Avery" label="Sean Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="20125" end="20142" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968230" start="20169" end="20182" title="2007 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2007 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="20269" end="20283" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="20293" end="20313" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q722737" start="20333" end="20350" title="Alexei Cherepanov" label="Alexei Cherepanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378413" start="20392" end="20419" title="NHL Central Scouting Bureau" label="NHL Central Scouting Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q739332" start="20611" end="20622" title="Scott Gomez" label="Scott Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q471491" start="20660" end="20671" title="Chris Drury" label="Chris Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="21376" end="21390" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634443" start="21424" end="21436" title="Victoria Cup (ice hockey)" label="Victoria Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q853056" start="21488" end="21510" title="Metallurg Magnitogorsk" label="Metallurg Magnitogorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="21514" end="21518" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="21604" end="21610" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968221" start="22259" end="22275" title="2004 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2004 Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="22280" end="22296" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378237" start="22304" end="22319" title="John Tortorella" label="John Tortorella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008308" start="22367" end="22380" title="2009 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2009 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q978090" start="22516" end="22525" title="Tom Pyatt" label="Tom Pyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308073" start="22531" end="22544" title="Michael Busto" label="Michael Busto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094838" start="22575" end="22588" title="Ryan McDonagh" label="Ryan McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086745" start="22590" end="22603" title="Chris Higgins (ice hockey)" label="Chris Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339289" start="22605" end="22621" title="Pavel Valentenko" label="Pavel Valentenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q428241" start="22627" end="22637" title="Doug Janik" label="Doug Janik"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="22707" end="22721" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="22762" end="22776" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="23423" end="23437" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387113" start="23466" end="23477" title="Wade Redden" label="Wade Redden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="23630" end="23660" title="Rockefeller Center" label="ice rink at Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="24065" end="24084" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q561882" start="24440" end="24454" title="Derek Boogaard" label="Derek Boogaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="24477" end="24486" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q739793" start="24611" end="24624" title="Brad Richards" label="Brad Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396686" start="24667" end="24680" title="Ryan Callahan" label="Ryan Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q960003" start="24810" end="24820" title="Marc Staal" label="Marc Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="24951" end="24965" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="25354" end="25360" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937742" start="25682" end="25691" title="Joel Ward (ice hockey)" label="Joel Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q324136" start="26222" end="26235" title="Adam Henrique" label="Adam Henrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q898139" start="26367" end="26383" title="Brandon Dubinsky" label="Brandon Dubinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q713347" start="26385" end="26399" title="Artem Anisimov" label="Artem Anisimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859540" start="26401" end="26411" title="Tim Erixon" label="Tim Erixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="26418" end="26422" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="26453" end="26474" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="26491" end="26500" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228532" start="26502" end="26516" title="Steven Delisle" label="Steven Delisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246603" start="26571" end="26589" title="NHL trade deadline" label="NHL trade deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200180" start="26676" end="26691" title="Derick Brassard" label="Derick Brassard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200013" start="26693" end="26706" title="Derek Dorsett" label="Derek Dorsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q527195" start="26708" end="26718" title="John Moore (ice hockey)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303383" start="26977" end="26992" title="Alain Vigneault" label="Alain Vigneault"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="27047" end="27061" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958416" start="27102" end="27125" title="2014 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2014 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="27232" end="27236" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="27273" end="27277" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q715426" start="27347" end="27363" title="Martin St. Louis" label="Martin St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245586" start="27603" end="27618" title="2013–14 New York Rangers season" label="2013–14 Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="27772" end="27785" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071940" start="28083" end="28087" title="2012 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="28098" end="28115" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q503722" start="28462" end="28475" title="Alec Martinez" label="Alec Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950711" start="28658" end="28668" title="Compliance buyout" label="bought-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954085" start="28745" end="28761" title="NHL salary cap" label="salary cap space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094838" start="28788" end="28801" title="Ryan McDonagh" label="Ryan McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q975099" start="28865" end="28877" title="Derek Stepan" label="Derek Stepan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="28950" end="28957" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="29305" end="29330" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968230" start="30340" end="30344" title="2007 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038576" start="30384" end="30396" title="Carl Hagelin" label="Carl Hagelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026393" start="30419" end="30429" title="Cam Talbot" label="Cam Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228959" start="30484" end="30497" title="Ryan Haggerty" label="Ryan Haggerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777426" start="30528" end="30540" title="Antti Raanta" label="Antti Raanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="30626" end="30637" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173920" start="30676" end="30687" title="Jeff Gorton" label="Jeff Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077346" start="30835" end="30846" title="Jesper Fast" label="Jesper Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q540422" start="30848" end="30860" title="J. T. Miller" label="J. T. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="30905" end="30919" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054654" start="31396" end="31421" title="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372929" start="31553" end="31569" title="Pavel Buchnevich" label="Pavel Buchnevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q465017" start="31626" end="31639" title="Chris Kreider" label="Chris Kreider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195713" start="31645" end="31656" title="Kevin Hayes (ice hockey)" label="Kevin Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859388" start="31795" end="31809" title="Mika Zibanejad" label="Mika Zibanejad"/>
<link wikidata="Q33700" start="31867" end="31882" title="Michael Grabner" label="Michael Grabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11866464" start="31945" end="31956" title="Jimmy Vesey" label="Jimmy Vesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="32014" end="32021" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051437" start="32110" end="32135" title="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="32761" end="32776" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228519" start="32864" end="32877" title="Tony DeAngelo" label="Tony DeAngelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398820" start="32965" end="32982" title="Kevin Shattenkirk" label="Kevin Shattenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="33331" end="33340" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246603" start="33376" end="33394" title="NHL trade deadline" label="NHL trade deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q944936" start="33465" end="33478" title="Matt Beleskey" label="Matt Beleskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453859" start="33480" end="33492" title="Ryan Spooner" label="Ryan Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24827237" start="33497" end="33510" title="Ryan Lindgren" label="Ryan Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094838" start="33558" end="33571" title="Ryan McDonagh" label="Ryan McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q540422" start="33576" end="33588" title="J. T. Miller" label="J. T. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="33596" end="33615" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339462" start="33620" end="33641" title="Vladislav Namestnikov" label="Vladislav Namestnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q24805730" start="33653" end="33665" title="Brett Howden" label="Brett Howden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20631166" start="33670" end="33681" title="Libor Hájek" label="Libor Hajek"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="33769" end="33773" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="33821" end="33825" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q902695" start="33953" end="33964" title="David Quinn (ice hockey)" label="David Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923509" start="34047" end="34058" title="Brady Skjei" label="Brady Skjei"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="34155" end="34169" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q30582528" start="34267" end="34279" title="Filip Chytil" label="Filip Chytil"/>
<link wikidata="Q984027" start="34364" end="34375" title="Ryan Strome" label="Ryan Strome"/>
<link wikidata="Q252043" start="34515" end="34530" title="Mats Zuccarello" label="Mats Zuccarello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195713" start="34598" end="34609" title="Kevin Hayes (ice hockey)" label="Kevin Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180731" start="34696" end="34711" title="Brendan Lemieux" label="Brendan Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="34766" end="34786" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q45835153" start="34831" end="34842" title="Kaapo Kakko" label="Kaapo Kakko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228719" start="34902" end="34915" title="John Davidson (ice hockey)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735944" start="35146" end="35154" title="Adam Fox" label="Adam Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133586" start="35220" end="35232" title="Jacob Trouba" label="Jacob Trouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="35266" end="35280" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="35457" end="35471" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="35562" end="35573" title="Hart Trophy" label="Hart Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061109" start="35604" end="35619" title="Igor Shesterkin" label="Igor Shesterkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q87414741" start="35998" end="36018" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New York (state)" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="36082" end="36108" title="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="24-team playoff tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="36420" end="36440" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q52012798" start="36470" end="36487" title="Alexis Lafrenière" label="Alexis Lafreniere"/>
<link wikidata="Q960003" start="36549" end="36559" title="Marc Staal" label="Marc Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q362157" start="36639" end="36655" title="Henrik Lundqvist" label="Henrik Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708728" start="36930" end="36948" title="Alexandar Georgiev" label="Alexandar Georgiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087006" start="36996" end="37008" title="The Athletic" label="The Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="37190" end="37209" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q542781" start="37243" end="37253" title="Tom Wilson (ice hockey)" label="Tom Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372929" start="37268" end="37284" title="Pavel Buchnevich" label="Pavel Buchnevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="37309" end="37323" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q720307" start="37561" end="37574" title="George Parros" label="George Parros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137546" start="37724" end="37735" title="James L. Dolan" label="James Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228719" start="37752" end="37765" title="John Davidson (ice hockey)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173920" start="37786" end="37797" title="Jeff Gorton" label="Jeff Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q471491" start="37958" end="37969" title="Chris Drury" label="Chris Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q371327" start="38114" end="38128" title="Gerard Gallant" label="Gerard Gallant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735944" start="38195" end="38203" title="Adam Fox" label="Adam Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="38291" end="38319" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="James Norris Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="38402" end="38416" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="38641" end="38660" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="38740" end="38754" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="38793" end="38812" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="38984" end="39003" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061109" start="39072" end="39087" title="Igor Shesterkin" label="Igor Shesterkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="39102" end="39115" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="39164" end="39180" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q715587" start="39207" end="39225" title="Vladimir Tarasenko" label="Vladimir Tarasenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493915" start="39230" end="39242" title="Niko Mikkola" label="Niko Mikkola"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="39252" end="39267" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q335876" start="39272" end="39284" title="Patrick Kane" label="Patrick Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267462" start="39387" end="39399" title="Devils–Rangers rivalry" label="river rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="39405" end="39422" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q713383" start="39533" end="39549" title="Peter Laviolette" label="Peter Laviolette"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="39580" end="39594" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="39630" end="39653" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125220378" start="39666" end="39679" title="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2024 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="39841" end="39857" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="40968" end="40973" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181489" start="41385" end="41402" title="John Ferguson Sr." label="John Ferguson Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="41917" end="41930" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="42919" end="42933" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="43097" end="43117" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="43197" end="43214" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="43804" end="43814" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="44084" end="44090" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485722" start="44115" end="44134" title="2012 NHL Winter Classic" label="2012 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542190" start="44427" end="44446" title="2014 NHL Stadium Series" label="2014 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097955" start="44811" end="44830" title="2018 NHL Winter Classic" label="2018 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q119774406" start="46097" end="46116" title="2024 NHL Stadium Series" label="2024 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902831" start="46526" end="46558" title="List of New York Rangers seasons" label="List of New York Rangers seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q709650" start="46787" end="46796" title="Bill Cook" label="Bill Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q539250" start="46810" end="46821" title="Art Coulter" label="Art Coulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357716" start="46835" end="46845" title="Ehrhardt Heller" label="Ott Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q539236" start="46859" end="46872" title="Neil Colville" label="Neil Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q360846" start="46886" end="46905" title="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402115" start="46919" end="46932" title="Frank Eddolls" label="Frank Eddolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q365331" start="46946" end="46959" title="Allan Stanley" label="Allan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035886" start="46973" end="46984" title="Don Raleigh" label="Don Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q356291" start="46998" end="47010" title="Harry Howell (ice hockey)" label="Harry Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101947" start="47024" end="47039" title="George Sullivan (ice hockey)" label="George Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q525300" start="47053" end="47066" title="Andy Bathgate" label="Andy Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029191" start="47080" end="47093" title="Camille Henry" label="Camille Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q551431" start="47107" end="47116" title="Bob Nevin" label="Bob Nevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978691" start="47130" end="47142" title="Vic Hadfield" label="Vic Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q719276" start="47156" end="47165" title="Brad Park" label="Brad Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="47179" end="47192" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017197" start="47206" end="47218" title="Dave Maloney" label="Dave Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q827516" start="47232" end="47244" title="Walt Tkaczuk" label="Walt Tkaczuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q371303" start="47258" end="47268" title="Barry Beck" label="Barry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q472440" start="47282" end="47295" title="Ron Greschner" label="Ron Greschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q346885" start="47309" end="47320" title="Kelly Kisio" label="Kelly Kisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="47334" end="47346" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="47360" end="47372" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="47412" end="47424" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q471491" start="47438" end="47449" title="Chris Drury" label="Chris Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396686" start="47463" end="47476" title="Ryan Callahan" label="Ryan Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094838" start="47490" end="47503" title="Ryan McDonagh" label="Ryan McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133586" start="47517" end="47529" title="Jacob Trouba" label="Jacob Trouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q471491" start="47596" end="47607" title="Chris Drury" label="Chris Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q713383" start="47691" end="47707" title="Peter Laviolette" label="Peter Laviolette"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="47903" end="47914" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q939682" start="47917" end="47924" title="1927–28 NHL season" label="1927–28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065166" start="47926" end="47933" title="1932–33 NHL season" label="1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888004" start="47935" end="47942" title="1939–40 NHL season" label="1939–40"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="47944" end="47951" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634443" start="47953" end="47965" title="Victoria Cup (ice hockey)" label="Victoria Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358749" start="47968" end="47985" title="2008 Victoria Cup" label="2008 Victoria Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="47987" end="48010" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="48013" end="48020" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="48022" end="48029" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="48031" end="48038" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="48040" end="48047" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133502" start="48049" end="48071" title="Prince of Wales Trophy" label="Prince of Wales Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q676894" start="48074" end="48081" title="1931–32 NHL season" label="1931–32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887889" start="48083" end="48090" title="1941–42 NHL season" label="1941–42"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="48092" end="48099" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="48101" end="48108" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757641" start="48110" end="48126" title="O&amp;#x27;Brien Trophy (ice hockey)" label="O&amp;#x27;Brien Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q762156" start="48129" end="48136" title="1949–50 NHL season" label="1949–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="48138" end="48168" title="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="48171" end="48183" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="48185" end="48192" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q265683" start="48195" end="48206" title="Rod Gilbert" label="Rod Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="48208" end="48215" title="1975–76 NHL season" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q491024" start="48218" end="48232" title="Anders Hedberg" label="Anders Hedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="48234" end="48241" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q349569" start="48244" end="48255" title="Adam Graves" label="Adam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="48257" end="48264" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q368327" start="48267" end="48280" title="Dominic Moore" label="Dominic Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="48282" end="48289" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="48291" end="48313" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196578" start="48316" end="48331" title="Kilby MacDonald" label="Kilby MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888004" start="48333" end="48340" title="1939–40 NHL season" label="1939–40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425342" start="48343" end="48356" title="Grant Warwick" label="Grant Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887889" start="48358" end="48365" title="1941–42 NHL season" label="1941–42"/>
<link wikidata="Q919705" start="48368" end="48381" title="Edgar Laprade" label="Edgar Laprade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889046" start="48383" end="48390" title="1945–46 NHL season" label="1945–46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336964" start="48393" end="48404" title="Pentti Lund" label="Pentti Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557797" start="48406" end="48413" title="1948–49 NHL season" label="1948–49"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345707" start="48416" end="48428" title="Gump Worsley" label="Gump Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724821" start="48430" end="48437" title="1952–53 NHL season" label="1952–53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029191" start="48440" end="48453" title="Camille Henry" label="Camille Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960698" start="48455" end="48462" title="1953–54 NHL season" label="1953–54"/>
<link wikidata="Q364424" start="48465" end="48478" title="Steve Vickers (ice hockey)" label="Steve Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q628927" start="48480" end="48487" title="1972–73 NHL season" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="48490" end="48502" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="48504" end="48511" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="48513" end="48531" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="48534" end="48546" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="48548" end="48555" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="48557" end="48577" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q360846" start="48580" end="48599" title="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754481" start="48601" end="48608" title="1947–48 NHL season" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q730897" start="48611" end="48623" title="Chuck Rayner" label="Chuck Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q762156" start="48625" end="48632" title="1949–50 NHL season" label="1949–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q525300" start="48635" end="48648" title="Andy Bathgate" label="Andy Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960710" start="48650" end="48657" title="1958–59 NHL season" label="1958–59"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="48660" end="48672" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="48674" end="48681" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="48683" end="48711" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="James Norris Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251751" start="48714" end="48725" title="Doug Harvey (ice hockey)" label="Doug Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960713" start="48727" end="48734" title="1961–62 NHL season" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q356291" start="48737" end="48749" title="Harry Howell (ice hockey)" label="Harry Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960750" start="48751" end="48758" title="1966–67 NHL season" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="48761" end="48773" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="48775" end="48782" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="48784" end="48791" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735944" start="48794" end="48802" title="Adam Fox" label="Adam Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="48804" end="48811" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q250753" start="48813" end="48840" title="King Clancy Memorial Trophy" label="King Clancy Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q349569" start="48843" end="48854" title="Adam Graves" label="Adam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="48856" end="48863" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q516636" start="48865" end="48890" title="Lady Byng Memorial Trophy" label="Lady Byng Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354316" start="48893" end="48906" title="Frank Boucher" label="Frank Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q939682" start="48908" end="48915" title="1927–28 NHL season" label="1927–28"/>
<link wikidata="Q239929" start="48917" end="48924" title="1928–29 NHL season" label="1928–29"/>
<link wikidata="Q761919" start="48926" end="48933" title="1929–30 NHL season" label="1929–30"/>
<link wikidata="Q939658" start="48935" end="48942" title="1930–31 NHL season" label="1930–31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065166" start="48944" end="48951" title="1932–33 NHL season" label="1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q598734" start="48953" end="48960" title="1933–34 NHL season" label="1933–34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886315" start="48962" end="48969" title="1934–35 NHL season" label="1934–35"/>
<link wikidata="Q362694" start="48972" end="48983" title="Clint Smith" label="Clint Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q786833" start="48985" end="48992" title="1938–39 NHL season" label="1938–39"/>
<link wikidata="Q360846" start="48995" end="49014" title="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754481" start="49016" end="49023" title="1947–48 NHL season" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q919705" start="49026" end="49039" title="Edgar Laprade" label="Edgar Laprade"/>
<link wikidata="Q762156" start="49041" end="49048" title="1949–50 NHL season" label="1949–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q526123" start="49051" end="49064" title="Andy Hebenton" label="Andy Hebenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759494" start="49066" end="49073" title="1956–57 NHL season" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029191" start="49076" end="49089" title="Camille Henry" label="Camille Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q585499" start="49091" end="49098" title="1957–58 NHL season" label="1957–58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="49101" end="49113" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q636949" start="49115" end="49122" title="1971–72 NHL season" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="49124" end="49131" title="1975–76 NHL season" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="49134" end="49147" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="49149" end="49156" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q674192" start="49157" end="49178" title="Lester Patrick Trophy" label="Lester Patrick Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181867" start="49181" end="49196" title="John Kilpatrick" label="John Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819633" start="49203" end="49217" title="Tommy Lockhart" label="Tommy Lockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="49219" end="49226" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305240" start="49229" end="49248" title="William M. Jennings" label="William M. Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q520254" start="49255" end="49268" title="Terry Sawchuk" label="Terry Sawchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="49270" end="49277" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328209" start="49280" end="49294" title="Murray Murdoch" label="Murray Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q772468" start="49296" end="49303" title="1973–74 NHL season" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903159" start="49306" end="49319" title="Bill Chadwick" label="Bill Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="49321" end="49328" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="49331" end="49344" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q285189" start="49346" end="49353" title="1977–78 NHL season" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167950" start="49356" end="49366" title="Fred Shero" label="Fred Shero"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="49368" end="49375" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052266" start="49378" end="49391" title="Emile Francis" label="Emile Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="49393" end="49400" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q742878" start="49403" end="49415" title="Lynn Patrick" label="Lynn Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="49417" end="49424" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q265683" start="49427" end="49438" title="Rod Gilbert" label="Rod Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="49440" end="49447" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354316" start="49450" end="49463" title="Frank Boucher" label="Frank Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="49465" end="49472" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="49475" end="49488" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="49490" end="49497" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q388635" start="49500" end="49512" title="Brian Mullen" label="Brian Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="49514" end="49521" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q252365" start="49524" end="49538" title="Pat LaFontaine" label="Pat LaFontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="49540" end="49547" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q202779" start="49550" end="49563" title="Craig Patrick" label="Craig Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="49565" end="49572" title="1999–00 NHL season" label="1999–00"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390562" start="49575" end="49586" title="Herb Brooks" label="Herb Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806101" start="49593" end="49604" title="Larry Pleau" label="Larry Pleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="49606" end="49613" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228719" start="49616" end="49629" title="John Davidson (ice hockey)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="49631" end="49638" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q332240" start="49641" end="49653" title="Red Berenson" label="Red Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="49660" end="49673" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="49675" end="49682" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="49685" end="49697" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237374" start="49704" end="49717" title="John Halligan (ice hockey)" label="John Halligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="49719" end="49726" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="49729" end="49741" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933497" start="49748" end="49760" title="Mike Richter" label="Mike Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="49762" end="49769" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922206" start="49772" end="49783" title="Bob Crocker" label="Bob Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="49785" end="49792" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q105135810" start="49795" end="49811" title="Jack Blatherwick (ice hockey)" label="Jack Blatherwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="49813" end="49820" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="49822" end="49845" title="Lester B. Pearson Award" label="Lester B. Pearson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="49848" end="49860" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q636949" start="49862" end="49869" title="1971–72 NHL season" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="49872" end="49884" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="49886" end="49893" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="49896" end="49908" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="49910" end="49917" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q686354" start="49919" end="49939" title="NHL Plus-Minus Award" label="NHL Plus-Minus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389530" start="49942" end="49957" title="Michal Rozsíval" label="Michal Rozsival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="49959" end="49966" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="49969" end="49982" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362379" start="49985" end="49994" title="Dave Kerr" label="Dave Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888004" start="49996" end="50003" title="1939–40 NHL season" label="1939–40"/>
<link wikidata="Q731240" start="50006" end="50020" title="Eddie Giacomin" label="Eddie Giacomin"/>
<link wikidata="Q364064" start="50027" end="50043" title="Gilles Villemure" label="Gilles Villemure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="50045" end="50052" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q734620" start="50055" end="50073" title="John Vanbiesbrouck" label="John Vanbiesbrouck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="50075" end="50082" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q362157" start="50085" end="50101" title="Henrik Lundqvist" label="Henrik Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="50103" end="50110" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061109" start="50113" end="50128" title="Igor Shesterkin" label="Igor Shesterkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="50130" end="50137" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q934201" start="50170" end="50174" title="1963 NHL amateur draft" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829389" start="50176" end="50186" title="Al Osborne" label="Al Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q898380" start="50203" end="50207" title="1964 NHL amateur draft" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907681" start="50209" end="50219" title="Bob Graham (ice hockey)" label="Bob Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q206746" start="50236" end="50240" title="1965 NHL amateur draft" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815301" start="50242" end="50256" title="André Veilleux" label="Andre Veilleux"/>
<link wikidata="Q535174" start="50273" end="50277" title="1966 NHL amateur draft" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q719276" start="50279" end="50288" title="Brad Park" label="Brad Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q249714" start="50305" end="50309" title="1967 NHL amateur draft" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907632" start="50311" end="50322" title="Bob Dickson (ice hockey)" label="Bob Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q902538" start="50339" end="50343" title="1969 NHL amateur draft" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847698" start="50345" end="50357" title="André Dupont" label="Andre Dupont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385577" start="50378" end="50390" title="Pierre Jarry" label="Pierre Jarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q141069" start="50400" end="50404" title="1970 NHL amateur draft" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218547" start="50406" end="50418" title="Norm Gratton" label="Norm Gratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q141064" start="50436" end="50440" title="1971 NHL amateur draft" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q364424" start="50442" end="50455" title="Steve Vickers (ice hockey)" label="Steve Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346946" start="50477" end="50490" title="Steve Durbano" label="Steve Durbano"/>
<link wikidata="Q141023" start="50500" end="50504" title="1972 NHL amateur draft" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829305" start="50506" end="50518" title="Al Blanchard" label="Al Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q888081" start="50540" end="50553" title="Bob MacMillan" label="Bob MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q141073" start="50563" end="50567" title="1973 NHL amateur draft" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q332013" start="50569" end="50583" title="Rick Middleton" label="Rick Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q902493" start="50601" end="50605" title="1974 NHL amateur draft" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017197" start="50607" end="50619" title="Dave Maloney" label="Dave Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q902841" start="50637" end="50641" title="1975 NHL amateur draft" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566824" start="50643" end="50655" title="Wayne Dillon" label="Wayne Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q749691" start="50673" end="50677" title="1976 NHL amateur draft" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q569039" start="50679" end="50690" title="Don Murdoch" label="Don Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178072" start="50707" end="50711" title="1977 NHL amateur draft" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q768323" start="50713" end="50727" title="Lucien DeBlois" label="Lucien DeBlois"/>
<link wikidata="Q452431" start="50748" end="50758" title="Ron Duguay" label="Ron Duguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q747206" start="50768" end="50772" title="1979 NHL entry draft" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037955" start="50774" end="50787" title="Doug Sulliman" label="Doug Sulliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q681852" start="50805" end="50809" title="1980 NHL entry draft" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423028" start="50811" end="50821" title="Jim Malone (ice hockey)" label="Jim Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q545454" start="50839" end="50843" title="1981 NHL entry draft" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q503714" start="50845" end="50858" title="James Patrick (ice hockey)" label="James Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q924632" start="50875" end="50879" title="1982 NHL entry draft" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077421" start="50881" end="50893" title="Chris Kontos" label="Chris Kontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q568707" start="50911" end="50915" title="1983 NHL entry draft" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173209" start="50917" end="50928" title="Dave Gagner" label="Dave Gagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q599962" start="50946" end="50950" title="1984 NHL entry draft" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518892" start="50952" end="50965" title="Terry Carkner" label="Terry Carkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q640275" start="50983" end="50987" title="1985 NHL entry draft" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q947768" start="50989" end="50999" title="Ulf Dahlén" label="Ulf Dahlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q369343" start="51016" end="51020" title="1986 NHL entry draft" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="51022" end="51034" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061678" start="51051" end="51055" title="1987 NHL entry draft" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684419" start="51057" end="51068" title="Jayson More" label="Jayson More"/>
<link wikidata="Q949629" start="51086" end="51090" title="1989 NHL entry draft" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378624" start="51092" end="51103" title="Steven Rice" label="Steven Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774014" start="51121" end="51125" title="1990 NHL entry draft" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q444465" start="51127" end="51142" title="Michael Stewart (ice hockey)" label="Michael Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q304461" start="51160" end="51164" title="1991 NHL entry draft" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q739944" start="51166" end="51180" title="Alexei Kovalev" label="Alexei Kovalev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960897" start="51198" end="51202" title="1992 NHL entry draft" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376567" start="51204" end="51217" title="Peter Ferraro" label="Peter Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523956" start="51235" end="51239" title="1993 NHL entry draft" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q725501" start="51241" end="51257" title="Niklas Sundström" label="Niklas Sundstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122726" start="51274" end="51278" title="1994 NHL entry draft" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q327861" start="51280" end="51292" title="Dan Cloutier" label="Dan Cloutier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960907" start="51310" end="51314" title="1996 NHL entry draft" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173442" start="51316" end="51326" title="Jeff Brown (ice hockey, born 1978)" label="Jeff Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493690" start="51344" end="51348" title="1997 NHL entry draft" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497847" start="51350" end="51366" title="Stefan Cherneski" label="Stefan Cherneski"/>
<link wikidata="Q776656" start="51384" end="51388" title="1998 NHL entry draft" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388544" start="51390" end="51404" title="Manny Malhotra" label="Manny Malhotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960919" start="51421" end="51425" title="1999 NHL entry draft" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390363" start="51427" end="51439" title="Pavel Brendl" label="Pavel Brendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547665" start="51460" end="51474" title="Jamie Lundmark" label="Jamie Lundmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="51483" end="51487" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159001" start="51489" end="51502" title="Dan Blackburn" label="Dan Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854869" start="51520" end="51524" title="2003 NHL entry draft" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q656833" start="51526" end="51539" title="Hugh Jessiman" label="Hugh Jessiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="51557" end="51561" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886899" start="51563" end="51573" title="Al Montoya" label="Al Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q940202" start="51594" end="51610" title="Lauri Korpikoski" label="Lauri Korpikoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="51620" end="51624" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q960003" start="51626" end="51636" title="Marc Staal" label="Marc Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="51654" end="51658" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q448661" start="51660" end="51675" title="Bob Sanguinetti" label="Bob Sanguinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="51693" end="51697" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q722737" start="51699" end="51716" title="Alexei Cherepanov" label="Alexei Cherepanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="51734" end="51738" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q941437" start="51740" end="51757" title="Michael Del Zotto" label="Michael Del Zotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="51775" end="51779" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q465017" start="51781" end="51794" title="Chris Kreider" label="Chris Kreider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="51812" end="51816" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q980125" start="51818" end="51832" title="Dylan McIlrath" label="Dylan McIlrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="51850" end="51854" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q540422" start="51856" end="51868" title="J. T. Miller" label="J. T. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="51886" end="51890" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923509" start="51892" end="51903" title="Brady Skjei" label="Brady Skjei"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715164" start="51921" end="51925" title="2017 NHL entry draft" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926009" start="51927" end="51941" title="Lias Andersson" label="Lias Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30582528" start="51962" end="51974" title="Filip Chytil" label="Filip Chytil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="51984" end="51988" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823170" start="51990" end="52005" title="Vitali Kravtsov" label="Vitali Kravtsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q55183451" start="52021" end="52040" title="K&amp;#x27;Andre Miller" label="K&amp;#x27;Andre Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q52482603" start="52054" end="52068" title="Nils Lundkvist" label="Nils Lundkvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="52078" end="52082" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q45835153" start="52084" end="52095" title="Kaapo Kakko" label="Kaapo Kakko"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="52112" end="52116" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q52012798" start="52118" end="52135" title="Alexis Lafrenière" label="Alexis Lafreniere"/>
<link wikidata="Q99744350" start="52156" end="52172" title="Braden Schneider" label="Braden Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="52182" end="52186" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q107650055" start="52188" end="52203" title="Brennan Othmann" label="Brennan Othmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="52221" end="52225" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q120073173" start="52227" end="52241" title="Gabe Perreault" label="Gabe Perreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127690" start="52259" end="52263" title="2024 NHL entry draft" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q126934610" start="52265" end="52276" title="E. J. Emery" label="E. J. Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="52395" end="52414" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473705" start="52715" end="52743" title="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award" label="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685402" start="52774" end="52785" title="Sal Messina" label="Sal Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="52789" end="52806" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228719" start="52966" end="52979" title="John Davidson (ice hockey)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408092" start="53003" end="53012" title="Sam Rosen (sportscaster)" label="Sam Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q725700" start="53044" end="53058" title="Glenn Anderson" label="Glenn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q525300" start="53061" end="53074" title="Andy Bathgate" label="Andy Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q711930" start="53077" end="53089" title="Doug Bentley" label="Doug Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q708755" start="53092" end="53103" title="Max Bentley" label="Max Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354316" start="53106" end="53119" title="Frank Boucher" label="Frank Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354159" start="53122" end="53134" title="Johnny Bower" label="Johnny Bower"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="53137" end="53147" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q539236" start="53150" end="53163" title="Neil Colville" label="Neil Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q709650" start="53166" end="53175" title="Bill Cook" label="Bill Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q539139" start="53178" end="53186" title="Bun Cook" label="Bun Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q539250" start="53189" end="53200" title="Art Coulter" label="Art Coulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="53203" end="53216" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q434092" start="53219" end="53228" title="Dick Duff" label="Dick Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="53231" end="53244" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q710352" start="53247" end="53258" title="Bill Gadsby" label="Bill Gadsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q373960" start="53261" end="53273" title="Mike Gartner" label="Mike Gartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q826558" start="53276" end="53292" title="Bernie Geoffrion" label="Bernie Geoffrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q731240" start="53295" end="53309" title="Eddie Giacomin" label="Eddie Giacomin"/>
<link wikidata="Q265683" start="53312" end="53323" title="Rod Gilbert" label="Rod Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="53326" end="53339" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251751" start="53342" end="53353" title="Doug Harvey (ice hockey)" label="Doug Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q359645" start="53356" end="53369" title="Bryan Hextall" label="Bryan Hextall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345631" start="53372" end="53382" title="Tim Horton" label="Tim Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q356291" start="53385" end="53397" title="Harry Howell (ice hockey)" label="Harry Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963774" start="53400" end="53413" title="Ching Johnson" label="Ching Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="53416" end="53426" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q553249" start="53429" end="53440" title="Guy Lafleur" label="Guy Lafleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q252365" start="53443" end="53457" title="Pat LaFontaine" label="Pat LaFontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q919705" start="53460" end="53473" title="Edgar Laprade" label="Edgar Laprade"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="53476" end="53488" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q960614" start="53491" end="53503" title="Eric Lindros" label="Eric Lindros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="53506" end="53516" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q731281" start="53519" end="53531" title="Harry Lumley (ice hockey)" label="Harry Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362157" start="53534" end="53550" title="Henrik Lundqvist" label="Henrik Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="53553" end="53565" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q538946" start="53568" end="53580" title="Howie Morenz" label="Howie Morenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q942406" start="53583" end="53600" title="Vaclav Nedomansky" label="Vaclav Nedomansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q360846" start="53603" end="53622" title="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Buddy O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q719276" start="53625" end="53634" title="Brad Park" label="Brad Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q742878" start="53637" end="53649" title="Lynn Patrick" label="Lynn Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q538935" start="53652" end="53666" title="Jacques Plante" label="Jacques Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q325966" start="53669" end="53679" title="Babe Pratt" label="Babe Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="53682" end="53694" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q730897" start="53697" end="53709" title="Chuck Rayner" label="Chuck Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q661592" start="53712" end="53726" title="Luc Robitaille" label="Luc Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q324379" start="53729" end="53741" title="Earl Seibert" label="Earl Seibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q739144" start="53744" end="53760" title="Brendan Shanahan" label="Brendan Shanahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q365331" start="53763" end="53776" title="Allan Stanley" label="Allan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q713653" start="53779" end="53791" title="Babe Siebert" label="Babe Siebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q362694" start="53794" end="53805" title="Clint Smith" label="Clint Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q520254" start="53808" end="53821" title="Terry Sawchuk" label="Terry Sawchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q715426" start="53824" end="53840" title="Martin St. Louis" label="Martin St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345707" start="53843" end="53855" title="Gump Worsley" label="Gump Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q606201" start="53858" end="53870" title="Sergei Zubov" label="Sergei Zubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390562" start="53883" end="53894" title="Herb Brooks" label="Herb Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144961" start="53897" end="53911" title="Colin Campbell (ice hockey, born 1953)" label="Colin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052266" start="53914" end="53927" title="Emile Francis" label="Emile Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305240" start="53930" end="53949" title="William M. Jennings" label="William M. Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="53952" end="53965" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202779" start="53968" end="53981" title="Craig Patrick" label="Craig Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="53984" end="53998" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q742878" start="54001" end="54013" title="Lynn Patrick" label="Lynn Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="54016" end="54027" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167950" start="54030" end="54040" title="Fred Shero" label="Fred Shero"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="54159" end="54172" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="54219" end="54241" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="54548" end="54560" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="54586" end="54598" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="54625" end="54637" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q465017" start="54673" end="54686" title="Chris Kreider" label="Chris Kreider"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="54723" end="54735" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q288994" start="54773" end="54785" title="Brian Leetch" label="Brian Leetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q677434" start="54823" end="54837" title="Theoren Fleury" label="Theoren Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="54875" end="54887" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="54927" end="54939" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="54977" end="54989" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366026" start="55029" end="55041" title="Jean Ratelle" label="Jean Ratelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="55086" end="55098" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="55110" end="55123" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="55138" end="55152" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465017" start="55186" end="55199" title="Chris Kreider" label="Chris Kreider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376695" start="55236" end="55251" title="Tomas Sandström" label="Tomas Sandstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q349569" start="55263" end="55274" title="Adam Graves" label="Adam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="55289" end="55303" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33700" start="55334" end="55349" title="Michael Grabner" label="Michael Grabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q719276" start="55378" end="55387" title="Brad Park" label="Brad Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q472440" start="55404" end="55417" title="Ron Greschner" label="Ron Greschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="55451" end="55463" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380510" start="55499" end="55512" title="Troy Mallette" label="Troy Mallette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376695" start="55543" end="55558" title="Tomas Sandström" label="Tomas Sandstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933497" start="55593" end="55605" title="Mike Richter" label="Mike Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q776376" start="55645" end="55660" title="John Ross Roach" label="John Ross Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345707" start="55699" end="55711" title="Gump Worsley" label="Gump Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371557" start="55756" end="55775" title="Emile Francis Award" label="Emile Francis Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985297" start="55778" end="55798" title="Ice Hockey in Harlem" label="Ice Hockey in Harlem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66886" wikidata="Q1664019" url="?curid=66886" title="The Datsuns">
<text>The Datsuns are a hard rock band from Cambridge, New Zealand, formed in 1998. Founding mainstays are Rudolf &quot;Dolf&quot; de Borst on vocals and bass guitar, and Christian Livingstone and Phil Somervell, both on guitar. They have released seven albums, with their debut self-titled album from October 2002 peaking at no. 1 in New Zealand and reaching the top 20 on the United Kingdom&#x27;s Official Charts. They had relocated to London in 2002. Their second album, &quot;Outta Sight/Outta Mind&quot; (May 2004), appeared at no. 7 in New Zealand and top 60 in the UK. &quot;Smoke &amp; Mirrors&quot; (2006) peaked in the top 20 in New Zealand. Early drummer Matt Osment was replaced by Ben Cole after that album. Their top 40 singles in the UK are &quot;In Love&quot; and &quot;Harmonic Generator&quot; (both in 2002). In New Zealand, their highest-charting single, &quot;Stuck Here for Days&quot; (2006), reached the top 30.

==History==

In 1995, while still at secondary school in Cambridge, New Zealand, Rudolf &quot;Dolf&quot; de Borst on vocals and bass guitar, Matt Osment on drums, and Phil Somervell on guitar formed a hard rock band, Trinket. Christian Livingstone joined in 1997 as their second guitarist and they entered a Battle of the Bands competition.

In 1998, they changed their name to the Datsuns, and initially each member used the band&#x27;s name as their last name; de Borst performed as Dolf D. Datsun. As the Datsuns they won a Battle of the Bands. They supported Swedish band, the Hellacopters, at a concert in Hamilton in October 1998. The group secured another support slot in May 2000, behind Canadian visitors, the Smugglers. In August of that year, the Datsuns released their first single, &quot;Super Gyration&quot;, on 7-inch vinyl only. They supported the White Stripes in November that year. Their early material was issued on their own label, Hellsquad Records. They toured Australia in March 2001 and then relocated to London to try the United Kingdom market.

In 2002 after appearing on John Peel&#x27;s programme on the BBC Radio 1, the Datsuns were lauded by the UK music press, including in a front cover article in &quot;NME&quot;. The band signed with V2 Records in July of that year. Their self-titled debut album appeared in October, which reached no. 17 in the UK and number-one in New Zealand. Its third single, &quot;In Love&quot; (2002), peaked in the top 30 in the UK. The band toured Australia in 2002 with Melbourne bands the Specimens and the Casanovas, as well as playing a live to air on PBS radio. The group won numerous awards including &quot;NME&quot;″s &#x27;Best Live Band&#x27; and New Zealand Music Awards for &#x27;Best Album&#x27;, &#x27;Best Group&#x27; and &#x27;Breakthrough Artist&#x27;.

The Datsuns performed at Ozzfest in 2003 on the main stage supporting Ozzy Osbourne, Marilyn Manson, Korn and Disturbed. They also played the main stage of the 2004 and 2009 Big Day Out festivals, and opened for Metallica on their Australian tour in 2004. Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich had previously praised the Datsuns on the revival debut of &quot;Headbangers Ball&quot;, before playing their video for &quot;In Love.&quot; Their second album, &quot;Outta Sight/Outta Mind&quot; (May 2004), was produced by Led Zeppelin member John Paul Jones. It reached no. 7 in New Zealand, top 50 in Australia and top 60 in the UK. Australian music journalist Ed Nimmervoll compared the first two albums, where during their studio sessions &quot;[they] just pressed record and played the songs they&#x27;d been playing live. The lyrics for the first album were stream of consciousness, the lyrics for the second album [were] more considered having been refined while on the road.&quot;

In October 2006 the Datsuns released their third album, &quot;Smoke &amp; Mirrors&quot;, which peaked in the top 20 in New Zealand. The album was met with generally positive reviews, although it was not reviewed as widely as the band&#x27;s first two efforts. Its lead single, &quot;Stuck Here for Days&quot; (2006), appeared in the top 30 in New Zealand. After the album&#x27;s release, Osment was replaced on drums by Ben Cole – also from Cambridge. The Datsuns toured New Zealand with Shihad during the Christmas to New Year period in 2006 to 2007. The group relocated to Germany and completed a tour of Europe to promote &quot;Smoke &amp; Mirrors&quot;. Although they mostly played in locations they previously had not visited, they managed to sell out the majority of their European dates.

The band&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Headstunts&quot; (an anagram of &quot;the Datsuns&quot;), was released on 6 October 2008. They toured New Zealand, Australia and North America, showcasing new material, &quot;Eye of the Needle&quot;, &quot;Human Error&quot;, &quot;So Long&quot;, &quot;Hey Paranoid People What&#x27;s in Your Head&quot;, &quot;Your Bones&quot; and released a limited edition single, &quot;Highschool Hoodlums&quot;. The quartet then embarked on a tour of the UK and the rest of Europe. The Datsuns&#x27; fifth studio album, &quot;Death Rattle Boogie&quot;, appeared in October 2012. It had been recorded in Stockholm at Gutterview Recorders, with additional work at Roundhead Studios in New Zealand, and was produced by former Hellacopters frontman Nicke Andersson. Their sixth studio album, &quot;Deep Sleep&quot;, was issued in October 2014, which reached New Zealand&#x27;s top 30. The group toured Japan for the third time in March 2016.

Following a long period of inactivity, in February 2021 the band released the single &quot;Brain To Brain&quot;: their first new music in seven years and a lead single for the album &quot;Eye To Eye&quot;, which was released on 28 May 2021.

==Discography==
===Albums===
=== Extended plays ===

===Singles===

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==
* Interview with the Datsuns about &quot;Head Stunts&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1664019" start="0" end="11" title="The Datsuns" label="The Datsuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="18" end="27" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028261" start="38" end="47" title="Cambridge, New Zealand" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281333" start="273" end="290" title="The Datsuns (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q843881" start="329" end="340" title="Recorded Music NZ" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="394" end="409" title="UK Albums Chart" label="Official Charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q769219" start="475" end="497" title="Outta Sight/Outta Mind" label="Outta Sight/Outta Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487024" start="577" end="596" title="Smoke &amp;amp; Mirrors (The Datsuns album)" label="Smoke &amp;amp; Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028261" start="987" end="1009" title="Cambridge, New Zealand" label="Cambridge, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246424" start="1238" end="1257" title="Battle of the Bands" label="Battle of the Bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q691018" start="1507" end="1523" title="the Hellacopters" label="the Hellacopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="1541" end="1549" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764952" start="1645" end="1658" title="The Smugglers (band)" label="the Smugglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1756" end="1768" title="7-inch vinyl" label="7-inch vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="1790" end="1807" title="the White Stripes" label="the White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="2029" end="2038" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="2063" end="2074" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2167" end="2170" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191537" start="2199" end="2209" title="V2 Records" label="V2 Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281333" start="2238" end="2261" title="The Datsuns (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986218" start="2496" end="2509" title="the Casanovas" label="the Casanovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015517" start="2647" end="2671" title="New Zealand Music Awards" label="New Zealand Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q722072" start="2786" end="2793" title="Ozzfest" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="2831" end="2844" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q485893" start="2846" end="2860" title="Marilyn Manson (band)" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="2862" end="2866" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131366" start="2871" end="2880" title="Disturbed (band)" label="Disturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q858782" start="2935" end="2946" title="Big Day Out" label="Big Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="2973" end="2982" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q106193" start="3035" end="3046" title="Lars Ulrich" label="Lars Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q279329" start="3112" end="3128" title="Headbangers Ball" label="Headbangers Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="3157" end="3162" title="music video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q769219" start="3214" end="3236" title="Outta Sight/Outta Mind" label="Outta Sight/Outta Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="3291" end="3306" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="3351" end="3360" title="ARIA Charts" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335226" start="3411" end="3424" title="Ed Nimmervoll" label="Ed Nimmervoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487024" start="3800" end="3819" title="Smoke &amp;amp; Mirrors (The Datsuns album)" label="Smoke &amp;amp; Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="4226" end="4232" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128978" start="4570" end="4580" title="Headstunts" label="Headstunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843709" start="4942" end="4961" title="Highschool Hoodlums" label="Highschool Hoodlums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="5160" end="5169" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371249" start="5219" end="5236" title="Roundhead Studios" label="Roundhead Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736370" start="5302" end="5317" title="Nicke Andersson" label="Nicke Andersson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66890" wikidata="Q200106" url="?curid=66890" title="People's Liberation Army">
<text>The People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) is the military of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC). It consists of four services—Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, and Rocket Force—and four arms—Aerospace Force, Cyberspace Force, Information Support Force, and Joint Logistics Support Force. It is led by the Central Military Commission (CMC) with its chairman as commander-in-chief.

The PLA can trace its origins during the Republican era to the left-wing units of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA) of the Kuomintang (KMT) when they broke away in 1927 in an uprising against the nationalist government as the Chinese Red Army, before being reintegrated into the NRA as units of New Fourth Army and Eighth Route Army during the Second Sino-Japanese War. The two NRA communist units were reconstituted as the PLA in 1947. Since 1949, the PLA has used nine different military strategies, which it calls &quot;strategic guidelines&quot;. The most important came in 1956, 1980, and 1993. Politically, the PLA and the paramilitary People&#x27;s Armed Police (PAP) have the largest delegation in the National People&#x27;s Congress (NPC); the joint delegation currently has 281 deputies—over 9% of the total—all of whom are CCP members.

The PLA is not a traditional nation-state military. It is a part, and the armed wing, of the CCP and controlled by the party, not by the state. The PLA&#x27;s primary mission is the defense of the party and its interests. The PLA is the guarantor of the party&#x27;s survival and rule, and the party prioritizes maintaining control and the loyalty of the PLA. According to Chinese law, the party has leadership over the armed forces and the CMC exercises supreme military command; the party and state CMCs are practically a single body by membership. Since 1989, the CCP general secretary has also been the CMC Chairman; this grants significant political power as the only member of the Politburo Standing Committee with direct responsibilities for the armed forces. The Ministry of National Defense has no command authority; it is the PLA&#x27;s interface with state and foreign entities and insulates the PLA from external influence.

Today, the majority of military units around the country are assigned to one of five theatre commands by geographical location. The PLA is the world&#x27;s largest military force (not including paramilitary or reserve forces) and has the second largest defence budget in the world. China&#x27;s military expenditure was US$296 billion in 2023, accounting for 12 percent of the world&#x27;s defence expenditures. It is also one of the fastest modernizing militaries in the world, and has been termed as a potential military superpower, with significant regional defence and rising global power projection capabilities.

In addition to wartime arrangements, the PLA is also involved in the peacetime operations of other components of the armed forces. This is particularly visible in maritime territorial disputes where the navy is heavily involved in the planning, coordination and execution of operations by the PAP&#x27;s China Coast Guard.

== Mission ==
The PLA&#x27;s primary mission is the defense of the CCP and its interests. It is the guarantor of the party&#x27;s survival and rule, and the party prioritizes maintaining control and the loyalty of the PLA. 

In 2004, paramount leader Hu Jintao stated the mission of the PLA as:
* The insurance of CCP leadership
* The protection of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, internal security and national development of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Safeguarding the country&#x27;s interests
* Maintaining and safeguarding world peace.
China describes its military posture as active defense, defined in a 2015 state white paper as &quot;We will not attack unless we are attacked, but we will surely counterattack if attacked.&quot;

== History ==
=== Early history ===
The CCP founded its military wing on 1 August 1927 during the Nanchang uprising, beginning the Chinese Civil War. Communist elements of the National Revolutionary Army rebelled under the leadership of Zhu De, He Long, Ye Jianying, Zhou Enlai, and other leftist elements of the Kuomintang (KMT), after the Shanghai massacre in 1927. They were then known as the Chinese Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Red Army, or simply the Red Army.

In 1934 and 1935, the Red Army survived several campaigns led against it by Chiang Kai-Shek&#x27;s KMT and engaged in the Long March.

During the Second Sino-Japanese War from 1937 to 1945, the CCP&#x27;s military forces were nominally integrated into the National Revolutionary Army of the Republic of China forming two main units, the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army. During this time, these two military groups primarily employed guerrilla tactics, generally avoiding large-scale battles with the Japanese, at the same time consolidating by recruiting KMT troops and paramilitary forces behind Japanese lines into their forces.

After the Japanese surrender in 1945, the CCP continued to use the National Revolutionary Army unit structures until the decision was made in February 1947 to merge the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army, renaming the new million-strong force the People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA). The reorganization was completed by late 1948. The PLA eventually won the Chinese Civil War, establishing the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949. It then underwent a drastic reorganization, with the establishment of the Air Force leadership structure in November 1949, followed by the Navy leadership structure the following April.

In 1950, the leadership structures of the artillery, armored troops, air defence troops, public security forces, and worker–soldier militias were also established. The chemical warfare defence forces, the railroad forces, the communications forces, and the strategic forces, as well as other separate forces (like engineering and construction, logistics and medical services), were established later on.

In this early period, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army overwhelmingly consisted of peasants. Its treatment of soldiers and officers was egalitarian and formal ranks were not adopted until 1955. As a result of its egalitarian organization, the early PLA overturned strict traditional hierarchies that governed the lives of peasants. As sociologist Alessandro Russo summarizes, the peasant composition of the PLA hierarchy was a radical break with Chinese societal norms and &quot;overturned the strict traditional hierarchies in unprecedented forms of egalitarianism[.]&quot;

In the PRC&#x27;s early years, the PLA was a dominant foreign policy institution in the country.

=== Modernization and conflicts ===


During the 1950s, the PLA with Soviet assistance began to transform itself from a peasant army into a modern one. Since 1949, China has used nine different military strategies, which the PLA calls &quot;strategic guidelines&quot;. The most important came in 1956, 1980, and 1993. Part of this process was the reorganization that created thirteen military regions in 1955.

In November 1950, some units of the PLA under the name of the People&#x27;s Volunteer Army intervened in the Korean War as United Nations forces under General Douglas MacArthur approached the Yalu River. Under the weight of this offensive, Chinese forces drove MacArthur&#x27;s forces out of North Korea and captured Seoul, but were subsequently pushed back south of Pyongyang north of the 38th Parallel. The war also catalyzed the rapid modernization of the PLAAF.

In 1962, the PLA ground force also fought India in the Sino-Indian War. In a series of border clashes in 1967 with Indian troops, the PLA suffered heavy numerical and tactical losses.

Before the Cultural Revolution, military region commanders tended to remain in their posts for long periods. The longest-serving military region commanders were Xu Shiyou in the Nanjing Military Region (1954–74), Yang Dezhi in the Jinan Military Region (1958–74), Chen Xilian in the Shenyang Military Region (1959–73), and Han Xianchu in the Fuzhou Military Region (1960–74).

In the early days of the Cultural Revolution, the PLA abandoned the use of the military ranks that it had adopted in 1955.

The establishment of a professional military force equipped with modern weapons and doctrine was the last of the Four Modernizations announced by Zhou Enlai and supported by Deng Xiaoping. In keeping with Deng&#x27;s mandate to reform, the PLA has demobilized millions of men and women since 1978 and has introduced modern methods in such areas as recruitment and manpower, strategy, and education and training. In 1979, the PLA fought Vietnam over a border skirmish in the Sino-Vietnamese War where both sides claimed victory. However, western analysts agree that Vietnam handily outperformed the PLA.

During the Sino-Soviet split, strained relations between China and the Soviet Union resulted in bloody border clashes and mutual backing of each other&#x27;s adversaries. China and Afghanistan had neutral relations with each other during the King&#x27;s rule. When the pro-Soviet Afghan Communists seized power in Afghanistan in 1978, relations between China and the Afghan communists quickly turned hostile. The Afghan pro-Soviet communists supported China&#x27;s enemies in Vietnam and blamed China for supporting Afghan anticommunist militants. China responded to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan by supporting the Afghan mujahidin and ramping up their military presence near Afghanistan in Xinjiang. China acquired military equipment from the United States to defend itself from Soviet attacks.

The PLA Ground Force trained and supported the Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet-Afghan War, moving its training camps for the mujahideen from Pakistan into China itself. Hundreds of millions of dollars worth of anti-aircraft missiles, rocket launchers, and machine guns were given to the Mujahideen by the Chinese. Chinese military advisors and army troops were also present with the Mujahideen during training.

=== Since 1980 ===
In 1981, the PLA conducted its largest military exercise in North China since the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic.

In the late 1980s, the central government had increasing expenditures and limited revenue. The central government encouraged its agencies and encouraged local governments to expand their services and pursue revenues. The PLA established businesses including hotels and restaurants. The PLA gained more autonomy and permission to engage in commercial activities in exchange for a reduced role in political affairs and limited budgets; the military was downsized to free resources for economic development. The lack of oversight, ineffective self-regulation, and Jiang Zemin&#x27;s and Hu Jintao&#x27;s lack of close personal ties to the PLA, led to systemic corruption that persisted through the late-2010s. Jiang&#x27;s attempt to divest the PLA of its commercial interests was only partly successful as many were still run by close associates of PLA officers. Corruption lowered readiness and proficiency, was a barrier to modernization and professionalization, and eroded party control. The 2010s anti-corruption campaigns and military reforms under Xi Jinping from the early-2010s were in part executed to address these problems.

Following the PLA&#x27;s suppression of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre, ideological correctness was temporarily revived as the dominant theme in Chinese military affairs. Reform and modernization have today resumed their position as the PLA&#x27;s primary objectives, although the armed forces&#x27; political loyalty to the CCP has remained a leading concern.

Beginning in the 1980s, the PLA tried to transform itself from a land-based power centered on a vast ground force to a smaller, more mobile, high-tech one capable of mounting operations beyond its borders. The motivation for this was that a massive land invasion by Russia was no longer seen as a major threat, and the new threats to China are seen to be a declaration of independence by Taiwan, possibly with assistance from the United States, or a confrontation over the Spratly Islands.

In 1985, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the CMC, the PLA changed from being constantly prepared to &quot;hit early, strike hard and to fight a nuclear war&quot; to developing the military in an era of peace. The PLA reoriented itself to modernization, improving its fighting ability, and becoming a world-class force. Deng Xiaoping stressed that the PLA needed to focus more on quality rather than on quantity.

The decision of the Chinese government in 1985 to reduce the size of the military by one million was completed by 1987. Staffing in military leadership was cut by about 50 percent. During the Ninth Five Year Plan (1996–2000) the PLA was reduced by a further 500,000. The PLA had also been expected to be reduced by another 200,000 by 2005. The PLA has focused on increasing mechanization and informatization to be able to fight a high-intensity war.

Former CMC chairman Jiang in 1990 called on the military to &quot;meet political standards, be militarily competent, have a good working style, adhere strictly to discipline, and provide vigorous logistic support&quot; (). The 1991 Gulf War provided the Chinese leadership with a stark realization that the PLA was an oversized, almost-obsolete force. The USA&#x27;s sending of two aircraft carrier groups to the vicinity of Taiwan during the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis prompted Jiang to order a ten-year PLA modernization program.

The possibility of a militarized Japan has also been a continuous concern to the Chinese leadership since the late 1990s. In addition, China&#x27;s military leadership has been reacting to and learning from the successes and failures of the United States Armed Forces during the Kosovo War, the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and the Iraqi insurgency. All these lessons inspired China to transform the PLA from a military based on quantity to one based on quality. Chairman Jiang Zemin officially made a &quot;revolution in military affairs&quot; (RMA) part of the official national military strategy in 1993 to modernize the Chinese armed forces.

A goal of the RMA is to transform the PLA into a force capable of winning what it calls &quot;local wars under high-tech conditions&quot; rather than a massive, numbers-dominated ground-type war. Chinese military planners call for short decisive campaigns, limited in both their geographic scope and their political goals. In contrast to the past, more attention is given to reconnaissance, mobility, and deep reach. This new vision has shifted resources towards the navy and air force. The PLA is also actively preparing for space warfare and cyber-warfare.

In 2002, the PLA began holding military exercises with militaries from other countries. From 2018 to 2023, more than half of these exercises have focused on military training other than war, generally antipiracy or antiterrorism exercises involving combatting non-state actors. In 2009, the PLA held its first military exercise in Africa, a humanitarian and medical training practice conducted in Gabon.

For the past 10 to 20 years, the PLA has acquired some advanced weapons systems from Russia, including Sovremenny class destroyers, Sukhoi Su-27 and Sukhoi Su-30 aircraft, and Kilo-class diesel-electric submarines. It has also started to produce several new classes of destroyers and frigates including the Type 052D class guided-missile destroyer. In addition, the PLAAF has designed its very own Chengdu J-10 fighter aircraft and a new stealth fighter, the Chengdu J-20. The PLA launched the new Jin class nuclear submarines on 3 December 2004 capable of launching nuclear warheads that could strike targets across the Pacific Ocean and have three aircraft carriers, with the latest, the Fujian, launched in 2022.

From 2014 to 2015, the PLA deployed 524 medical staff on a rotational basis to combat the Ebola virus outbreak in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Guinea-Bissau. As of 2023, this was the PLA&#x27;s largest medical assistance mission in another country.

China re-organized its military from 2015 to 2016. In 2015, the PLA formed new units including the PLA Ground Force, the PLA Rocket Force and the PLA Strategic Support Force. In 2016, the CMC replaced the four traditional military departments with a number of new bodies. China replaced its system of seven military regions with newly established Theater Commands: Northern, Southern, Western, Eastern, and Central. In the prior system, operations were segmented by military branch and region. In contrast, each Theater Command is intended to function as a unified entity with joint operations across different military branches.

The PLA on 1 August 2017 marked its 90th anniversary. Before the big anniversary it mounted its biggest parade yet and the first outside of Beijing, held in the Zhurihe Training Base in the Northern Theater Command (within the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region).

In December 2023, Reuters reported a military leadership purge after high-ranking generals were ousted from the National People&#x27;s Congress. Prior to 2017, over sixty generals were investigated and sacked.

=== Overseas deployments and peacekeeping operations ===

In addition to its Support Base in Djibouti, the PLA operates a base in Tajikistan and a listening station in Cuba. The Espacio Lejano Station in Argentina is operated by a unit of a PLA. The PLAN has also undertaken rotational deployments of its warships at the Ream Naval Base in Cambodia.

The People&#x27;s Republic of China has sent the PLA to various hotspots as part of China&#x27;s role as a prominent member of the United Nations. Such units usually include engineers and logistical units and members of the paramilitary People&#x27;s Armed Police and have been deployed as part of peacekeeping operations in Lebanon, the Republic of the Congo, Sudan, Ivory Coast, Haiti, and more recently, Mali and South Sudan.

=== Engagements ===
* 1927–1950: Chinese Civil War
* 1937–1945: Second Sino-Japanese War
* 1949: Yangtze incident against British warships on the Yangtze River
* 1949: Incorporation of Xinjiang into the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* 1950: Annexation of Tibet by the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* 1950–1953: Korean War under the banner of the Chinese People&#x27;s Volunteer Army
* 1954–1955: First Taiwan Strait Crisis
* 1955–1970: Vietnam War
* 1958: Second Taiwan Strait Crisis at Quemoy and Matsu
* 1962: Sino-Indian War
* 1967: Border skirmishes with India
* 1969: Sino-Soviet border conflict
* 1974: Battle of the Paracel Islands with South Vietnam
* 1979: Sino-Vietnamese War
* 1979–1990: Sino-Vietnamese conflicts
* 1988: Johnson South Reef Skirmish with Vietnam
* 1989: Enforcement of martial law in Beijing during the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
* 1990: Barin uprising
* 1995–1996: Third Taiwan Strait Crisis
* 2007–present: UNIFIL peacekeeping operations in Lebanon
* 2009–present: Anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden
* 2014: Search and rescue efforts for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370
* 2014: UN peacekeeping operations in Mali
* 2015: UNMISS peacekeeping operations in South Sudan
* 2020–2021: China–India skirmishes
As of at least early 2024, China has not fought a war since 1979 and has only fought relatively minor conflicts since.

== Organization ==
The PLA is a component of the armed forces of China, which also includes the PAP, the reserves, and the militia. The armed forces are controlled by the CCP under the doctrine of &quot;the Party must always control the gun&quot;.() The PLA and the PAP have the largest delegation in the National People&#x27;s Congress (NPC), which are elected by servicemember election committees of top-level military subdivisions, including the PLA&#x27;s theater commands and service branches. At the 14th National People&#x27;s Congress; the joint delegation has 281 deputies—over 9% of the total—all of whom are CCP members.

=== Central Military Commission ===

The PLA is governed by the Central Military Commission (CMC); under the arrangement of &quot;one institution with two names&quot;, there exists a state CMC and a Party CMC, although both commissions have identical personnel, organization and function, and effectively work as a single body. The only difference in membership between the two occurs for a few months every five years, during the period between a Party National Congress, when Party CMC membership changes, and the next ensuing National People&#x27;s Congress, when the state CMC changes.

The CMC is composed of a chairman, vice chairpersons and regular members. The chairman of the CMC is the commander-in-chief of the PLA, with the post generally held by the paramount leader of China; since 1989, the post has generally been held together with the CCP general secretary. Unlike in other countries, the Ministry of National Defense and its Minister do not have command authority, largely acting as diplomatic liaisons of the CMC, insulating the PLA from external influence. However, the Minister has always been a member of the CMC.

; Chairman:
* Xi Jinping (also General Secretary, President and Commander-in-chief of Joint Battle Command)

; Vice Chairmen:
* General Zhang Youxia 
* General He Weidong

; Members
* Chief of the Joint Staff Department (JSD) – General Liu Zhenli
* Director of the Political Work Department – Admiral Miao Hua
* Secretary of the Commission for Discipline Inspection – General Zhang Shengmin

Previously, the PLA was governed by four general departments; the General Political, the General Logistics, the General Armament, and the General Staff Departments. These were abolished in 2016 under the military reforms undertaken by Xi Jinping, replaced with 15 new functional departments directly reporting to the CMC:

# General Office
# Joint Staff Department
# Political Work Department
# Logistic Support Department
# Equipment Development Department
# Training and Administration Department
# National Defense Mobilization Department
# Discipline Inspection Commission
# Politics and Legal Affairs Commission
# Science and Technology Commission
# Office for Strategic Planning
# Office for Reform and Organizational Structure
# Office for International Military Cooperation
# Audit Office
# Agency for Offices Administration

Included among the 15 departments are three commissions. The CMC Discipline Inspection Commission is charged with rooting out corruption.

=== Political leadership ===
The CCP maintains absolute control over the PLA. It requires the PLA to undergo political education, instilling CCP ideology in its members. Additionally, China maintains a political commissar system. Regiment-level and higher units maintain CCP committees and political commissars (). Additionally, battalion-level and company-level units respectively maintain political directors and political instructors. The political workers are officially equal to commanders in status. The political workers are officially responsible for the implementation of party committee decisions, instilling and maintaining party discipline, providing political education, and working with other components of the political work system.

As a rule, the political worker serves as the party committee secretary while the commander serves as the deputy secretary. Key decisions in the PLA are generally made in the CCP committees throughout the military. Due to the CCP&#x27;s absolute leadership, non-CCP political parties, groups and organizations except the Communist Youth League of China are not allowed to establish organizations or have members in the PLA. Additionally, only the CCP is allowed to appoint the leading cadres at all levels of the PLA.

=== Grades ===

Grades determine the command hierarchy from the CMC to the platoon level. Entities command lower-graded entities, and coordinate with like-graded entities. Since 1988, all organizations, billets, and officers in the PLA have a grade.

Civil–military relations within the wider state bureaucracy is also influenced by grades. The grading systems used by the armed forces and the government are parallel, making it easier for military entities to identify the civilian entities they should coordinate with.

An officer&#x27;s authority, eligibility for billets, pay, and retirement age is determined by grade. Career progression includes lateral transfers between billets of the same grade, but which are not considered promotions. An officer retiring to the civil service has their grade translated to the civil grade system; their grade continues to progress and draw retirement benefits through the civil system rather than the armed forces.

Historically, an officer&#x27;s grade — or position () — was more important than their &quot;rank&quot; (). Historically, time-in-grade and time-in-rank requirements and promotions were not synchronized; multiple ranks were present in each grade with all having the same authority. Rank was mainly a visual aid to roughly determine relative position when interacting with Chinese and foreign personnel. PLA etiquette preferred addressing personnel by position rather than by rank. Reforms to a more rank-centric system began in 2021. In 2023, a revised grade structure associated one rank per grade, with some ranks spanning multiple grades.

=== Operational control ===
Operational control of combat units is divided between the service headquarters and domestic geographically based theatre commands.

Theatre commands are multi-service (&quot;joint&quot;) organizations that are broadly responsible for strategy, plans, tactics, and policy specific to their assigned area of responsibility. In wartime, they will likely have full control of subordinate units; in peacetime, units also report to their service headquarters. Force-building is the responsibility of the services and the CMC. The five theatre commands, in order of stated significance are:

* Eastern Theater Command
* Southern Theater Command
* Western Theater Command
* Northern Theater Command
* Central Theater Command

The service headquarters retain operational control in some areas within China and outside of China. For example, army headquarters controls or is responsible for the Beijing Garrison, the Tibet Military District, the Xinjiang Military District, and border and coastal defences. The counterpiracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden are controlled by navy headquarters. The JSD nominally controls operations beyond China&#x27;s periphery, but in practice this seems to apply only to army operations.

Services and theater commands have the same grade. The overlap of areas or units of responsibility may create disputes requiring CMC arbitration.

As part of the 2015 reforms, military regions were replaced by theatre commands in 2016. Military regions were − uinlike the theatre commands − army-centric peacetime administrative organizations, and joint wartime commands were created on-demand by the army-dominated General Staff Department.

=== Organization table ===








=== State-owned enterprises ===
Multiple state-owned enterprises have established internal People&#x27;s Armed Forces Departments run by the People&#x27;s Liberation Army. The internal units are expected &quot;to work together with grassroots organizations to collect intelligence and information, dissolve and/or eliminate security concerns at the budding stage,&quot; according to the &quot;People&#x27;s Liberation Army Daily&quot;.

===Academic Institutions===

There are two academic institutions directly subordinate to the CMC, the National Defense University and the National University of Defense Technology, and they are considered the two top military education institutions in China. There are also 35 institutions affiliated to the PLA&#x27;s branches and arms, and 7 institutions affiliated to the People&#x27;s Armed Police.

== Service branches ==
The PLA consists of four services (Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, and Rocket Force) and four arms (Aerospace Force, Cyberspace Force, Information Support Force, and Joint Logistics Support Force).

=== Services ===
The PLA maintains four services (): the Ground Force, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Rocket Force. Following the 200,000 and 300,000 personnel reduction announced in 2003 and 2005 respectively, the total strength of the PLA has been reduced from 2.5 million to around 2 million. The reductions came mainly from non-combat ground forces, which would allow more funds to be diverted to naval, air, and strategic missile forces. This shows China&#x27;s shift from ground force prioritization to emphasizing air and naval power with high-tech equipment for offensive roles over disputed territories, particularly in the South China Sea.

==== Ground Force ====

The PLA Ground Force (PLAGF) is the largest of the PLA&#x27;s five services with 975,000 active duty personnel, approximately half of the PLA&#x27;s total manpower of around 2 million personnel. The PLAGF is organized into twelve active duty group armies sequentially numbered from the 71st Group Army to the 83rd Group Army which are distributed to each of the PRC&#x27;s five theatre commands, receiving two to three group armies per command. In wartime, numerous PLAGF reserve and paramilitary units may be mobilized to augment these active group armies. The PLAGF reserve component comprises approximately 510,000 personnel divided into thirty infantry and twelve anti-aircraft artillery (AAA) divisions. The PLAGF is led by Commander Liu Zhenli and Political Commissar Qin Shutong.

==== Navy ====

Until the early 1990s, the PLA Navy (PLAN) performed a subordinate role to the PLA Ground Force (PLAGF). Since then it has undergone rapid modernisation. The 300,000 strong PLAN is organized into three major fleets: the North Sea Fleet headquartered at Qingdao, the East Sea Fleet headquartered at Ningbo, and the South Sea Fleet headquartered in Zhanjiang. Each fleet consists of a number of surface ship, submarine, naval air force, coastal defence, and marine units.

The navy includes a 25,000 strong Marine Corps (organised into seven brigades), a 26,000 strong Naval Aviation Force operating several hundred attack helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. As part of its overall programme of naval modernisation, the PLAN is in the stage of developing a blue water navy. In November 2012, then Party General Secretary Hu Jintao reported to the CCP&#x27;s 18th National Congress his desire to &quot;enhance our capacity for exploiting marine resource and build China into a strong maritime power&quot;. According to the United States Department of Defense, the PLAN has numerically the largest navy in the world. The PLAN is led by Commander Dong Jun and Political Commissar Yuan Huazhi.

==== Air Force ====

The 395,000 strong People&#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) was organized into five Theatre Command Air Forces (TCAF) and 24 air divisions. , the system has been changed into 11 Corps Deputy-grade &quot;Bases&quot; controlling air brigades. Divisions have been mostly converted to brigades, although some (specifically the Bomber divisions, and some of the special mission units) remain operational as divisions. The largest operational units within the Aviation Corps is the air division, which has 2 to 3 aviation regiments, each with 20 to 36 aircraft. An Air Brigade has from 24 to 50 aircraft.

The surface-to-air missile (SAM) Corps is organized into SAM divisions and brigades. There are also three airborne divisions manned by the PLAAF. J-XX and XXJ are names applied by Western intelligence agencies to describe programs by the People&#x27;s Republic of China to develop one or more fifth-generation fighter aircraft. The PLAAF is led by Commander Chang Dingqiu and Political Commissar Guo Puxiao.

==== Rocket Force ====

The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Rocket Force (PLARF) is the main strategic missile force of the PLA and consists of at least 120,000 personnel. It controls China&#x27;s nuclear and conventional strategic missiles. China&#x27;s total nuclear arsenal size is estimated to be between 100 and 400 thermonuclear warheads. The PLARF is organized into bases sequentially numbered from 61 through 67, wherein the first six are operational and allocated to the nation&#x27;s theatre commands while Base 67 serves as the PRC&#x27;s central nuclear weapons storage facility. The PLARF is led by Command Li Yuchao and Political Commissar Xu Zhongbo.

=== Arms ===
The PLA maintains four arms (): the Aerospace Force, the Cyberspace Force, the Information Support Force, and the Joint Logistics Support Force. The four-arm system was established on 19 April 2024.

== Personnel ==
=== Recruitment and terms of service ===
The PLA began as an all-volunteer force. In 1955, as part of an effort to modernize the PLA, the first &quot;Military Service Law&quot; created a system of compulsory military service. Since the late 1970s, the PLA has been a hybrid force that combines conscripts and volunteers. Conscripts who fulfilled their service obligation can stay in the military as volunteer soldiers for a total of 16 years. De jure, military service with the PLA is obligatory for all Chinese citizens. However, mandatory military service has not been enacted in China since 1949.

===Women and ethnic minorities===

Women participated extensively in unconventional warfare, including in combat positions, in the Chinese Red Army during the revolutionary period, Chinese Civil War (1927–1949) and the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945). After the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, along with the People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA)&#x27;s transition toward the conventional military organization, the role of women in the armed forces gradually reduced to support, medical, and logistics roles. It was considered a prestigious choice for women to join the military. Serving in the military opens up opportunities for education, training, higher status, and relocation to cities after completing the service. During the Cultural Revolution, military service was regarded as a privilege and a method to avoid political campaign and coresion.

In the 1980s, the PLA underwent large-scale demobilization amid the Chinese economic reform, and women were discharged back to civilian society for economic development while the exclusion of women in the military expanded. In the 1990s, the PLA revived the recruitment of female personnel in regular military formations but primarily focused on non-combat roles at specialized positions. Most women were trained in areas such as academic/engineering, medics, communications, intelligence, cultural work, and administrative work, as these positions conform to the traditional gender roles. Women in the PLA were more likely to be cadets and officers instead of enlisted soldiers because of their specializations. The military organization still preserved some female combat units as public exemplars of social equality.

Both enlisted and cadet women personnel underwent the same basic training as their male counterparts in the PLA, but many of them serve in predominantly female organizations. Due to ideological reasons, the regulation governing the segregation of sex in the PLA is prohibited, but a quasi-segregated arrangement for women&#x27;s organizations is still applied through considerations of convenience. Women were likelier to hold commanding positions in female-heavy organizations such as medical, logistic, research, and political work units, but sometimes in combat units during peacetime. In PLAAF, women traditionally pilot transport aircraft or serve as crew members. There had been a small number of high-ranking female officials in the PLA since 1949, but the advancement of position had remained relatively uncommon. In the 2010s, women were increasingly serving in combat roles, in mixed-gender organizations alongside their male counterparts, and to the same physical standard.

The military actively promotes opportunities for women in the military, such as celebrating International Women&#x27;s Day for the members of the armed forces, publicizing the number of firsts for female officers and enlisted personnel, including deployments with peacekeeping forces or serving on PLA Navy&#x27;s first aircraft carrier, announcing female military achievements in state media, and promoting female special forces through news reports or popular media. PLA does not publish detailed gender composition of its armed forces, but the Jamestown Foundation estimated approximately 5% of the active military force in China is female.

National unity and territorial integrity are central themes of the Chinese Communist Revolution. The Chinese Red Army and the succeeding PLA actively recruited ethnic minorities. During the Chinese Civil War, Mongol cavalry units were formed. During the Korean War, as many as 50,000 ethnic Koreans in China volunteered to join the PLA. PLA&#x27;s recruitment of minorities generally correlates to state policies. During the early years, minorities were given preferential treatment, with special attention given to recruitment and training. In the 1950s, ethnic Mongols accounted for 52% of all officers in Inner Mongolia military region. During the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution, armed forces emphasized &quot;socialist culture&quot;, assimilation policies, and the construction of common identities between soldiers of different ethnicities.

For ethnic minority cadets and officials, overall development follows national policies. Typically, minority officers hold officer positions in their home regions. Examples included over 34% of the battalion and regimental cadres in Yi autonomous region militia were of the Yi ethnicity, and 45% of the militia cadres in Tibetan local militia were of Tibetan ethnicity. Ethnical minorities achieved high-ranking positions in the PLA, and the percentage of appointments appears to follow the ratio of the Chinese population composition. Prominent figures included ethnic Mongol general Ulanhu, who served in high-ranking roles in the Inner Mongolian region and as vice president of China, and ethnic Uyghur Saifuddin Azizi, a Lieutenant General who served in the CCP Central Committee. There were a few instances of ethnic distrust within the PLA, with one prominent example being the defection of Margub Iskhakov, an ethnic Muslim Tatar PLA general, to the Soviet Union in the 1960s. However, his defection largely contributed to his disillusion with the failed Great Leap Forward policies, instead of his ethnic background. In modern times, ethnic representation is most visible among junior-ranking officers. Only a few minorities reach the highest-ranking positions.

===Rank structure ===
====Officers====
====Other ranks====
== Weapons and equipment ==
According to the United States Department of Defense, China is developing kinetic-energy weapons, high-powered lasers, high-powered microwave weapons, particle-beam weapons, and electromagnetic pulse weapons with its increase of military fundings.

The PLA has said of reports that its modernisation is dependent on sales of advanced technology from American allies, senior leadership have stated &quot;Some have politicized China&#x27;s normal commercial cooperation with foreign countries, damaging our reputation.&quot; These contributions include advanced European diesel engines for Chinese warships, military helicopter designs from Eurocopter, French anti-submarine sonars and helicopters, Australian technology for the Houbei class missile boat, and Israeli supplied American missile, laser and aircraft technology.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute&#x27;s data, China became the world&#x27;s third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–14, an increase of 143 percent from the period 2005–2009. SIPRI also calculated that China surpassed Russia to become the world&#x27;s second largest arms exporter by 2020.

China&#x27;s share of global arms exports hence increased from 3 to 5 percent. China supplied major arms to 35 states in 2010–14. A significant percentage (just over 68 percent) of Chinese exports went to three countries: Pakistan, Bangladesh and Myanmar. China also exported major arms to 18 African states. Examples of China&#x27;s increasing global presence as an arms supplier in 2010–14 included deals with Venezuela for armoured vehicles and transport and trainer aircraft, with Algeria for three frigates, with Indonesia for the supply of hundreds of anti-ship missiles and with Nigeria for the supply of several unmanned combat aerial vehicles.

Following rapid advances in its arms industry, China has become less dependent on arms imports, which decreased by 42 percent between 2005–09 and 2010–14. Russia accounted for 61 percent of Chinese arms imports, followed by France with 16 percent and Ukraine with 13 per cent. Helicopters formed a major part of Russian and French deliveries, with the French designs produced under licence in China.

Over the years, China has struggled to design and produce effective engines for combat and transport vehicles. It continued to import large numbers of engines from Russia and Ukraine in 2010–14 for indigenously designed combat, advanced trainer and transport aircraft, and naval ships. It also produced British-, French- and German-designed engines for combat aircraft, naval ships and armoured vehicles, mostly as part of agreements that have been in place for decades.

In August 2021, China tested a nuclear-capable hypersonic missile that circled the globe before speeding towards its target. The &quot;Financial Times&quot; reported that &quot;the test showed that China had made astounding progress on hypersonic weapons and was far more advanced than U.S. officials realized.&quot; During the Exercise Zapad-81 in 2021 with Russian forces, most of the gear were novel Chinese arms such as the KJ-500 airborne early warning and control aircraft, J-20 and J-16 fighters, Y-20 transport planes, and surveillance and combat drones. Another joint forces exercise took place in August 2023 near Alaska.

On 24 September 2024, the PLARF performed its first intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) test over the Pacific Ocean since the early 1980s.

=== Cyberwarfare ===
There is a belief in the Western military doctrines that the PLA have already begun engaging countries using cyber-warfare. There has been a significant increase in the number of presumed Chinese military initiated cyber events from 1999 to the present day.

Cyberwarfare has gained recognition as a valuable technique because it is an asymmetric technique that is a part of information operations and information warfare. As is written by two PLAGF Colonels, Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui in the book &quot;Unrestricted Warfare&quot;, &quot;Methods that are not characterized by the use of the force of arms, nor by the use of military power, nor even by the presence of casualties and bloodshed, are just as likely to facilitate the successful realization of the war&#x27;s goals, if not more so.

While China has long been suspected of cyber spying, on 24 May 2011 the PLA announced the existence of having &#x27;cyber capabilities&#x27;.

In February 2013, the media named &quot;Comment Crew&quot; as a hacker military faction for China&#x27;s People&#x27;s Liberation Army. In May 2014, a Federal Grand Jury in the United States indicted five Unit 61398 officers on criminal charges related to cyber attacks on private companies based in the United States after alleged investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation who exposed their identities in collaboration with US intelligence agencies such as the CIA.

In February 2020, the United States government indicted members of China&#x27;s People&#x27;s Liberation Army for the 2017 Equifax data breach, which involved hacking into Equifax and plundering sensitive data as part of a massive heist that also included stealing trade secrets, though the CCP denied these claims.

=== Nuclear capabilities ===


The first of China&#x27;s nuclear weapons tests took place in 1964, and its first hydrogen bomb test occurred in 1967 at Lop Nur. Tests continued until 1996, when the country signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), but did not ratify it.

The number of nuclear warheads in China&#x27;s arsenal remains a state secret. There are varying estimates of the size of China&#x27;s arsenal. The &quot;Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists&quot; and Federation of American Scientists estimated in 2024 that China has a stockpile of approximately 438 nuclear warheads, while the United States Department of Defense put the estimate at more than 500 operational nuclear warheads, making it the third-largest in the world.

China&#x27;s policy has traditionally been one of no first use while maintaining a deterrent retaliatory force targeted for countervalue targets. According to a 2023 study by the National Defense University, China&#x27;s nuclear doctrine has historically leaned toward maintaining a secure second-strike capability.

=== Space ===

Having witnessed the crucial role of space to United States military success in the Gulf War, China continues to view space as a critical domain in both conflict and international strategic competition. The PLA operates a various satellite constellations performing reconnaissance, navigation, communication, and counterspace functions. Planners at PLA&#x27;s National Defense University project China&#x27;s space actions as retaliatory or preventative, following conditions like an attack on a Chinese satellite, an attack on China, or the interruption of a PLA amphibious landing. According to this approach, PLA planners assume that the country must have the capacity for retaliation and second-strike capability against a powerful opponent. PLA planners envision a limited space war and therefore seek to identify weak but critical nodes in other space systems.

Significant components of the PLA&#x27;s space-based reconnaissance include Jianbing (vanguard) satellites with cover names Yaogan () and Gaofen (). These satellites collect electro-optical (EO) imagery to collect a literal representation of a target, synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery to penetrate the cloudy climates of southern China, and electronic intelligence (ELINT) to provide targeting intelligence on adversarial ships. The PLA also leverages a restricted, high-performance service of the country&#x27;s BeiDou positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) satellites for its forces and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) platforms. For secure communications, the PLA uses the Zhongxing and Fenghuo series of satellites which enable secure data and voice transmission over C-band, Ku-band, and UHF. PLA deployment of anti-satellite and counterspace satellites including those of the Shijian and Shiyan series have also brought significant concern from western nations.

The PLA also plays a significant role in the Chinese space program. To date, all the participants have been selected from members of the PLA Air Force. China became the third country in the world to have sent a man into space by its own means with the flight of Yang Liwei aboard the Shenzhou 5 spacecraft on 15 October 2003, the flight of Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng aboard Shenzhou 6 on 12 October 2005, and Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming, and Jing Haipeng aboard Shenzhou 7 on 25 September 2008.

The PLA started the development of an anti-ballistic and anti-satellite system in the 1960s, code named Project 640, including ground-based lasers and anti-satellite missiles. On 11 January 2007, China conducted a successful test of an anti-satellite missile, with an SC-19 class KKV.

The PLA has tested two types of hypersonic space vehicles, the Shenglong Spaceplane and a new one built by Chengdu Aircraft Corporation. Only a few pictures have appeared since it was revealed in late 2007. Earlier, images of the High-enthalpy Shock Waves Laboratory wind tunnel of the CAS Key Laboratory of high-temperature gas dynamics (LHD) were published in the Chinese media. Tests with speeds up to Mach 20 were reached around 2001.

== Budget ==
China&#x27;s official military budget for 2024 was at 1.67 trillion yuan (US$231 billion), which is an increase of 7.2% over the last year. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) estimated that China&#x27;s military expenditure was US$296 billion in 2023, the second-largest in the world after the United States and accounting for 12 percent of the world&#x27;s defence expenditures.
== Symbols ==

=== Anthem ===
The March of the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army was adopted as the military anthem by the Central Military Commission on 25 July 1988. The lyrics of the anthem were written by composer Gong Mu (real name: Zhang Yongnian; Chinese: 张永年) and the music was composed by Korea-born Chinese composer Zheng Lücheng.

=== Flag and insignia ===

The PLA&#x27;s insignia consists of a roundel with a red star bearing the two Chinese characters &quot;&quot;(literally &quot;eight-one&quot;), referring to the Nanchang uprising which began on 1 August 1927 (first day of the eighth month) and symbolic as the CCP&#x27;s founding of the PLA. The inclusion of the two characters (&quot;) is symbolic of the party&#x27;s revolutionary history carrying strong emotional connotations of the political power which it shed blood to obtain. The flag of the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army is the war flag of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army; the layout of the flag has a golden star at the top left corner and &quot; to the right of the star, placed on a red field. Each service branch also has its flags: The top of the flags is the same as the PLA flag; the bottom are occupied by the colors of the branches.

The flag of the Ground Forces has a forest green bar at the bottom. The naval ensign has stripes of blue and white at the bottom. The Air Force uses a sky blue bar. The Rocket Force uses a yellow bar at the bottom. The forest green represents the earth, the blue and white stripes represent the seas, the sky blue represents the air and the yellow represents the flare of missile launching.

== See also ==

* Outline of the Chinese Civil War
* Outline of the military history of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Republic of China Armed Forces

== References ==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==

=== History ===
* 
* 

=== Present-day ===

* (China Military Power Report, Annual Report to Congress)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="4" end="33" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="35" end="38" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="PLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="63" end="86" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="101" end="132" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="160" end="168" title="Military branch" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="169" end="181" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="183" end="187" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="189" end="198" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364097" start="204" end="216" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Rocket Force" label="Rocket Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416251" start="231" end="246" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Aerospace Force" label="Aerospace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537209" start="248" end="264" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Cyberspace Force" label="Cyberspace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125524285" start="266" end="291" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Information Support Force" label="Information Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412977" start="297" end="326" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Joint Logistics Support Force" label="Joint Logistics Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="345" end="372" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="388" end="396" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047378" start="400" end="418" title="Supreme Military Command of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="462" end="476" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republican era"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="507" end="534" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="548" end="558" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q476634" start="600" end="608" title="Nanchang Uprising" label="uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="621" end="643" title="nationalist government" label="nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="651" end="667" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Chinese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="720" end="735" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="740" end="757" title="Eighth Route Army" label="Eighth Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="769" end="793" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440398" start="1067" end="1093" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="1135" end="1166" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684774" start="1585" end="1604" title="Civilian control of the military in communist states" label="maintaining control"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="1840" end="1861" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="1960" end="1988" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332463" start="2044" end="2072" title="Ministry of National Defense of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663913" start="2295" end="2311" title="Theater commands of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="theatre commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="2349" end="2388" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="the world&amp;#x27;s largest military force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135239" start="2420" end="2434" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Reserve Force" label="reserve forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="2569" end="2620" title="List of countries with highest military expenditures" label="12 percent of the world&amp;#x27;s defence expenditures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="2797" end="2813" title="power projection" label="power projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456192" start="2992" end="3021" title="Territorial disputes of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="maritime territorial disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172005" start="3133" end="3150" title="China Coast Guard" label="China Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684774" start="3328" end="3347" title="Civilian control of the military in communist states" label="maintaining control"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="3387" end="3403" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="3404" end="3413" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="3699" end="3710" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401427" start="3752" end="3766" title="active defense" label="active defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="3792" end="3803" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q476634" start="4007" end="4024" title="Nanchang uprising" label="Nanchang uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="4040" end="4057" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="4085" end="4112" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q22513" start="4146" end="4152" title="Zhu De" label="Zhu De"/>
<link wikidata="Q700713" start="4154" end="4161" title="He Long" label="He Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q504372" start="4163" end="4174" title="Ye Jianying" label="Ye Jianying"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="4176" end="4186" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="4222" end="4232" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="4250" end="4267" title="Shanghai massacre" label="Shanghai massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="4305" end="4354" title="Chinese Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Red Army" label="Chinese Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="4457" end="4472" title="Chiang Kai-Shek" label="Chiang Kai-Shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="4503" end="4513" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4527" end="4551" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="4672" end="4689" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="4718" end="4735" title="Eighth Route Army" label="Eighth Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="4744" end="4759" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="4824" end="4841" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="5033" end="5051" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5420" end="5451" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="5535" end="5544" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="5600" end="5604" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28698515" start="6684" end="6698" title="Foreign policy of China" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488945" start="7201" end="7229" title="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="7248" end="7258" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="7298" end="7315" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="7331" end="7341" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="7456" end="7461" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q483102" start="7529" end="7542" title="38th parallel north" label="38th Parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="7661" end="7676" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222426" start="7681" end="7715" title="Nathu La and Cho La clashes" label="a series of border clashes in 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="7802" end="7821" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q835115" start="7952" end="7961" title="Xu Shiyou" label="Xu Shiyou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077971" start="7969" end="7992" title="Nanjing Military Region" label="Nanjing Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926859" start="8004" end="8014" title="Yang Dezhi" label="Yang Dezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077976" start="8022" end="8043" title="Jinan Military Region" label="Jinan Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q710115" start="8055" end="8066" title="Chen Xilian" label="Chen Xilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197000" start="8074" end="8098" title="Shenyang Military Region" label="Shenyang Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646706" start="8114" end="8125" title="Han Xianchu" label="Han Xianchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q636187" start="8405" end="8424" title="Four Modernizations" label="Four Modernizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="8466" end="8479" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q451987" start="8640" end="8651" title="military recruitment" label="recruitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="8666" end="8674" title="military strategy" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351849" start="8680" end="8702" title="military education and training" label="education and training"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="8728" end="8735" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="8766" end="8785" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Sino-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="8907" end="8924" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="9467" end="9497" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="9516" end="9532" title="Afghan mujahidin" label="Afghan mujahidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10905479" start="10172" end="10204" title="North China Military Exercise" label="military exercise in North China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="10739" end="10759" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="10817" end="10828" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="10840" end="10849" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="11308" end="11318" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165608" start="11404" end="11426" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army at the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="PLA&amp;#x27;s suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="11434" end="11477" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12157" end="12163" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="12242" end="12257" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="12297" end="12345" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="13405" end="13413" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q705373" start="13616" end="13642" title="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="13947" end="13973" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="13985" end="13995" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="14001" end="14029" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="2001 invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="14035" end="14056" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="14066" end="14082" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)" label="Iraqi insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q690689" start="14242" end="14272" title="revolution in military affairs" label="revolution in military affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889134" start="14344" end="14378" title="Modernization of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="modernize the Chinese armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="14756" end="14770" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190578" start="14907" end="14920" title="space warfare" label="space warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="14925" end="14938" title="cyber-warfare" label="cyber-warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063228" start="15449" end="15476" title="Sovremenny-class destroyer" label="Sovremenny class destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q173680" start="15478" end="15490" title="Sukhoi Su-27" label="Sukhoi Su-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q204331" start="15495" end="15507" title="Sukhoi Su-30" label="Sukhoi Su-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="15522" end="15532" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Kilo-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492255" start="15653" end="15662" title="Type 052D destroyer" label="Type 052D"/>
<link wikidata="Q635779" start="15744" end="15756" title="Chengdu J-10" label="Chengdu J-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q560319" start="15805" end="15817" title="Chengdu J-20" label="Chengdu J-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203377" start="15844" end="15853" title="Type 094 submarine" label="Jin class"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="16153" end="16173" title="Western African Ebola virus epidemic" label="Ebola virus outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079073" start="16325" end="16368" title="2015 People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China military reform" label="re-organized its military from 2015 to 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566824" start="16684" end="16692" title="Northern Theater Command" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22442974" start="16694" end="16702" title="Southern Theater Command" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566825" start="16704" end="16711" title="Western Theater Command" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566826" start="16713" end="16720" title="Eastern Theater Command" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566822" start="16726" end="16733" title="Central Theater Command" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970809" start="17111" end="17132" title="Zhurihe Training Base" label="Zhurihe Training Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566824" start="17140" end="17164" title="Northern Theater Command" label="Northern Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="17231" end="17238" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="17325" end="17356" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693574" start="17501" end="17525" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Support Base in Djibouti" label="Support Base in Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646468" start="17571" end="17588" title="listening station" label="listening station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20014921" start="17602" end="17624" title="Espacio Lejano Station" label="Espacio Lejano Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064236" start="17745" end="17760" title="Ream Naval Base" label="Ream Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440398" start="18012" end="18038" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="18100" end="18107" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="18113" end="18134" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="18136" end="18141" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="18143" end="18154" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="18156" end="18161" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946372" start="18182" end="18186" title="Mali War" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q670434" start="18191" end="18202" title="United Nations Mission in South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="18238" end="18255" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="18269" end="18293" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202301" start="18302" end="18318" title="Amethyst incident" label="Yangtze incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851547" start="18373" end="18439" title="Incorporation of Xinjiang into the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Incorporation of Xinjiang into the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557549" start="18448" end="18506" title="Annexation of Tibet by the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Annexation of Tibet by the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="18520" end="18530" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q488945" start="18563" end="18591" title="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421268" start="18605" end="18631" title="First Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="First Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="18645" end="18656" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q700442" start="18665" end="18692" title="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="18696" end="18702" title="Quemoy" label="Quemoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q609255" start="18707" end="18712" title="Matsu (islands)" label="Matsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="18721" end="18736" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222426" start="18745" end="18762" title="Nathu La and Cho La clashes" label="Border skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q244932" start="18782" end="18809" title="Sino-Soviet border conflict" label="Sino-Soviet border conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q784397" start="18818" end="18847" title="Battle of the Paracel Islands" label="Battle of the Paracel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="18853" end="18866" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="18875" end="18894" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Sino-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741182" start="18908" end="18933" title="Sino-Vietnamese conflicts (1979–1991)" label="Sino-Vietnamese conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q175767" start="18942" end="18969" title="Johnson South Reef Skirmish" label="Johnson South Reef Skirmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165608" start="18991" end="19028" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army at the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Enforcement of martial law in Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="19040" end="19083" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860423" start="19092" end="19106" title="Barin uprising" label="Barin uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q705373" start="19120" end="19146" title="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="19163" end="19169" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="19197" end="19204" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="19221" end="19243" title="Piracy in Somalia" label="Anti-piracy operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="19251" end="19263" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908324" start="19302" end="19330" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="19339" end="19341" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946372" start="19369" end="19373" title="Mali War" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q670434" start="19382" end="19388" title="UNMISS" label="UNMISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="19416" end="19427" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93879586" start="19441" end="19463" title="2020–2021 China–India skirmishes" label="China–India skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628467" start="19707" end="19714" title="Militia (China)" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239769" start="19787" end="19824" title="Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun" label="the Party must always control the gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="19889" end="19920" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q113663125" start="20090" end="20126" title="14th National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="14th National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863788" start="20347" end="20377" title="one institution with two names" label="one institution with two names"/>
<link wikidata="Q183482" start="20665" end="20688" title="National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Party National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="20833" end="20841" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22098497" start="20843" end="20860" title="Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission" label="vice chairpersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="20980" end="20996" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="21070" end="21091" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332463" start="21124" end="21152" title="Ministry of National Defense (China)" label="Ministry of National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q10297096" start="21161" end="21169" title="Minister of National Defense (China)" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="21369" end="21379" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="21386" end="21403" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="21405" end="21414" title="President of China" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="21419" end="21437" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q705140" start="21491" end="21503" title="Zhang Youxia" label="Zhang Youxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28409057" start="21515" end="21525" title="He Weidong" label="He Weidong"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075564" start="21552" end="21574" title="Joint Staff Department (China)" label="Joint Staff Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897586" start="21591" end="21601" title="Liu Zhenli (general)" label="Liu Zhenli"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094667" start="21620" end="21645" title="Political Work Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Political Work Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317097" start="21656" end="21664" title="Miao Hua" label="Miao Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873175" start="21684" end="21720" title="Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission" label="Commission for Discipline Inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825604" start="21731" end="21745" title="Zhang Shengmin" label="Zhang Shengmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079073" start="21951" end="21967" title="2015 People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China military reform" label="military reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651372" start="22072" end="22086" title="General Office of the Central Military Commission" label="General Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075564" start="22089" end="22111" title="Joint Staff Department (China)" label="Joint Staff Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094667" start="22114" end="22139" title="Political Work Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Political Work Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094671" start="22142" end="22169" title="Logistic Support Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Logistic Support Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094673" start="22172" end="22204" title="Equipment Development Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Equipment Development Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651310" start="22207" end="22245" title="Training and Administration Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Training and Administration Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094677" start="22248" end="22288" title="National Defense Mobilization Department of the Central Military Commission" label="National Defense Mobilization Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873175" start="22291" end="22323" title="Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission" label="Discipline Inspection Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651625" start="22326" end="22363" title="Political and Legal Affairs Commission of the Central Military Commission" label="Politics and Legal Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651325" start="22366" end="22399" title="Science and Technology Commission of the Central Military Commission" label="Science and Technology Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872984" start="22402" end="22431" title="Office for Strategic Planning of the Central Military Commission" label="Office for Strategic Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094679" start="22434" end="22480" title="Office for Reform and Organizational Structure" label="Office for Reform and Organizational Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651312" start="22483" end="22528" title="Office for International Military Cooperation of the Central Military Commission" label="Office for International Military Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651305" start="22531" end="22543" title="Audit Office of the Central Military Commission" label="Audit Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094687" start="22546" end="22579" title="Agency for Offices Administration of the Central Military Commission" label="Agency for Offices Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924561" start="22861" end="22873" title="Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="22922" end="22941" title="political commissar" label="political commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q574619" start="23735" end="23752" title="List of political parties in China" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071253" start="23790" end="23821" title="Communist Youth League of China" label="Communist Youth League of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="24025" end="24042" title="command hierarchy" label="command hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124770" start="24239" end="24263" title="Civil–military relations" label="Civil–military relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163854" start="25041" end="25045" title="Ranks of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663913" start="25733" end="25749" title="Theater command (China)" label="theatre commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="25854" end="25862" title="Military strategy" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q149377" start="25864" end="25869" title="Military operation plan" label="plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="25871" end="25878" title="Military tactics" label="tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667082" start="25884" end="25890" title="Military policy" label="policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788676" start="25918" end="25940" title="area of responsibility" label="area of responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566826" start="26207" end="26230" title="Eastern Theater Command" label="Eastern Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q22442974" start="26233" end="26257" title="Southern Theater Command" label="Southern Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566825" start="26260" end="26283" title="Western Theater Command" label="Western Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566824" start="26286" end="26310" title="Northern Theater Command" label="Northern Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566822" start="26313" end="26336" title="Central Theater Command" label="Central Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210895" start="26527" end="26550" title="Tibet Military District" label="Tibet Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q125855376" start="26556" end="26582" title="Xinjiang Military District" label="Xinjiang Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628467" start="27400" end="27426" title="Militia (China)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q987846" start="27702" end="27737" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147859" start="27848" end="27875" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army National Defense University" label="National Defense University"/>
<link wikidata="Q831227" start="27884" end="27925" title="National University of Defense Technology" label="National University of Defense Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="28198" end="28206" title="Military branch" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="28208" end="28220" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="28222" end="28226" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="28228" end="28237" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364097" start="28243" end="28255" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Rocket Force" label="Rocket Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416251" start="28272" end="28287" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Aerospace Force" label="Aerospace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537209" start="28289" end="28305" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Cyberspace Force" label="Cyberspace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125524285" start="28307" end="28332" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Information Support Force" label="Information Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412977" start="28338" end="28367" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Joint Logistics Support Force" label="Joint Logistics Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456192" start="28964" end="28984" title="Territorial disputes of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="disputed territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="29006" end="29021" title="Territorial disputes in the South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548795" start="29334" end="29349" title="71st Group Army" label="71st Group Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640488" start="29357" end="29372" title="83rd Group Army" label="83rd Group Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144991" start="29520" end="29527" title="Military reserve force" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="29532" end="29544" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135239" start="29616" end="29623" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Reserve Force" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897586" start="29787" end="29797" title="Liu Zhenli (general)" label="Liu Zhenli"/>
<link wikidata="Q56570188" start="29822" end="29833" title="Qin Shutong" label="Qin Shutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="29931" end="29947" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="PLA Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="30072" end="30087" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="30105" end="30112" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q838163" start="30118" end="30132" title="East Sea Fleet" label="East Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="30150" end="30156" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587645" start="30166" end="30181" title="South Sea Fleet" label="South Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q59144" start="30199" end="30208" title="Zhanjiang" label="Zhanjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="30245" end="30257" title="surface ship" label="surface ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="30259" end="30268" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="30270" end="30285" title="naval air force" label="naval air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="30287" end="30302" title="coastal defence and fortification" label="coastal defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="30308" end="30314" title="marine (military)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061382" start="30357" end="30369" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873008" start="30419" end="30439" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Naval Air Force" label="Naval Aviation Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="30608" end="30623" title="blue water navy" label="blue water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q137566" start="30709" end="30731" title="18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="18th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="30887" end="30908" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995154" start="30995" end="31003" title="Dong Jun" label="Dong Jun"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995511" start="31028" end="31039" title="Yuan Huazhi" label="Yuan Huazhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="31248" end="31266" title="Grades of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Corps Deputy-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="31731" end="31740" title="division (military)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="31745" end="31752" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550926" start="31785" end="31794" title="15th Airborne Corps" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719436" start="31816" end="31820" title="J-XX" label="J-XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q560406" start="31963" end="31979" title="Fifth generation jet fighter" label="fifth-generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="31980" end="31996" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834532" start="32028" end="32041" title="Chang Dingqiu" label="Chang Dingqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q104381961" start="32066" end="32076" title="Guo Puxiao" label="Guo Puxiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="32274" end="32281" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="32299" end="32316" title="strategic missile" label="strategic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="32635" end="32649" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q97929129" start="32697" end="32706" title="Li Yuchao" label="Li Yuchao"/>
<link wikidata="Q108395947" start="32731" end="32741" title="Xu Zhongbo" label="Xu Zhongbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416251" start="32793" end="32808" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Aerospace Force" label="Aerospace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537209" start="32814" end="32830" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Cyberspace Force" label="Cyberspace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q125524285" start="32836" end="32861" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Information Support Force" label="Information Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412977" start="32871" end="32900" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Joint Logistics Support Force" label="Joint Logistics Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="33181" end="33197" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="33416" end="33423" title="De jure" label="De jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342628" start="33643" end="33665" title="unconventional warfare" label="unconventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="33705" end="33721" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Chinese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="33733" end="33753" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="revolutionary period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054413" start="34421" end="34452" title="Down to the Countryside Movement" label="political campaign and coresion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="34523" end="34546" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="34756" end="34774" title="military formation" label="military formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201260" start="34907" end="34913" title="Combat medic" label="medics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736535" start="34915" end="34929" title="Military communications" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="35335" end="35349" title="Military recruit training" label="basic training"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="35436" end="35449" title="Military organization" label="organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="36354" end="36384" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090146" start="36809" end="36829" title="Jamestown Foundation" label="Jamestown Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="37067" end="37084" title="Ethnic minorities in China" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="37515" end="37529" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="37558" end="37576" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q461282" start="37999" end="38001" title="Yi people" label="Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q716083" start="38351" end="38357" title="Ulanhu" label="Ulanhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="38465" end="38471" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272963" start="38472" end="38487" title="Saifuddin Azizi" label="Saifuddin Azizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="38491" end="38509" title="Lieutenant General" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="38528" end="38549" title="CCP Central Committee" label="CCP Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8330550" start="38663" end="38678" title="Margub Iskhakov" label="Margub Iskhakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="38690" end="38696" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="38697" end="38702" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="38723" end="38735" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="39141" end="39176" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="39256" end="39272" title="microwave" label="microwave weapon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39275" end="39295" title="Particle beam#Military" label="particle-beam weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="39302" end="39323" title="electromagnetic pulse" label="electromagnetic pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316407" start="39851" end="39876" title="Houbei class missile boat" label="Houbei class missile boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="39966" end="40014" title="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute" label="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523908" start="41851" end="41869" title="Hypersonic flight" label="hypersonic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042315" start="42132" end="42149" title="Exercise Zapad-81" label="Exercise Zapad-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q48839642" start="42232" end="42282" title="Shaanxi KJ-500" label="KJ-500 airborne early warning and control aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q560319" start="42284" end="42288" title="Chengdu J-20" label="J-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482884" start="42293" end="42306" title="Shenyang J-16" label="J-16 fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654128" start="42308" end="42329" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Y-20" label="Y-20 transport planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100492" start="42979" end="43025" title="Chinese information operations and information warfare" label="information operations and information warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267664" start="43064" end="43074" title="Qiao Liang (writer)" label="Qiao Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967678" start="43079" end="43092" title="Wang Xiangsui" label="Wang Xiangsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757421" start="43111" end="43131" title="Unrestricted Warfare" label="Unrestricted Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039245" start="43442" end="43454" title="cyber spying" label="cyber spying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="43705" end="43715" title="Grand Jury" label="Grand Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942294" start="43751" end="43761" title="PLA Unit 61398" label="Unit 61398"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="43900" end="43931" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85730212" start="44144" end="44168" title="2017 Equifax data breach" label="2017 Equifax data breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11363285" start="44387" end="44421" title="List of nuclear weapons tests of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s nuclear weapons tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329367" start="44450" end="44474" title="Test No. 6" label="first hydrogen bomb test"/>
<link wikidata="Q319412" start="44495" end="44502" title="Lop Nur" label="Lop Nur"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="44560" end="44597" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004412" start="44784" end="44817" title="Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists" label="Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="44828" end="44861" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="44956" end="44991" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45070" end="45083" title="List of countries with nuclear weapons#Estimated worldwide nuclear stockpiles" label="third-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520989" start="45149" end="45161" title="no first use" label="no first use"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177048" start="45223" end="45235" title="countervalue" label="countervalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967074" start="45278" end="45305" title="National Defense University" label="National Defense University"/>
<link wikidata="Q243760" start="45389" end="45402" title="Second strike" label="second-strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="45515" end="45523" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687934" start="45611" end="45632" title="strategic competition" label="strategic competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="45697" end="45711" title="Reconnaissance satellite" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="45713" end="45723" title="Satellite navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="45725" end="45738" title="Communications satellite" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="45744" end="45756" title="Anti-satellite weapon" label="counterspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="46411" end="46422" title="Front organization" label="cover names"/>
<link wikidata="Q589786" start="46423" end="46429" title="Yaogan" label="Yaogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669407" start="46437" end="46443" title="Gaofen" label="Gaofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027487" start="46473" end="46488" title="Electro-optical sensor" label="electro-optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685924" start="46543" end="46549" title="Targeting (warfare)" label="target"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="46551" end="46575" title="Synthetic-aperture radar" label="synthetic aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="46626" end="46640" title="South China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="46646" end="46669" title="electronic intelligence" label="electronic intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886377" start="46825" end="46860" title="Positioning system" label="positioning, navigation, and timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974529" start="46897" end="46943" title="Intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance" label="intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344775" start="47101" end="47107" title="C band (IEEE)" label="C-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q306639" start="47109" end="47116" title="Ku band" label="Ku-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="47122" end="47125" title="Ultra high frequency" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452851" start="47211" end="47218" title="Shijian" label="Shijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q71227" start="47223" end="47229" title="Shiyan" label="Shiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q162304" start="47343" end="47364" title="Chinese space program" label="Chinese space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q147581" start="47560" end="47570" title="Yang Liwei" label="Yang Liwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q378417" start="47582" end="47592" title="Shenzhou 5" label="Shenzhou 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q344892" start="47638" end="47649" title="Fei Junlong" label="Fei Junlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q472683" start="47654" end="47666" title="Nie Haisheng" label="Nie Haisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q331310" start="47674" end="47684" title="Shenzhou 6" label="Shenzhou 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q197135" start="47709" end="47721" title="Zhai Zhigang" label="Zhai Zhigang"/>
<link wikidata="Q557082" start="47723" end="47733" title="Liu Boming (taikonaut)" label="Liu Boming"/>
<link wikidata="Q461840" start="47739" end="47751" title="Jing Haipeng" label="Jing Haipeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q318646" start="47759" end="47769" title="Shenzhou 7" label="Shenzhou 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q182183" start="48018" end="48022" title="2007 Chinese anti-satellite missile test" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="48029" end="48051" title="anti-satellite missile" label="anti-satellite missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q560441" start="48186" end="48214" title="Chengdu Aircraft Corporation" label="Chengdu Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="48346" end="48357" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="48365" end="48368" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="48676" end="48724" title="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute" label="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="48885" end="48936" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="12 percent of the world&amp;#x27;s defence expenditures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49160" end="49167" title="Gong Mu" label="Gong Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="49196" end="49203" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q625893" start="49268" end="49281" title="Zheng Lücheng" label="Zheng Lücheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="49389" end="49406" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q476634" start="49472" end="49489" title="Nanchang uprising" label="Nanchang uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688960" start="50583" end="50615" title="Outline of the Chinese Civil War" label="Outline of the Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688967" start="50618" end="50688" title="Outline of the military history of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Outline of the military history of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q458428" start="50691" end="50721" title="Republic of China Armed Forces" label="Republic of China Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="50884" end="50892" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66901" wikidata="Q1124258" url="?curid=66901" title="Ehecatl">
<text>Ehecatl ( , ) is a pre-Columbian deity associated with the wind, who features in Aztec mythology and the mythologies of other cultures from the central Mexico region of Mesoamerica. He is most usually interpreted as the aspect of the Feathered Serpent deity (Quetzalcoatl in Aztec and other Nahua cultures) as a god of wind, and is therefore also known as Ehecatl-Quetzalcoatl. Ehecatl also figures prominently as one of the creator gods and culture heroes in the mythical creation accounts documented for pre-Columbian central Mexican cultures.

Since the wind blows in all directions, Ehecatl was associated with all the cardinal directions. His temple was built as a cylinder in order to reduce the air resistance, and was sometimes portrayed with two protruding masks through which the wind blew.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1124258" start="0" end="7" title="Ehecatl" label="Ehecatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="19" end="32" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="59" end="63" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q391184" start="81" end="96" title="Aztec mythology" label="Aztec mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="169" end="180" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736568" start="234" end="251" title="Feathered Serpent (deity)" label="Feathered Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q179818" start="259" end="271" title="Quetzalcoatl" label="Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="275" end="280" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q826591" start="291" end="296" title="Nahua people" label="Nahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124258" start="356" end="376" title="Ehecatl" label="Ehecatl-Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821404" start="473" end="490" title="Mesoamerican creation accounts" label="creation accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718" start="623" end="641" title="cardinal direction" label="cardinal direction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66904" wikidata="Q289241" url="?curid=66904" title="Nixie tube">
<text>A Nixie tube ( ), or cold cathode display, is an electronic device used for displaying numerals or other information using glow discharge.

The glass tube contains a wire-mesh anode and multiple cathodes, shaped like numerals or other symbols. Applying power to one cathode surrounds it with an orange glow discharge. The tube is filled with a gas at low pressure, usually mostly neon and a small amount of argon, in a Penning mixture. In later nixies, in order to extend the usable life of the device, a tiny amount of mercury was added to reduce cathode poisoning and sputtering.

Although it resembles a vacuum tube in appearance, its operation does not depend on thermionic emission of electrons from a hot cathode. It is hence a cold cathode tube (a form of gas-filled tube), and is a variant of the neon lamp. Such tubes rarely exceed even under the most severe of operating conditions in a room at ambient temperature. Vacuum fluorescent displays from the same era use completely different technology—they have a heated cathode together with a control grid and shaped phosphor anodes; Nixies have no heater or control grid, typically a single anode (in the form of a wire mesh, not to be confused with a control grid), and shaped bare metal cathodes.

==History==
Nixie tubes were invented by David Hagelbarger. The early Nixie displays were made by a small vacuum tube manufacturer called Haydu Brothers Laboratories, and introduced in 1955 by Burroughs Corporation, who purchased Haydu. The name &quot;Nixie&quot; was derived by Burroughs from &quot;NIX I&quot;, an abbreviation of &quot;Numeric Indicator eXperimental No. 1&quot;, although this may have been a backronym designed to justify the evocation of the mythical creature with this name. Hundreds of variations of this design were manufactured by many firms, from the 1950s until the 1990s. The Burroughs Corporation introduced &quot;Nixie&quot; and owned the name &quot;Nixie&quot; as a trademark. Nixie-like displays made by other firms had trademarked names including &quot;Digitron&quot;, &quot;Inditron&quot; and &quot;Numicator&quot;. A proper generic term is &quot;cold cathode neon readout tube&quot;, though the phrase &quot;Nixie tube&quot; quickly entered the vernacular as a generic name.

Burroughs even had another Haydu tube that could operate as a digital counter and directly drive a Nixie tube for display. This was called a &quot;Trochotron&quot;, in later form known as the &quot;Beam-X Switch&quot; counter tube; another name was &quot;magnetron beam-switching tube&quot;, referring to their derivation from a split-anode magnetron. Trochotrons were used in the UNIVAC 1101 computer, as well as in clocks and frequency counters.

The first trochotrons were surrounded by a hollow cylindrical magnet, with poles at the ends. The field inside the magnet had essentially-parallel lines of force, parallel to the axis of the tube. It was a thermionic vacuum tube; inside were a central cathode, ten anodes, and ten &quot;spade&quot; electrodes. The magnetic field and voltages applied to the electrodes made the electrons form a thick sheet (as in a cavity magnetron) that went to only one anode. Applying a pulse with specified width and voltages to the spades made the sheet advance to the next anode, where it stayed until the next advance pulse. Count direction was determined by the direction of the magnetic field, and as such was not reversible. A later form of trochotron called a Beam-X Switch replaced the large, heavy external cylindrical magnet with ten small internal metal-alloy rod magnets which also served as electrodes.

Glow-transfer counting tubes, similar in essential function to the trochotrons, had a glow discharge on one of a number of main cathodes, visible through the top of the glass envelope. Most used a neon-based gas mixture and counted in base-10, but faster types were based on argon, hydrogen, or other gases, and for timekeeping and similar applications a few base-12 types were available. Sets of &quot;guide&quot; cathodes (usually two sets, but some types had one or three) between the indicating cathodes moved the glow in steps to the next main cathode. Types with two or three sets of guide cathodes could count in either direction. A well-known trade name for glow-transfer counter tubes in the United Kingdom was Dekatron. Types with connections to each individual indicating cathode, which enabled presetting the tube&#x27;s state to any value (in contrast to simpler types which could only be directly reset to zero or a small subset of their total number of states), were trade named &quot;Selectron&quot; tubes.

At least one device that functioned in the same way as Nixie tubes was patented in the 1930s
. There were a number of relevant patents filed by Northrop and others around the early 1950s, and the first mass-produced display tubes were introduced in 1954 by National Union Co. under the brand name Inditron. However, the construction of the first Inditrons was cruder than that of the later Nixies, lacking the common anode grid, so that the unlit numerals were held at anode voltage to function as the effective anode. Their average lifetime was shorter, and they failed to find many applications due to their complex drive needs.

== Design ==
The most common form of Nixie tube has ten cathodes in the shapes of the numerals 0 to 9 (and occasionally a decimal point or two), but there are also types that show various letters, signs and symbols. Because the numbers and other characters are arranged one behind another, each character appears at a different depth, giving Nixie based displays a distinct appearance. A related device is the pixie tube, which uses a stencil mask with numeral-shaped holes instead of shaped cathodes. Some Russian Nixies, e.g. the ИH-14 (IN-14), used an upside-down digit 2 as the digit 5, presumably to save manufacturing costs.

Each cathode can be made to glow in the characteristic neon red-orange color by applying about 170 volts DC at a few milliamperes between a cathode and the anode. The current limiting is normally implemented as an anode resistor of a few tens of thousands of ohms. Nixies exhibit negative resistance and will maintain their glow at typically 20 V to 30 V below the strike voltage. Some color variation can be observed between types, caused by differences in the gas mixtures used. Longer-life tubes that were manufactured later in the Nixie timeline have mercury added to reduce sputtering resulting in a blue or purple tinge to the emitted light. In some cases, these colors are filtered out by a red or orange filter coating on the glass.

One advantage of the Nixie tube is that its cathodes are typographically designed, shaped for legibility. In most types, they are not placed in numerical sequence from back to front, but arranged so that cathodes in front obscure the lit cathode minimally. One such arrangement is 6 7 5 8 4 3 9 2 0 1 from front (6) to back (1). Russian ИH-12A (IN-12A) and ИH-12B (IN-12B) tubes use the number arrangement 3 8 9 4 0 5 7 2 6 1 from front (3) to back (1), with the 5 being an upside down 2. The ИH-12B tubes feature a bottom far left decimal point between the numbers 8 and 3.

==Applications and lifetime==
Nixies were used as numeric displays in early digital voltmeters, multimeters, frequency counters and many other types of technical equipment. They also appeared in costly digital time displays used in research and military establishments, and in many early electronic desktop calculators, including the first: the Sumlock-Comptometer &quot;ANITA Mk VII&quot; of 1961 and even the first electronic telephone switchboards. Later alphanumeric versions in fourteen-segment display format found use in airport arrival/departure signs and stock ticker displays. Some elevators used Nixies to display floor numbers.

Average longevity of Nixie tubes varied from about 5,000 hours for the earliest types, to as high as 200,000 hours or more for some of the last types to be introduced. There is no formal definition as to what constitutes &quot;end of life&quot; for Nixies, mechanical failure excepted. Some sources suggest that incomplete glow coverage of a glyph (&quot;cathode poisoning&quot;) or appearance of glow elsewhere in the tube would not be acceptable.

Nixie tubes are susceptible to multiple failure modes, including:
* Simple breakage
* Cracks and hermetic seal leaks allowing the atmosphere to enter
* Cathode poisoning preventing part or all of one or more characters from illuminating
* Increased striking voltage causing flicker or failure to light
* Sputtering of electrode metal onto the glass envelope blocking the cathodes from view
* Internal open or short circuits which may be due to physical abuse or sputtering

Driving Nixies outside of their specified electrical parameters will accelerate their demise, especially excess current, which increases sputtering of the electrodes. A few extreme examples of sputtering have even resulted in complete disintegration of Nixie-tube cathodes.

Cathode poisoning can be abated by limiting current through the tubes to significantly below their maximum rating, through the use of Nixie tubes constructed from materials that avoid the effect (e.g. by being free of silicates and aluminum), or by programming devices to periodically cycle through all digits so that seldom-displayed ones get activated.

As testament to their longevity, and that of the equipment which incorporated them, several suppliers still provided common Nixie tube types as replacement parts, new in original packaging. Devices with Nixie-tube displays in excellent working condition are still plentiful, though many have been in use for 30 to 40 years or more. Such items can easily be found as surplus and obtained at very little expense. In the former Soviet Union, Nixies were still being manufactured in volume in the 1980s, so Russian and Eastern European Nixies are still available.

== Alternatives and successors ==
Other numeric-display technologies include light pipes, rear-projection and edge-lit lightguide displays (all using individual incandescent or neon light bulbs for illumination), Numitron incandescent filament readouts, Panaplex seven-segment displays, and vacuum fluorescent display tubes. Before Nixie tubes became prominent, most numeric displays were electromechanical, using stepping mechanisms to display digits either directly by use of cylinders bearing printed numerals attached to their rotors, or indirectly by wiring the outputs of stepping switches to indicator bulbs. Later, a few vintage clocks even used a form of stepping switch to drive Nixie tubes.

Nixie tubes were superseded in the 1970s by light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and vacuum fluorescent displays (VFDs), often in the form of seven-segment displays. The VFD uses a hot filament to emit electrons, a control grid and phosphor-coated anodes (similar to a cathode-ray tube) shaped to represent segments of a digit, pixels of a graphical display, or complete letters, symbols, or words. Whereas Nixies typically require 180 volts to illuminate, VFDs only require relatively low voltages to operate, making them easier and cheaper to use. VFDs have a simple internal structure, resulting in a bright, sharp, and unobstructed image. Unlike Nixies, the glass envelope of a VFD is evacuated rather than being filled with a specific mixture of gases at low pressure.

Specialized high-voltage driver chips such as the 7441/74141 were available to drive Nixies. LEDs are better suited to the low voltages that semiconductor integrated circuits typically use, which was an advantage for devices such as pocket calculators, digital watches, and handheld digital measurement instruments. Also, LEDs are much smaller and sturdier, without a fragile glass envelope. LEDs use less power than VFDs or Nixie tubes with the same function.

==Legacy ==
Citing dissatisfaction with the aesthetics of modern digital displays and a nostalgic fondness for the styling of obsolete technology, significant numbers of electronics enthusiasts have shown interest in reviving Nixies. Unsold tubes that have been sitting in warehouses for decades are being brought out and used, the most common application being in homemade digital clocks. During their heyday, Nixies were generally considered too expensive for use in mass-market consumer goods such as clocks. This recent surge in demand has caused prices to rise significantly, particularly for large tubes, making small-scale production of new devices again viable.

In addition to the tube itself, another important consideration is the relatively high-voltage circuitry necessary to drive the tube. The original 7400 series drivers integrated circuits such as the 74141 BCD decoder driver have long since been out of production and are rarer than NOS tubes. The 74141 is still available as NOS from various web suppliers and the Soviet equivalent, the K155ID1, is still in production. However, modern bipolar transistors with high voltage ratings are now available cheaply, such as MPSA92 or MPSA42.

==See also==

* Genericized trademark
* Nimo tube
* Numitron tube
* Sixteen-segment display
* Vacuum fluorescent display

==References==
==Further reading==
* .
* , Dewey 621.381/51, LCC TK7871.73.W44.

==External links==

* Brief history of Haydu Brothers 
* Mike&#x27;s Electric Stuff: Display and Counting Tubes
* Nixie tube photos and datasheets 
* Giant Nixie Tube Collection 
* The Art of Making a Nixie Tube
* Nixie Tube Description and Pictures 
* The Nixie Tube Story (IEEE Spectrum, 7/18)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q289241" start="2" end="12" title="Nixie tube" label="Nixie tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q289241" start="21" end="41" title="Nixie tube" label="cold cathode display"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="49" end="59" title="electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="76" end="116" title="display device" label="displaying numerals or other information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427934" start="123" end="137" title="glow discharge" label="glow discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="176" end="181" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="195" end="202" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="217" end="225" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427934" start="302" end="316" title="glow discharge" label="glow discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="380" end="384" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="407" end="412" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656210" start="419" end="434" title="Penning mixture" label="Penning mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="520" end="527" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365473" start="548" end="565" title="cathode poisoning" label="cathode poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="570" end="580" title="sputtering" label="sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="607" end="618" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q215259" start="667" end="686" title="thermionic emission" label="thermionic emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="690" end="698" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365473" start="707" end="718" title="hot cathode" label="hot cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q814902" start="734" end="746" title="cold cathode" label="cold cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159201" start="763" end="778" title="gas-filled tube" label="gas-filled tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q622970" start="805" end="814" title="neon lamp" label="neon lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="926" end="952" title="Vacuum fluorescent display" label="Vacuum fluorescent display"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="1452" end="1473" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="1671" end="1680" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q830493" start="1718" end="1754" title="Nixie (folklore)" label="the mythical creature with this name"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1956" end="1965" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q247299" start="2332" end="2347" title="Counter (digital)" label="digital counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="2599" end="2620" title="magnetron" label="split-anode magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q532714" start="2651" end="2662" title="UNIVAC 1101" label="UNIVAC 1101"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4325" end="4339" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q247225" start="4344" end="4352" title="Dekatron" label="Dekatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q504073" start="5715" end="5722" title="stencil" label="stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="6011" end="6015" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="6017" end="6019" title="direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="6029" end="6041" title="ampere" label="milliamperes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="6132" end="6140" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="6171" end="6174" title="ohm" label="ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q925339" start="6192" end="6211" title="negative resistance" label="negative resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="6491" end="6501" title="sputtering" label="sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179741" start="7314" end="7323" title="voltmeter" label="voltmeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189996" start="7326" end="7336" title="multimeter" label="multimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331405" start="7339" end="7356" title="frequency counter" label="frequency counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="7537" end="7547" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q966756" start="7601" end="7613" title="Sumlock ANITA calculator" label="ANITA Mk VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145581" start="7647" end="7680" title="TSPS" label="electronic telephone switchboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q737372" start="7688" end="7700" title="alphanumeric" label="alphanumeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826068" start="7713" end="7737" title="fourteen-segment display" label="fourteen-segment display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430676" start="7794" end="7806" title="Financial quote" label="stock ticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="7822" end="7830" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8226" end="8243" title="Hot cathode#Failure modes" label="cathode poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475577" start="8418" end="8431" title="hermetic seal" label="hermetic seal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8473" end="8490" title="Hot cathode#Failure modes" label="Cathode poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="8625" end="8635" title="Sputtering" label="Sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546296" start="10106" end="10124" title="lightguide display" label="lightguide display"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="10148" end="10160" title="incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q622970" start="10164" end="10168" title="neon lamp" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046569" start="10200" end="10208" title="Numitron" label="Numitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="10278" end="10304" title="vacuum fluorescent display" label="vacuum fluorescent display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713498" start="10565" end="10580" title="stepping switch" label="stepping switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="10734" end="10754" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="10767" end="10793" title="vacuum fluorescent display" label="vacuum fluorescent display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046569" start="10824" end="10845" title="seven-segment display" label="seven-segment display"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="10951" end="10967" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q265899" start="11507" end="11517" title="7400 series" label="7441/74141"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="11612" end="11630" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q265899" start="12737" end="12748" title="7400 series" label="7400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="12795" end="12798" title="binary-coded decimal" label="BCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q907054" start="12872" end="12875" title="New old stock" label="NOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="13026" end="13044" title="bipolar transistor" label="bipolar transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="13142" end="13163" title="Genericized trademark" label="Genericized trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037728" start="13166" end="13175" title="Nimo tube" label="Nimo tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046569" start="13178" end="13191" title="Numitron tube" label="Numitron tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533029" start="13194" end="13217" title="Sixteen-segment display" label="Sixteen-segment display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="13220" end="13246" title="Vacuum fluorescent display" label="Vacuum fluorescent display"/>
<link wikidata="Q48460" start="13291" end="13296" title="Dewey Decimal Classification" label="Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q621080" start="13309" end="13312" title="Library of Congress Classification" label="LCC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66906" wikidata="Q1332160" url="?curid=66906" title="Indonesian National Revolution">
<text>The Indonesian National Revolution (), also known as the Indonesian War of Independence (, ), was an armed conflict and diplomatic struggle between the Republic of Indonesia and the Dutch Empire and an internal social revolution during postwar and postcolonial Indonesia. It took place between Indonesia&#x27;s declaration of independence in 1945 and the Netherlands&#x27; transfer of sovereignty over the Dutch East Indies to the Republic of the United States of Indonesia at the end of 1949.

The four-year struggle involved sporadic but bloody armed conflict, internal Indonesian political and communal upheavals, and two major international diplomatic interventions. Dutch military forces (and, for a while, the forces of the World War II allies) were able to control the major towns, cities and industrial assets in Republican heartlands on Java and Sumatra but could not control the countryside. By 1949, international pressure on the Netherlands, the United States threatening to cut off all economic aid for World War II rebuilding efforts to the Netherlands and the partial military stalemate became such that the Netherlands transferred sovereignty over the Dutch East Indies to the Republic of the United States of Indonesia.

The revolution marked the end of the colonial administration of the Dutch East Indies, except for New Guinea. It also significantly changed ethnic castes as well as reducing the power of many of the local rulers (&quot;raja&quot;). It did not significantly improve the economic or political fortunes of the majority of the population, although a few Indonesians were able to gain a larger role in commerce.

==Background==
The Indonesian independence movement began in May 1908, which is commemorated as the &quot;Day of National Awakening&quot; (). Indonesian nationalism and movements supporting independence from Dutch colonialism, such as Budi Utomo, the Indonesian National Party (PNI), Sarekat Islam and the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI), grew rapidly in the first half of the 20th century. Budi Utomo, Sarekat Islam and others pursued strategies of co-operation by joining the Dutch initiated &quot;Volksraad&quot; (&quot;People&#x27;s Council&quot;) in the hope that Indonesia would be granted self-rule. Others chose a non-cooperative strategy demanding the freedom of self-government from the Dutch East Indies colony. 

The occupation of Indonesia by Japan for three and a half years during World War II was a crucial factor in the subsequent revolution. The Netherlands had minimal ability to defend its colony against the Japanese army, and within only three months of their initial attacks, the Japanese had occupied the Dutch East Indies. In Java, and to a lesser extent in Sumatra (Indonesia&#x27;s two dominant islands), the Japanese spread and encouraged nationalist sentiment. Although this was done more for Japanese political advantage than from altruistic support of Indonesian independence, this support created new Indonesian institutions (including local neighbourhood organisations) and elevated political leaders such as Sukarno. Just as significantly for the subsequent revolution, the Japanese destroyed and replaced much of the Dutch-created economic, administrative, and political infrastructure.

On 7 September 1944, with the war going badly for the Japanese, Prime Minister Koiso promised independence for Indonesia, but no date was set. For supporters of Sukarno, this announcement was seen as vindication for his collaboration with the Japanese.

== Japanese Surrender ==
===Proclamation of Indonesian Independence===

The unconditional surrender of Japan on August 15, 1945 was eagerly received by the radical and politicised &quot;pemuda&quot; (Indonesian for &#x27;male youth&#x27;) groups. They pressured Sukarno and Hatta to proclaim Indonesian independence on 17 August 1945, two days later. The following day, the Preparatory Committee for Indonesian Independence (PPKI) elected Sukarno as president, and Hatta as vice-president.

===Revolution and Bersiap===

It was mid-September before news of the declaration of independence spread to the outer islands, and many Indonesians far from the capital Jakarta did not believe it. As the news spread, most Indonesians came to regard themselves as pro-Republican, and a mood of revolution swept across the country. External power had shifted; it would be weeks before Allied Forces shipping entered Indonesia (owing in part to boycotts and strikes, in Australia, on coaling, loading and manning Dutch shipping from Australia, where the Netherlands East Indies Government in exile was based). These strikes were only fully broken in July 1946. The Japanese, on the other hand, were required by the terms of the surrender to both lay down their arms and maintain order; a contradiction that some resolved by handing weapons to Japanese-trained Indonesians.

The resulting power vacuums in Java and Sumatra in the weeks following the Japanese surrender created an atmosphere of uncertainty, but also one of opportunity for the Republicans. Many &quot;pemuda&quot; joined pro-Republic struggle groups (&quot;badan perjuangan&quot;). The most disciplined were soldiers from the Japanese-formed but disbanded &quot;Giyūgun&quot; (PETA, volunteer army) and &quot;Heiho&quot; (local soldiers employed by Japanese armed forces) groups. Many groups were undisciplined, due to both the circumstances of their formation and what they perceived as revolutionary spirit. In the first weeks, Japanese troops often withdrew from urban areas to avoid confrontations.

By September 1945, control of major infrastructure installations, including railway stations and trams in Java&#x27;s largest cities, had been taken over by Republican &quot;pemuda&quot; who encountered little Japanese resistance. To spread the revolutionary message, &quot;pemuda&quot; set up their own radio stations and newspapers, and graffiti proclaimed the nationalist sentiment. On most islands, struggle committees and militia were set up. Republican newspapers and journals were common in Jakarta, Yogyakarta, and Surakarta, which fostered a generation of writers known as &quot;angkatan 45&quot; (&#x27;generation of 45&#x27;) many of whom believed their work could be part of the revolution.

Republican leaders struggled to come to terms with popular sentiment; some wanted passionate armed struggle; others a more reasoned approach. Some leaders, such as the leftist Tan Malaka, spread the idea that this was a revolutionary struggle to be led and won by the Indonesian &quot;pemuda&quot;. Sukarno and Hatta, by contrast, were more interested in planning government and institutions to achieve independence through diplomacy. Pro-revolution demonstrations took place in large cities, including one in Jakarta on 19 September with over 200,000 people, which Sukarno and Hatta, fearing violence, successfully quelled.

By September 1945, many of the self-proclaimed &quot;pemuda&quot;, who were ready to die for &#x27;100% freedom&#x27;, were getting impatient. It was common for ethnic &#x27;out-groups&#x27; – Dutch internees, Eurasian, Ambonese and Chinese – and anyone considered to be a spy, to be subjected to intimidation, kidnapping, robbery, murder and organised massacres. Such attacks would continue throughout the course of the revolution, but were most present during the 1945–46 period, which is known as the Bersiap.

Estimates of the death toll of the Bersiap period vary from 3,500 to 30,000. NIOD concluded a Dutch casualty number of approximately 5,500 with possible higher numbers but not above 10,000. Estimates of the number of Indonesian fighters killed in the lead up to and during the Battle of Surabaya range from 6,300 to 15,000. The Japanese forces lost around 1,000 soldiers and the British forces registered 660 soldiers, mostly British Indians, as killed (with a similar number missing in action). The actual Dutch military was hardly involved, as it started to return to Indonesia only in March and April 1946.

===Formation of the Republican government===
By the end of August 1945, a central Republican government had been established in Jakarta. It adopted a constitution drafted during the Japanese occupation by the Preparatory Committee for Indonesian Independence. With general elections yet to be held, a Central Indonesian National Committee (KNIP) was appointed to assist the President. Similar committees were established at provincial and regency levels.

Questions of allegiance immediately arose amongst indigenous rulers. Central Javanese principalities, for example, immediately declared themselves Republican, while many &quot;raja&quot; (&#x27;rulers&#x27;) of the outer islands, who had been enriched from their support of the Dutch, were less enthusiastic. Such reluctance among many outer islands was sharpened by the radical, non-aristocratic, and sometimes Islamic nature of the Java-centric Republican leadership. Support did, however, come from South Sulawesi (including the King of Bone, who still recalled battles against the Dutch from early in the century), and from Makassarese and Bugis &quot;raja&quot;, who supported the Republican Governor of Jakarta, a Menadonese Christian. Many Balinese &quot;raja&quot; accepted Republican authority.

Fearing the Dutch would attempt to re-establish their authority over Indonesia, the new Republican Government and its leaders moved quickly to strengthen the fledgling administration. Within Indonesia, the newly formed government, although enthusiastic, was fragile and focused in Java (where focused at all). It was rarely and loosely in contact with the outer islands, which had more Japanese troops (particularly in Japanese naval areas), less sympathetic Japanese commanders, and fewer Republican leaders and activists. In 14 November 1945, a parliamentary form of government was established and Sjahrir was appointed prime minister.

In the week following the Japanese surrender, the Giyūgun (PETA) and Heiho groups were disbanded by the Japanese. Command structures and membership vital for a national army were consequently dismantled. Thus, rather than being formed from a trained, armed, and organised army, the Republican armed forces began to grow in September from usually younger, less trained groups built around charismatic leaders. Creating a rational military structure that was obedient to central authority from such disorganisation, was one of the major problems of the revolution, a problem that remains through to contemporary times. In the self-created Indonesian army, Japanese-trained Indonesian officers prevailed over those trained by the Dutch. A thirty-year-old former school teacher, Sudirman, was elected &#x27;commander-in-chief&#x27; at the first meeting of Division Commanders in Yogyakarta on 12 November 1945.

== Allied Situation (1945) ==
The Dutch accused Sukarno and Hatta of collaborating with the Japanese, and denounced the Republic as a creation of Japanese fascism. The Dutch East Indies administration had just received a ten million dollar loan from the United States to finance its return to Indonesia.

===Allied occupation===
The Netherlands, however, was critically weakened from World War II in Europe and did not return as a significant military force until early 1946. The Japanese and members of the Allied forces reluctantly agreed to act as caretakers. Australian forces of I Corps under general Leslie Morshead had landed in Borneo in May 1945, to destroy the Imperial Japanese forces stationed there, as well as maintaining order on the island until the Dutch could return. As US forces were focusing on the Japanese home islands, the archipelago was put under the jurisdiction of British Admiral Earl Louis Mountbatten, the Supreme Allied Commander, South East Asia Command. Allied enclaves already existed in Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo), Morotai (Maluku) and parts of Irian Jaya; Dutch administrators had already returned to these areas. In the Japanese navy areas, the arrival of Allied troops quickly prevented revolutionary activities where Australian troops, followed by Dutch troops and administrators, took the Japanese surrender (except for Bali and Lombok). Due to the lack of strong resistance, two Australian Army divisions succeeded in occupying eastern Indonesia.
The British were charged with restoring order and civilian government in Java. The Dutch took this to mean pre-war colonial administration and continued to claim sovereignty over Indonesia. The British and Indian troops did not, however, land on Java to accept the Japanese surrender until late September 1945. Lord Mountbatten&#x27;s immediate tasks included the repatriation of some 300,000 Japanese, and freeing prisoners of war. He did not want, nor did he have the resources, to commit his troops to a long struggle to regain Indonesia for the Dutch. The first British troops reached Jakarta in late September 1945, and arrived in the cities of Medan (North Sumatra), Padang (West Sumatra), Palembang (South Sumatra), Semarang (Central Java) and Surabaya (East Java) in October. In an attempt to avoid clashes with Indonesians, the British commander Lieutenant General Sir Philip Christison diverted soldiers of the former Dutch colonial army to eastern Indonesia, where Dutch reoccupation was proceeding smoothly. Tensions mounted as Allied troops entered Java and Sumatra; clashes broke out between Republicans and their perceived enemies, namely Dutch prisoners, Dutch colonial troops (KNIL), Chinese, Indo-Europeans and Japanese.

The first stages of warfare were initiated in October 1945 when, in accordance with the terms of their surrender, the Japanese tried to re-establish the authority they had relinquished to Indonesians in the towns and cities. Japanese military police killed Republican &quot;pemuda&quot; in Pekalongan (Central Java) on 3 October, and Japanese troops drove Republican &quot;pemuda&quot; out of Bandung in West Java and handed the city to the British, but the fiercest fighting involving the Japanese was in Semarang. On 14 October, British forces began to occupy the city. Retreating Republican forces retaliated by killing between 130 and 300 Japanese prisoners they were holding. Five hundred Japanese and two thousand Indonesians had been killed and the Japanese had almost captured the city six days later when British forces arrived. The Allies repatriated the remaining Japanese troops and civilians to Japan, although about 1,000 elected to remain behind and later assisted Republican forces in fighting for independence.

The British subsequently decided to evacuate the 10,000 Indo-Europeans and European internees in the volatile Central Java interior. British detachments sent to the towns of Ambarawa and Magelang encountered strong Republican resistance and used air attacks against the Indonesians. Sukarno arranged a ceasefire on 2 November, but by late November fighting had resumed and the British withdrew to the coast (refer Battle of Ambarawa). Republican attacks against Allied and alleged pro-Dutch civilians reached a peak in November and December, with 1,200 killed in Bandung as the &quot;pemuda&quot; returned to the offensive. In March 1946, departing Republicans responded to a British ultimatum for them to leave the city of Bandung by deliberately burning down much of the southern half of the city in what is popularly known in Indonesia as the &quot;Bandung Sea of Fire&quot;.

===Battle of Surabaya===
The Battle of Surabaya was the heaviest and bloodiest single battle of the revolution and became a national symbol of Indonesian resistance. &quot;Pemuda&quot; groups in Surabaya, the second largest city in Indonesia, seized arms and ammunition from the Japanese and set up two new organisations; the Indonesia National Committee (KNI) and the People&#x27;s Security Council (BKR). By the time the Allied forces arrived at the end of October 1945, the &quot;pemuda&quot; foothold in Surabaya city was described as &quot;a strong unified fortress&quot;.

In September and October 1945 Europeans and pro-Dutch Eurasians were attacked and killed by Indonesian mobs. Ferocious fighting erupted when 6,000 British Indian troops landed in the city. Sukarno and Hatta negotiated a ceasefire between the Republicans and the British forces led by Brigadier Mallaby. Mallaby was killed on 30 October 1945 while he was travelling about Surabaya under a white flag to spread the news about the cease fire agreement and rescue some stranded Mahratta troops, despite being warned of the danger by Force 136 troops. Following the killing of Mallaby on 30 October, the British sent more troops into the city from 10 November under the cover of air attacks. Although the European forces largely captured the city in three days, the poorly armed Republicans fought on until 29 November and thousands died as the population fled to the countryside.

Despite the military defeat suffered by the Republicans and a loss of manpower and weaponry that would severely hamper Republican forces for the rest of the revolution, the battle and defence mounted by the Indonesians galvanised the nation in support of independence and helped garner international attention. For the Dutch, it removed any doubt that the Republic was a well-organised resistance with popular support. It also convinced Britain to lie on the side of neutrality in the revolution, and within a few years, Britain would support the Republican cause in the United Nations. The last British troops left Indonesia in November 1946, but by this time 55,000 Dutch troops had landed in Java.

===Situation from Dutch Landing on Java until Linggadjati -- circa January–December 1946===

With British assistance, the Dutch landed their Netherlands Indies Civil Administration (NICA) forces in Jakarta and other key centres. Republican sources reported 8,000 deaths up to January 1946 in the defence of Jakarta, but they could not hold the city. The Republican leadership thus established themselves in the city of Yogyakarta with the crucial support of the new sultan, Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono IX. Yogyakarta went on to play a leading role in the revolution, which would result in the city being granted its own Special Territory status. In Bogor, near Jakarta, and in Balikpapan in Kalimantan, Republican officials were imprisoned. In preparation for the Dutch occupation of Sumatra, its largest cities, Palembang and Medan, were bombed. In December 1946, Special Forces Depot (DST), led by commando and counter-insurgency expert Captain Raymond &quot;Turk&quot; Westerling, were accused of pacifying the southern Sulawesi region using arbitrary terror techniques, which were copied by other anti-Republicans. As many as 3,000 Republican militia and their supporters were killed in a few weeks.

On Java and Sumatra, the Dutch found military success in cities and major towns, but they were unable to subdue the villages and countryside. On the outer islands (including Bali), Republican sentiment was not as strong, at least among the elite. They were consequently occupied by the Dutch with comparative ease, and autonomous states were set up by the Dutch. The largest, the State of East Indonesia (NIT), encompassed most of eastern Indonesia, and was established in December 1946, with its administrative capital in Makassar.

==Diplomacy and major military engagements (1946–1948) ==
===Linggadjati Agreement===
The Linggadjati Agreement, brokered by the British and concluded in November 1946, saw the Netherlands recognise the Republic as the &quot;de facto&quot; authority over Java, Madura, and Sumatra. Both parties agreed to the formation of the United States of Indonesia by 1 January 1949, a semi-autonomous federal state with the monarch of the Netherlands at its head. The Republican-controlled Java and Sumatra would be one of its states, alongside areas that were generally under stronger Dutch influence, including southern Kalimantan, and the &quot;Great East&quot;, which consisted of Sulawesi, Maluku, the Lesser Sunda Islands, and Western New Guinea. The Central National Committee of Indonesia (KNIP) did not ratify the agreement until February 1947, and neither the Republic nor the Dutch were satisfied with it. On 25 March 1947 the Lower House of the Dutch parliament ratified a stripped-down version of the treaty, which was not accepted by the Republic. Both sides soon accused the other of violating the agreement.

===Operation Product===

At midnight on 20 July 1947, the Dutch launched a major military offensive called &quot;Operatie Product&quot;, with the aim of regaining control of economically lucrative areas in Java and Sumatra and deep ports in Java, thus covering the cost of the ~120,000-strong Dutch military presence. Claiming violations of the Linggajati Agreement, the Dutch euphimistically described the campaign as &quot;police actions&quot; to restore law and order. In the offensive, Dutch forces drove Republican troops out of parts of Sumatra, and East and West Java. The Republicans were confined to the Yogyakarta region of Java.

International reaction to the Dutch actions was negative. Neighbouring Australia and newly independent India were particularly active in supporting the Republic&#x27;s cause in the UN, as were the Soviet Union and, most significantly, the United States. Dutch ships continued to be boycotted from loading and unloading by Australian waterside workers, a blockade that began in September 1945. The United Nations Security Council became directly involved in the conflict, establishing a Committee of Good Office (CGO, known in Indonesia as Komite Tiga Negara, KTN, but not confused with Unilateral Committee.) to sponsor further negotiations, making the Dutch diplomatic position particularly difficult. A ceasefire, called for by UNSC resolution 27, was ordered by the Dutch and Sukarno on 4 August 1947.

===Renville Agreement===

The United Nations Security Council brokered the Renville Agreement in an attempt to rectify the collapsed Linggadjati Agreement. The agreement was ratified in January 1948 and recognised a cease-fire along the so-called &#x27;Van Mook line&#x27;; an artificial line which connected the most advanced Dutch tanks&#x27; positions. Many Republican positions, however, were still intact behind the Dutch lines. Some Republican militias, particularly laborers, peasants, and student troops, just couldn&#x27;t leave thus must live (and operate) behind Renville Line. The agreement also required referendums to be held on the political future of the Dutch-held areas. The apparent reasonableness of Republicans garnered much important American goodwill.

Indonesian Republic faced economic hardship due to continued naval blockade and land blockades at Renville line (in violation of Renville Agreement) which affect sufficient availability of not only arms, but also food, clothing, medicines including bandages, mails, books, magazines, material to service and repair transportation, and overpopulation because of people fleeing from Dutch advances in Operation Product. This economic hardship paired with political crisis by accepting terms of Renville Agreement, and factional conflicts due to conflicting ideologies of Indonesian nationalists fed fuel to one of internal turmoils which later into Madiun Affair.

Diplomatic efforts between the Netherlands and the Republic continued throughout 1948 and 1949. Political pressures, both domestic and international, hindered Dutch attempts to decide upon objectives. Similarly, Republican leaders faced great difficulty in persuading their people to accept diplomatic concessions. By July 1948 negotiations were in deadlock and the Netherlands pushed unilaterally towards Van Mook&#x27;s federal Indonesia concept. The new federal states of South Sumatra and East Java were created, although neither had a viable support base. The Netherlands set up the &quot;Bijeenkomst voor Federaal Overleg (BFO)&quot; (or Federal Consultative Assembly), a body comprising the leadership of the federal states, and charged with the formation of a United States of Indonesia and an interim government by the end of 1948. The Dutch plans, however, had no place for the Republic unless it accepted a minor role already defined for it. Later plans included Java and Sumatra but dropped all mention of the Republic. The main sticking point in the negotiations was the balance of power between the Netherlands High Representative (successor to office of Governor-General) and the Republican forces.

Mutual distrust between the Netherlands and the Republic hindered negotiations. Indonesia who faced aforementioned naval and land blockades (which violated Renville Agreement) also feared a second major Dutch offensive. Meanwhile, the Dutch objected to continued pro-Republican activity on the Dutch side of the Renville line.

In February 1948 the Siliwangi Battalion of the Republican Army, led by Nasution, marched from West Java to Central Java; the relocation was intended to ease internal Republican tensions involving the Battalion in the Surakarta area. The Battalion, however, clashed with Dutch troops while crossing Mount Slamet, and the Dutch believed it was part of a systematic troop movement across the Renville Line. The fear of such incursions actually succeeding, along with apparent Republican undermining of the Dutch-established Pasundan state and negative reports, led to the Dutch leadership increasingly seeing itself as losing control.

===Operation Crow and General Offensive (&quot;Serangan Oemoem&quot;)===


Frustrated at negotiations with the Republic and believing it weakened by both the &quot;Darul Islam&quot; and Madiun insurgencies, the Dutch launched a military offensive on 19 December 1948 which it termed &#x27;Operatie Kraai&#x27; (Operation Crow). By the following day it had conquered the city of Yogyakarta, the location of the temporary Republican capital. By the end of December, all major Republican held cities in Java and Sumatra were in Dutch hands. The Republican president, vice-president, and all but six Republic of Indonesia ministers were captured by Dutch troops and exiled on Bangka Island off the east coast of Sumatra. In areas surrounding Yogyakarta and Surakarta, Republican forces refused to surrender and continued to wage a guerrilla war under the leadership of Republican military chief of staff General Sudirman, who had escaped the Dutch offensives. An emergency Republican government, the Pemerintahan Darurat Republik Indonesia (PDRI), was established in West Sumatra.

Although Dutch forces conquered the towns and cities in Republican heartlands on Java and Sumatra, they could not control villages and the countryside. Republican troops and militia led by Lt. Colonel (later President) Suharto attacked Dutch positions in Yogyakarta at dawn on 1 March 1949. The Dutch were expelled from the city for six hours but reinforcements were brought in from the nearby cities of Ambarawa and Semarang that afternoon. Indonesian fighters retreated at 12:00 pm and the Dutch re-entered the city. The Indonesian attack, later known in Indonesia as &quot;Serangan Oemoem&quot; (new spelling: &quot;Serangan Umum&quot; &#x27;1 March General Offensive&#x27;), is commemorated by a large monument in Yogyakarta. A large-scale attack against Dutch troops in Surakarta on 10 August the same year resulted in republican forces holding the city for two days.

Once again, international opinion of the Dutch military campaigns was one of outrage, significantly in both the United Nations and the United States. U.S. Secretary of State George C. Marshall threatened to stop all of the economic aid program to the Netherlands unless they immediately withdraw from Indonesia and transferred all of the sovereignty to Indonesia. In January 1949, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution demanding the reinstatement of the Republican government. United States aid specifically earmarked for Dutch Indonesia was immediately cancelled and pressure mounted within the US Congress for all United States aid to be cut off. This included Marshall Plan funds vital for Dutch post-World War II rebuilding that had so far totalled $US 1 billion. The Netherlands Government had spent an amount equivalent to almost half of this funding their campaigns in Indonesia. That United States aid could be used to fund &quot;a senile and ineffectual imperialism&quot; encouraged many key voices in the United States – including those amongst the US Republican Party and from within American churches and NGOs – to speak out in support of Indonesian independence.
==Internal turmoil==
The internal turmoil happened was called as social revolutions and insurgencies of Communist and Islamist. It is argued there were common causes because of general similarity of these separated actions. The common causes are extreme polarization of &quot;pergerakan&quot; and aristocrat groups, the harshness of Japanese requirement for labour and rice; the vacuum of central authority; powerful Islamic sentiment for mass mobilization; and activity of minute semi-underground revolutionary cadres (commonly communist).

===Social revolutions===
The so-called &#x27;social revolutions&#x27; following the independence proclamation were challenges to the Dutch-established Indonesian social order, and to some extent a result of the resentment against Japanese-imposed policies. Across the country, people rose up against traditional aristocrats and village heads and attempted to exert popular ownership of land and other resources. The majority of the social revolutions ended quickly; in most cases the challenges to the social order were quashed, although in East Sumatra, the sultanates were overthrown and there were mass killings of members of the aristocratic families.

A culture of violence rooted in the deep conflicts that split the countryside during the revolution would repeatedly erupt throughout the whole second half of the 20th century. The term &#x27;social revolution&#x27; has been applied to a range of mostly violent activities of the left that included both altruistic attempts to organise real revolution and simple expressions of revenge, resentment and assertions of power. Violence was one of the many lessons learned during the Japanese occupation, and figures identified as &#x27;feudal&#x27;, including kings, regents, or simply the wealthy, were often attacked and sometimes beheaded. Rape became a weapon against &#x27;feudal&#x27; women. In the coastal sultanates of Sumatra and Kalimantan, for example, sultans and others whose authority had been shored up by the Dutch, were attacked as soon as Japanese authority left. The pro-Dutch aristocratic administrators (&quot;uleëbalangs&quot;) secular local lords of Aceh, who had been the foundation of Dutch rule, were executed during local civil war, and its place was taken over by pro-Republican religious leaders. (&quot;ulama&quot;). Meanwhile, monarchical officials in Surakarta was kidnapped by anti-monarchist movement which led to the freezing and abolition of the special region.

Many Indonesians lived in fear and uncertainty, particularly a significant proportion of the population who supported the Dutch or who remained under Dutch control. The popular revolutionary cry &#x27;Freedom or Death&#x27; was often interpreted to justify killings under claimed Republican authority. Traders were often in particularly difficult positions. On the one hand, they were pressured by Republicans to boycott all sales to the Dutch; on the other hand, Dutch police could be merciless in their efforts to stamp out smugglers on which the Republican economy depended. In some areas, the term &quot;kedaulatan rakyat&quot; (&#x27;exercising the sovereignty of the people&#x27;) – which is mentioned in the preamble of the Constitution and used by &quot;pemuda&quot; to demand pro-active policies from leaders – came to be used not only in the demanding of free goods, but also to justify extortion and robbery. Chinese merchants, in particular, were often forced to keep their goods at artificially low prices under threat of death.

===Communist and Islamist insurgencies===

On 18 September 1948 an &#x27;Indonesian Soviet Republic&#x27; was declared in Madiun, east of Yogyakarta, by members of the PKI and the Indonesian Socialist Party (PSI). Judging the time right for a proletarian uprising, they intended it to be a rallying point for revolt against &quot;Sukarno-Hatta, the slaves of the Japanese and America&quot;. Madiun however was won back by Republican forces within a few weeks and the insurgency leader, Musso, killed. Ario Soerjo, the governor of East Java, as well as several police officers and religious leaders, were killed by the rebels. This ended a distraction for the revolution, and it turned vague American sympathies based on anti-colonial sentiments into diplomatic support. Internationally, the Republic was now seen as being staunchly anti-communist and a potential ally in the emerging global Cold War between the American-led &#x27;free world&#x27; and the Soviet-led bloc.

Members of the Republican Army who had come from Indonesian Hizbullah felt betrayed by the Indonesian Government for ratifying the Renville Agreement – therefore recognising many areas behind the van Mook Line as &quot;de jure&quot; Dutch. In May 1948, they declared a break-away regime, the &quot;Negara Islam Indonesia&quot; (Indonesian Islamic State), better known as &quot;Darul Islam&quot;. Led by an Islamic mystic, Sekarmadji Maridjan Kartosuwirjo, &quot;Darul Islam&quot; sought to establish Indonesia as an Islamic theocracy. At the time, the Republican Government did not respond, as they were focused on the threat from the Dutch. Some leaders of Masjumi sympathised with the rebellion. After the Republic regained all territories in 1950, the government took the &quot;Darul Islam&quot; threat seriously, especially after some provinces declared that they had joined &quot;Darul Islam&quot;. The last group of rebels was put down in 1962.

==Transfer of sovereignty==


The resilience of Indonesian Republican resistance and active international diplomacy set world opinion against the Dutch efforts to re-establish their colony. The second &#x27;police action&#x27; was a diplomatic disaster for the Dutch cause. The newly appointed United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson pushed the Netherlands government into negotiations earlier recommended by the United Nations but until then defied by the Netherlands. The Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference was held in The Hague from 23 August 1949 to 2 November 1949 between the Republic, the Netherlands, and the Dutch-created federal states. The Netherlands agreed to recognise Indonesian sovereignty over a new federal state known as the &#x27;United States of Indonesia&#x27; (RUSI). It would include all the territory of the former Dutch East Indies with the exception of Dutch New Guinea; sovereignty over which it was agreed would be retained by the Netherlands until further negotiations with Indonesia within a year of the transfer of sovereignty. The other issue on which Indonesia gave concessions was paying the Netherlands East Indies debt which amounted to 4.5 billion guilders. This amount would mean, Indonesia paid for the colonial government expenses of &quot;&quot;. Sovereignty was formally transferred on 27 December 1949, and the new state was immediately recognised by the United States of America.
Republican-controlled Java and Sumatra together formed a single state in the seven-state, nine-territory RUSI federation, but accounted for almost half its population. The other fifteen &#x27;federal&#x27; states and territories had been created by the Netherlands since 1945. These entities were dissolved into the Republic over the first half of 1950. An abortive anti-Republic coup in Bandung and Jakarta by Westerling&#x27;s Legion of the Just Ruler (APRA) on 23 January 1950 resulted in the dissolution of the populous Pasundan state in West Java, thus quickening the dissolution of the federal structure. Colonial soldiers, who were largely Ambonese, clashed with Republican troops in Makassar during the Makassar Uprising in April 1950. The predominantly Christian Ambonese were from one of the few regions with pro-Dutch sentiments and they were suspicious of the Javanese Muslim-dominated Republic, whom they unfavourably regarded as leftists. On 25 April 1950, an independent Republic of South Maluku (RMS) was proclaimed in Ambon but this was suppressed by Republican troops during a campaign from July to November. With the state of East Sumatra now being the only federal state remaining, it too folded and fell in line with the unitary Republic. On 17 August 1950, the fifth anniversary of his declaration of Indonesian independence, Sukarno proclaimed the Republic of Indonesia as a unitary state.
==Impacts and casualties==
Although there is no accurate account of how many Indonesians died, they died in far greater numbers than the Europeans. Estimates of Indonesian deaths in fighting and civilians range from 97,421 to 100,000 dead. A total of 980 British soldiers were killed or went missing in Java and Sumatra in 1945 and 1946, most of them Indian soldiers. More than 4,000 Dutch soldiers lost their lives in Indonesia between 1945 and 1949. Many Japanese died; while it is unknown how many died, only about half of whom died in actual combat, the rest killed in rampages by Indonesians. Seven million people were displaced on Java and Sumatra. Based on demographic data, historian Pierre van der Eng estimated a demographic gap of around 2.4 million people in Indonesia during the entire 1940s, including the period of the
Japanese invasion and occupation during WW2, and the Indonesian National Revolution. Van der Eng states that conflict led to significant ramifications for Indonesians outside of direct violence, such as widespread famine, disease and a lowered fertility rate. According to the official website of Indonesian veterans, there were 863,432 people who joined the struggle for Indonesian independence and this included those who were members of the militia, police, intelligence and auxiliary and as of 2023, there are still 25,676 Indonesian National Revolution veterans alive and According to the official Netherlands veterans website, there are around 5,000 veterans who were deployed to the Dutch East Indies still alive, this also includes former KNIL members.

The revolution had direct effects on economic conditions; shortages were common, particularly food, clothing and fuel. There were in effect two economies – the Dutch and the Republican – both of which had to simultaneously rebuild after World War II and survive the disruptions of the revolution. The Republic had to set up all necessities of life, ranging from &#x27;postage stamps, army badges, and train tickets&#x27; whilst subject to Dutch trade blockades. Confusion and ruinous inflationary surges resulted from competing currencies; Japanese, new Dutch money, and Republican currencies were all used, often concurrently. The Indonesian government was saddled with significant debt, slowing development, with last remaining payment for Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference was made in the form of annual payment, with 1% annual interest rate since 1973, was made in 2002.

Indonesian independence was secured through a blend of both diplomacy and force. Despite their ill-discipline raising the prospect of anarchy, without confronting foreign and Indonesian colonial forces, Republican diplomatic efforts would have been futile. The revolution is the turning point of modern Indonesian history, and it has provided the reference point and validation for the country&#x27;s major political trends that continue to the present day. It gave impetus to communism in the country, to militant nationalism, to Sukarno&#x27;s &#x27;guided democracy&#x27;, to political Islam, the origins of the Indonesian army and its role in Indonesian power, the country&#x27;s constitutional arrangements, and the centralism of power in Indonesia.

The revolution destroyed a colonial administration ruled from the other side of the world, and dismantled with it the , seen by many as obsolete and powerless. Also, it relaxed the rigid racial and social categorisations of colonial Indonesia. Tremendous energies and aspirations were created amongst Indonesians; a new creative surge was seen in writing and art, as was a great demand for education and modernisation. It did not, however, significantly improve the economic or political fortune of the population&#x27;s poverty-stricken peasant majority; only a few Indonesians were able to gain a larger role in commerce, and hopes for democracy were dashed within a decade.
==Dutch apologies==
In 2013, the Netherlands government apologised for the violence used against the Indonesian people. In 2016, Dutch Foreign Minister Bert Koenders apologized for a massacre by Dutch troops of 400 Indonesian villagers in 1947. During a state visit to Indonesia in March 2020, King Willem-Alexander made a surprise apology for &quot;excessive violence&quot; by Dutch troops.

On 17 February 2022, a major Dutch historical review was released, titled &quot;Independence, Decolonization, Violence and War in Indonesia, 1945–1950&quot;. The research was done by three institutions: Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies (KITLV), Netherlands Institute for Military History (NIMH) and NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies. The review concluded that the Netherlands had used systematic and excessive violence during the war. According to the review, &quot;The use of extreme violence by the Dutch armed forces was not only widespread, but often deliberate, too&quot; and &quot;was condoned at every level: political, military and legal.&quot; On the same day, the Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte apologized for the atrocities committed by the Dutch during the war and also for the failure of past Dutch governments to acknowledge it.

==See also==

* Independence Day (Indonesia)
* List of high-ranking commanders of the Indonesian National Revolution
* Timeline of the Indonesian National Revolution
* United Nations Commission for Indonesia
* Netherlands-Indonesia Union
* &quot;Revolusi&quot;

==Notes==

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Holst Pellekaan, R.E. van, I.C. de Regt &quot;Operaties in de Oost: de Koninklijke Marine in de Indische archipel (1945–1951)&quot; (Amsterdam 2003).
* Ide Anak Agug Gde Agung (1996) (translated to English by Linda Owens)&quot;From the Formation of the State of East Indonesia Towards the Establishment of the United States of Indonesia&quot; Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia (Original edition Dari Negara Indonesia Timur ke Republic Indonesia Serikat 1985 Gadjah Mada University Press)
* Jong, L. de (1988). &quot;Het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden in de Tweede Wereldoorlog&quot;, deel 12, Sdu, &#x27;s-Gravenhage (an authoritative standard text on both the political and military aspects, in Dutch)
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Parallel and Divergent Aspects of British Rule in the Raj, French Rule in Indochina, Dutch Rule in the Netherlands East Indies (Indonesia), and American Rule in the Philippines.
* Radio address by Queen Wilhelmina on 7 December 1942.
* Dutch Proposals for Indonesian Settlement 6 November 1945.
* Dutch Proposals for Indonesian Settlement 10 Feb 1946.
* Text of the Linggadjati Agreement 10 Feb 1946.
* The Renville Political Principles 17 January 1948.
* Dutch Queen Signs away an Empire (1950), newsreel on the British Pathé YouTube Channel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1332160" start="4" end="34" title="Indonesian National Revolution" label="Indonesian National Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332160" start="57" end="87" title="Indonesian National Revolution" label="Indonesian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="152" end="173" title="Republic of Indonesia" label="Republic of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="182" end="194" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279967" start="211" end="228" title="social revolution" label="social revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349904" start="236" end="243" title="Aftermath of WWII" label="postwar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="260" title="Dutch East Indies#World War II and independence" label="postcolonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661772" start="294" end="338" title="Indonesian Declaration of Independence" label="Indonesia&amp;#x27;s declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="355" end="366" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q519255" start="373" end="473" title="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference" label="transfer of sovereignty over the Dutch East Indies to the Republic of the United States of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="730" end="749" title="World War II Allies" label="World War II allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="846" end="850" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="855" end="862" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="958" end="971" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="999" end="1047" title="Marshall Plan" label="economic aid for World War II rebuilding efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q208330" start="1092" end="1101" title="stalemate" label="stalemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q523435" start="1209" end="1235" title="United States of Indonesia" label="United States of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="1275" end="1298" title="Colonialism" label="colonial administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="1306" end="1323" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q941881" start="1336" end="1346" title="Dutch New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="1457" end="1461" title="raja" label="raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744401" start="1752" end="1777" title="Indonesian National Awakening" label="Day of National Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927561" start="1881" end="1891" title="Budi Utomo" label="Budi Utomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965221" start="1897" end="1922" title="Indonesian National Party" label="Indonesian National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973503" start="1930" end="1943" title="Sarekat Islam" label="Sarekat Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q157744" start="1952" end="1978" title="Indonesian Communist Party" label="Indonesian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q702310" start="2376" end="2408" title="Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies" label="occupation of Indonesia by Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="2576" end="2589" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese army"/>
<link wikidata="Q315549" start="3349" end="3354" title="Kuniaki Koiso" label="Koiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="3600" end="3632" title="Victory over Japan Day" label="unconditional surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199401" start="3898" end="3947" title="Preparatory Committee for Indonesian Independence" label="Preparatory Committee for Indonesian Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755916" start="3974" end="3983" title="President of Indonesia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543445" start="3998" end="4012" title="Vice President of Indonesia" label="vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="4184" end="4191" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4398" end="4411" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003542" start="4457" end="4491" title="Black Armada" label="boycotts and strikes, in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180139" start="5254" end="5258" title="Defenders of the Homeland" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111080" start="5286" end="5291" title="Heiho" label="Heiho"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="6008" end="6015" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="6088" end="6098" title="Yogyakarta" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803" start="6104" end="6113" title="Surakarta" label="Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q561682" start="6461" end="6471" title="Tan Malaka" label="Tan Malaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="7121" end="7129" title="Indo people" label="Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="7131" end="7139" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945786" start="7144" end="7151" title="Chinese Indonesians" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894934" start="7415" end="7422" title="Bersiap" label="Bersiap"/>
<link wikidata="Q474823" start="7502" end="7506" title="NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies" label="NIOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="7851" end="7866" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49373" start="8184" end="8198" title="Constitution of Indonesia" label="a constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329200" start="8337" end="8374" title="Central Indonesian National Committee" label="Central Indonesian National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557" start="8561" end="8573" title="Central Java" label="Central Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078" start="8994" end="9008" title="South Sulawesi" label="South Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q892292" start="9032" end="9036" title="Bone state" label="Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886290" start="9120" end="9131" title="Makassarese people" label="Makassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="9136" end="9141" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847" start="9212" end="9218" title="Menado" label="Menado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="9239" end="9243" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="9716" end="9730" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Japanese naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="9844" end="9876" title="parliamentary" label="parliamentary form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470857" start="9897" end="9904" title="Sutan Sjahrir" label="Sjahrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367329" start="10711" end="10719" title="Sudirman" label="Sudirman"/>
<link wikidata="Q707323" start="10990" end="11006" title="Statism in Shōwa Japan" label="Japanese fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11098" end="11111" title="United States of America" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892366" start="11428" end="11435" title="I Corps (Australia)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303510" start="11450" end="11465" title="Leslie Morshead" label="Leslie Morshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156895" start="11470" end="11476" title="Borneo campaign" label="landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="11480" end="11486" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="11758" end="11775" title="Louis Mountbatten" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050792" start="11781" end="11805" title="Supreme Allied Commander" label="Supreme Allied Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="11807" end="11830" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="11867" end="11877" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="11890" end="11896" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053892" start="11899" end="11906" title="Morotai" label="Morotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="11908" end="11914" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="11929" end="11939" title="Irian Jaya" label="Irian Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="12209" end="12213" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564" start="12218" end="12224" title="Lombok" label="Lombok"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="12269" end="12284" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12531" end="12538" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="12543" end="12549" title="British Raj" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="12987" end="12992" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140" start="12994" end="13007" title="North Sumatra" label="North Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253" start="13010" end="13016" title="Padang, Indonesia" label="Padang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2772" start="13018" end="13030" title="West Sumatra" label="West Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="13033" end="13042" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271" start="13044" end="13057" title="South Sumatra" label="South Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025" start="13060" end="13068" title="Semarang" label="Semarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557" start="13070" end="13082" title="Central Java" label="Central Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q11462" start="13088" end="13096" title="Surabaya" label="Surabaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586" start="13098" end="13107" title="East Java" label="East Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253173" start="13215" end="13232" title="Philip Christison" label="Philip Christison"/>
<link wikidata="Q523553" start="13508" end="13536" title="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army" label="Dutch colonial troops (KNIL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="13547" end="13561" title="Indo (Eurasian)" label="Indo-Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11026" start="13867" end="13877" title="Pekalongan" label="Pekalongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10389" start="13970" end="13977" title="Bandung" label="Bandung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724" start="13981" end="13990" title="West Java" label="West Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747287" start="14780" end="14788" title="Ambarawa" label="Ambarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11017" start="14793" end="14801" title="Magelang" label="Magelang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13095653" start="15020" end="15038" title="Battle of Ambarawa" label="Battle of Ambarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754428" start="15458" end="15477" title="Bandung Sea of Fire" label="Bandung Sea of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="15736" end="15740" title="Weapon" label="arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="15745" end="15755" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="15909" end="15922" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="16254" end="16261" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q29050" start="16266" end="16271" title="Mohammad Hatta" label="Hatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="16327" end="16341" title="British Armed Forces" label="British forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191789" start="16349" end="16366" title="Aubertin Walter Sothern Mallaby" label="Brigadier Mallaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641357" start="16539" end="16547" title="5th Mahratta Light Infantry" label="Mahratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750809" start="16594" end="16603" title="Force 136" label="Force 136"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499780" start="17785" end="17824" title="Netherlands Indies Civil Administration" label="Netherlands Indies Civil Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="18063" end="18073" title="Yogyakarta (city)" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q76227" start="18118" end="18146" title="Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono IX" label="Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q10393" start="18291" end="18296" title="Bogor" label="Bogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14492" start="18319" end="18329" title="Balikpapan" label="Balikpapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028541" start="18507" end="18527" title="Korps Speciale Troepen" label="Special Forces Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="18555" end="18573" title="counterinsurgency" label="counter-insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q723945" start="18581" end="18624" title="Raymond Westerling" label="Captain Raymond &amp;quot;Turk&amp;quot; Westerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631408" start="18642" end="18680" title="South Sulawesi campaign of 1946–1947" label="pacifying the southern Sulawesi region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625496" start="19227" end="19250" title="State of East Indonesia" label="State of East Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="19370" end="19378" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112088" start="19471" end="19492" title="Linggadjati Agreement" label="Linggadjati Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208134" start="19642" end="19648" title="Madura" label="Madura"/>
<link wikidata="Q523435" start="19707" end="19733" title="United States of Indonesia" label="United States of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="19771" end="19778" title="Federation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="19794" end="19820" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="monarch of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313136" start="20018" end="20028" title="Great East" label="Great East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803" start="20077" end="20097" title="Lesser Sunda Islands" label="Lesser Sunda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="20103" end="20121" title="Western New Guinea" label="Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q233262" start="20308" end="20343" title="House of Representatives (Netherlands)" label="Lower House of the Dutch parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q278039" start="20914" end="20940" title="police actions (Indonesia)" label="&amp;quot;police actions&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21207" end="21216" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21239" end="21244" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21333" end="21345" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="21533" end="21564" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q668480" start="21866" end="21884" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 27" label="UNSC resolution 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q769581" start="22195" end="22208" title="Van Mook line" label="Van Mook line"/>
<link wikidata="Q662844" start="23365" end="23378" title="Madiun Affair" label="Madiun Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440075" start="24025" end="24054" title="Federal Consultative Assembly" label="Federal Consultative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q523435" start="24149" end="24175" title="United States of Indonesia" label="United States of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317291" start="24996" end="25004" title="Nasution" label="Nasution"/>
<link wikidata="Q580131" start="25223" end="25235" title="Mount Slamet" label="Mount Slamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641601" start="25722" end="25733" title="Darul Islam (Indonesia)" label="Darul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q662844" start="25744" end="25750" title="Madiun affair" label="Madiun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188428" start="26230" end="26243" title="Bangka Island" label="Bangka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="26385" end="26394" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367329" start="26458" end="26474" title="Sudirman" label="General Sudirman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374604" start="26554" end="26593" title="Emergency Government of the Republic of Indonesia" label="Pemerintahan Darurat Republik Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="26825" end="26836" title="Lieutenant Colonel" label="Lt. Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="26855" end="26862" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471529" start="27281" end="27306" title="General Offensive of 1 March 1949" label="1 March General Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499652" start="27334" end="27350" title="Yogya Kembali Monument" label="a large monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803" start="27411" end="27420" title="Surakarta" label="Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="27660" end="27683" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="27684" end="27702" title="George C. Marshall" label="George C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121659" start="27895" end="27946" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 63" label="United Nations Security Council passed a resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="28124" end="28135" title="US Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="28191" end="28204" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="28590" end="28606" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508533" start="29787" end="29799" title="East Sumatra revolution" label="East Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="30435" end="30441" title="feudal" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="30663" end="30669" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="30872" end="30876" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19725082" start="31082" end="31091" title="Special Region of Surakarta" label="Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q211201" start="32325" end="32331" title="Soviet (council)" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q204699" start="32421" end="32447" title="Socialist Party of Indonesia" label="Indonesian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29502" start="32484" end="32504" title="proletarian revolution" label="proletarian uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q12515782" start="32742" end="32753" title="Ario Soerjo" label="Ario Soerjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="33073" end="33087" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="33132" end="33140" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198008" start="33637" end="33669" title="Sekarmadji Maridjan Kartosuwirjo" label="Sekarmadji Maridjan Kartosuwirjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204060" start="33731" end="33748" title="Islamic state" label="Islamic theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579297" start="33873" end="33880" title="Masjumi" label="Masjumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="34461" end="34493" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="34494" end="34506" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q519255" start="34647" end="34686" title="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference" label="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="34895" end="34908" title="federal state" label="federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q523435" start="34928" end="34954" title="United States of Indonesia" label="United States of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q941881" start="35058" end="35074" title="Dutch New Guinea" label="Dutch New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4535736" start="35960" end="35987" title="APRA Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="abortive anti-Republic coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058624" start="36032" end="36056" title="Legion of the Just Ruler" label="Legion of the Just Ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143131" start="36127" end="36135" title="Pasundan" label="Pasundan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="36294" end="36302" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738826" start="36314" end="36331" title="Makassar Uprising" label="Makassar Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414395" start="36589" end="36613" title="Republic of South Maluku" label="Republic of South Maluku"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="37001" end="37014" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q702310" start="37850" end="37893" title="Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies" label="Japanese invasion and occupation during WW2"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="38453" end="38464" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="38540" end="38557" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q523553" start="38597" end="38601" title="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army" label="KNIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="38980" end="38993" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306266" start="39013" end="39025" title="train ticket" label="train ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q519255" start="39354" end="39393" title="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference" label="Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q331596" start="39797" end="39815" title="History of Indonesia" label="Indonesian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499669" start="40046" end="40062" title="guided democracy" label="guided democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023616" start="41079" end="41092" title="Bert Koenders" label="Bert Koenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324916" start="41181" end="41192" title="state visit" label="state visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="41221" end="41242" title="King Willem-Alexander" label="King Willem-Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282075" start="41523" end="41591" title="Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies" label="Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41601" end="41643" title="Netherlands Institute for Military History" label="Netherlands Institute for Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q474823" start="41655" end="41709" title="NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies" label="NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="42051" end="42071" title="Dutch Prime Minister" label="Dutch Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q57792" start="42072" end="42082" title="Mark Rutte" label="Mark Rutte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178161" start="42179" end="42201" title="List of cabinets of the Netherlands" label="past Dutch governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q62732044" start="42238" end="42266" title="Independence Day (Indonesia)" label="Independence Day (Indonesia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115765136" start="42269" end="42338" title="List of high-ranking commanders of the Indonesian National Revolution" label="List of high-ranking commanders of the Indonesian National Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806366" start="42341" end="42387" title="Timeline of the Indonesian National Revolution" label="Timeline of the Indonesian National Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q115817827" start="42390" end="42429" title="United Nations Commission for Indonesia" label="United Nations Commission for Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678524" start="42432" end="42459" title="Netherlands-Indonesia Union" label="Netherlands-Indonesia Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473483" start="42468" end="42476" title="Revolusi" label="Revolusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="43858" end="43871" title="British Pathé" label="British Pathé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66910" wikidata="Q156272" url="?curid=66910" title="André Derain">
<text>André Derain (, ; 10 June 1880 – 8 September 1954) was a French artist, painter, sculptor and co-founder of Fauvism with Henri Matisse.

In 2025, all of Derain’s work entered the public domain in the United States.

==Life and career==

===Early years===
Derain was born in 1880 in Chatou, Yvelines, Île-de-France, just outside Paris. In 1895 he began to study on his own, contrary to claims that meeting Vlaminck or Matisse began his efforts to paint, and occasionally went to the countryside with an old friend of Cézanne&#x27;s, Father Jacomin along with his two sons. In 1898, while studying to be an engineer at the Académie Camillo, he attended painting classes under Eugène Carrière, and there met Matisse. In 1900, he met and shared a studio with Maurice de Vlaminck and together they began to paint scenes in the neighbourhood, but this was interrupted by military service at Commercy from September 1901 to 1904. Following his release from service, Matisse persuaded Derain&#x27;s parents to allow him to abandon his engineering career and devote himself solely to painting; subsequently Derain attended the .

===Fauvism===

Derain and Matisse worked together through the summer of 1905 in the Mediterranean village of Collioure and Derain completed the &quot;Mountains at Collioure&quot; painting. Later that year they displayed their highly innovative paintings at the Salon d&#x27;Automne. The vivid, unnatural colors led the critic Louis Vauxcelles to derisively dub their works as &quot;les Fauves&quot;, or &quot;the wild beasts&quot;, marking the start of the Fauvist movement. In March 1906, the noted art dealer Ambroise Vollard sent Derain to London to produce a series of paintings with the city as subject. In 30 paintings (29 of which are still extant), Derain presented a portrait of London that was radically different from anything done by previous painters of the city such as Whistler or Monet. With bold colors and compositions, Derain painted multiple pictures of the Thames and Tower Bridge. These London paintings remain among his most popular work. Art critic T. G Rosenthal: &quot;Not since Monet has anyone made London seem so fresh and yet remain quintessentially English. Some of his views of the Thames use the Pointillist technique of multiple dots, although by this time, because the dots have become much larger, it is rather more simply the separation of colours called Divisionism and it is peculiarly effective in conveying the fragmentation of colour in moving water in sunlight.&quot;

In 1907 art dealer Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler purchased Derain&#x27;s entire studio, granting Derain financial stability. He experimented with stone sculpture and moved to Montmartre to be near his friend Pablo Picasso and other noted artists. Fernande Olivier, Picasso&#x27;s mistress at the time, described Derain as:
Slim, elegant, with a lively colour and enamelled black hair. With an English chic, somewhat striking. Fancy waistcoats, ties in crude colours, red and green. Always a pipe in his mouth, phlegmatic, mocking, cold, an arguer.

At Montmartre, Derain began to shift from the brilliant Fauvist palette to more muted tones, showing the influence of Cubism and Paul Cézanne. (According to Gertrude Stein, Derain may have been influenced by African sculpture before Picasso.) Derain supplied woodcuts in primitivist style for an edition of Guillaume Apollinaire&#x27;s first book of prose, &quot;L&#x27;enchanteur pourrissant&quot; (1909). He displayed works at the Neue Künstlervereinigung in Munich in 1910, in 1912 at the secessionist Der Blaue Reiter and in 1913 at the seminal Armory Show in New York. He also illustrated a collection of poems by Max Jacob in 1912.

===Towards a new classicism===

At about this time Derain&#x27;s work began overtly reflecting his study of the Old Masters. The role of color was reduced and forms became austere; the years 1911–1914 are sometimes referred to as his gothic period. In 1914 he was mobilized for military service in World War I and until his release in 1919 he would have little time for painting, although in 1916 he provided a set of illustrations for André Breton&#x27;s first book, &quot;Mont de Piete&quot;.

After the war, Derain won new acclaim as a leader of the renewed classicism then ascendant. With the wildness of his Fauve years far behind, he was admired as an upholder of tradition. In 1919 he designed the ballet &quot;La Boutique fantasque&quot; for Diaghilev, leader of the Ballets Russes. A major success, it would lead to his creating many ballet designs.

The 1920s marked the height of his success, as he was awarded the Carnegie Prize in 1928 for his &quot;Still-life with Dead Game&quot; and began to exhibit extensively abroad—in London, Berlin, Frankfurt, Düsseldorf, New York City and Cincinnati, Ohio.

During the German occupation of France in World War II, Derain lived primarily in Paris and was much courted by the Germans because he represented the prestige of French culture. Derain accepted an invitation to make an official visit to Germany in 1941, and traveled with other French artists to Berlin to attend a Nazi exhibition of an officially endorsed artist, Arno Breker. Derain&#x27;s presence in Germany was used effectively by Nazi propaganda, and after the Liberation he was branded a collaborator and ostracized by many former supporters.

A year before his death, he contracted an eye infection from which he never fully recovered. He died in Garches, Hauts-de-Seine, Île-de-France, France in 1954 when he was struck by a moving vehicle.

Derain&#x27;s London paintings were the subject of a major exhibition at the Courtauld Institute from 27 October 2005 to 22 January 2006.

== Gallery ==
==Public collections==
Among the public collections holding works by André Derain are:
* Museum of Fine Arts, Ghent, Gent
* Museum de Fundatie, Zwolle, Netherlands

== Nazi-looted art ==
In 2020, a French court ordered that three paintings by Derain, &quot;Paysage à Cassis (ou Vue de Cassis&quot;), &quot;La Chapelle-sous-Crécy&quot; were restituted and &quot;Pinède, Cassis&quot; should be restituted to the heirs of René Gimpel, from whom they had been looted during the Nazi occupation of France. Gimpel&#x27;s family had submitted the claim in 2013. In 2023 Derain&#x27;s &quot;Still Life With a Bottle&quot; was restituted to the heirs of Dane Reichsmann, who was murdered in Auschwitz with his wife.

==See also==
*&quot;The Pool of London&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
*Clement, Russell (1994). &quot;Les Fauves: A Sourcebook&quot;. Greenwood Press. .
*Cowling, Elizabeth; Mundy, Jennifer (1990). &quot;On Classic Ground: Picasso, Léger, de Chirico and the New Classicism 1910–1930&quot;. London: Tate Gallery. 
*Diehl, Gaston (1977). &quot;Derain&quot;. Crown Publishers, Inc. .
*Hamilton, George Heard (1993). &quot;Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880–1940&quot;. Yale University Press. .
*Sotriffer, Kristian (1972). &quot;Expressionism and Fauvism&quot;. McGraw-Hill. .

==External links==
*André Derain at the National Gallery of Art
* Works by André Derain (public domain in Canada)
*André Derain exhibition catalogs
*Gelett Burgess, &quot;The Wild Men of Paris, Matisse, Picasso and Les Fauves&quot;, 1910, &quot;Architectural Record&quot;
*André Derain, Museums and Public Art Galleries Worldwide, Artcyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156272" start="0" end="12" title="André Derain" label="André Derain"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="108" end="115" title="Fauvism" label="Fauvism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="121" end="134" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000688" start="179" end="213" title="public domain in the United States" label="public domain in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q240752" start="282" end="288" title="Chatou" label="Chatou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12820" start="290" end="298" title="Yvelines" label="Yvelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="300" end="313" title="Île-de-France (region)" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q241098" start="405" end="413" title="Vlaminck" label="Vlaminck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="417" end="424" title="Matisse" label="Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="516" end="523" title="Cézanne" label="Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q461464" start="674" end="689" title="Eugène Carrière" label="Eugène Carrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q241098" start="755" end="774" title="Maurice de Vlaminck" label="Maurice de Vlaminck"/>
<link wikidata="Q212456" start="885" end="893" title="Commercy" label="Commercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1205" end="1218" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q254829" start="1230" end="1239" title="Collioure" label="Collioure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925696" start="1271" end="1293" title="Mountains at Collioure" label="Mountains at Collioure"/>
<link wikidata="Q739989" start="1382" end="1402" title="Salon d&amp;#x27;Automne" label="Salon d&amp;#x27;Automne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872044" start="1447" end="1463" title="Louis Vauxcelles" label="Louis Vauxcelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="1503" end="1513" title="les Fauves" label="les Fauves"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="1578" end="1585" title="Fauvism" label="Fauvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q459041" start="1632" end="1648" title="Ambroise Vollard" label="Ambroise Vollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q203643" start="1905" end="1913" title="James Abbott McNeill Whistler" label="Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="1917" end="1922" title="Claude Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1999" end="2005" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="2010" end="2022" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="2250" end="2261" title="Pointillism" label="Pointillist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487023" start="2413" end="2424" title="Divisionism" label="Divisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q67762" start="2552" end="2575" title="Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler" label="Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="2702" end="2712" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="2735" end="2748" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="3194" end="3200" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="3205" end="3217" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="3233" end="3247" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="3347" end="3358" title="Primitivism" label="primitivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="3383" end="3404" title="Guillaume Apollinaire" label="Guillaume Apollinaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="3439" end="3468" title="L&amp;#x27;enchanteur pourrissant" label="L&amp;#x27;enchanteur pourrissant"/>
<link wikidata="Q698293" start="3509" end="3533" title="Neue Künstlervereinigung" label="Neue Künstlervereinigung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3537" end="3543" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="3581" end="3597" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q688909" start="3625" end="3636" title="Armory Show" label="Armory Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q156214" start="3695" end="3704" title="Max Jacob" label="Max Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q435989" start="3827" end="3838" title="Old Masters" label="Old Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="3949" end="3955" title="Gothic art" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4013" end="4024" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="4151" end="4163" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="4276" end="4286" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="4420" end="4426" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420510" start="4433" end="4454" title="La Boutique fantasque" label="La Boutique fantasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="4465" end="4474" title="Serge Diaghilev" label="Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="4490" end="4504" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043966" start="4641" end="4655" title="Carnegie Prize" label="Carnegie Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="4769" end="4778" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="4780" end="4790" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="4810" end="4820" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="4822" end="4826" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4871" end="4883" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="5145" end="5149" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q689057" start="5167" end="5193" title="Art of the Third Reich" label="officially endorsed artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61055" start="5195" end="5206" title="Arno Breker" label="Arno Breker"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="5266" end="5281" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="5297" end="5307" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="5325" end="5337" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="collaborator"/>
<link wikidata="Q246199" start="5485" end="5492" title="Garches" label="Garches"/>
<link wikidata="Q12543" start="5494" end="5508" title="Hauts-de-Seine" label="Hauts-de-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="5510" end="5523" title="Île-de-France (region)" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q734266" start="5658" end="5677" title="Courtauld Institute" label="Courtauld Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365880" start="5823" end="5849" title="Museum of Fine Arts, Ghent" label="Museum of Fine Arts, Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="5851" end="5855" title="Ghent" label="Gent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436387" start="5858" end="5876" title="Museum de Fundatie" label="Museum de Fundatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q793" start="5878" end="5884" title="Zwolle" label="Zwolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5886" end="5897" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426274" start="6153" end="6164" title="René Gimpel" label="René Gimpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28541252" start="6456" end="6486" title="The Pool of London (painting)" label="&amp;quot;The Pool of London&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66919" wikidata="Q225644" url="?curid=66919" title="CBC">
<text>CBC may refer to:

==Media==
* Cadena Baja California or Grupo Cadena, a radio and television broadcaster in Mexico
* Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Canada&#x27;s radio and television public broadcaster
** CBC Television
** CBC Radio One
** CBC Music
** CBC News
** CBC.ca
** CBC Arts
** Canadian Broadcasting Centre
* Capital Broadcasting Center, an Egyptian television broadcasting channel
* Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation, a national radio and TV broadcaster operated by the state-owned broadcasting corporation of Barbados
** CBC-TV8, the oldest broadcast station in Barbados
* CBC Benna, an Algerian television channel
* CBC Film Sales Corporation, an American film studio later renamed as Columbia Pictures
* Chubu-Nippon Broadcasting, a radio station and a TV station in Nagoya, Japan
*&quot;Comments by Celebs&quot;, an Instagram account and podcast highlighting celebrities&#x27; use of social media
* Capitol Broadcasting Company
* CBC (Azerbaijani TV channel), an Azerbaijani television channel

==Organizations==
* Carolina Bird Club, a non-profit organisation

===Politics===
* Congressional Black Caucus, an organization of African American members of the Congress of the US

===Business===
* CBC Group, an Asian Healthcare investment firm
* Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan), formerly known as the Central Bank of China
* Commercial Bank of Ceylon, a private bank in Sri Lanka
* Commercial Banking Company of Sydney, a former bank in Australia
* Commonwealth Business Council, an association promoting Commonwealth trade
* , a Brazilian ammunition manufacturer
* Copyright Board of Canada

===Education===
* Central Bible College, a college in Springfield, Missouri, US
* Coastal Bend College, a community college in southern Texas, US
* Columbia Basin College, a community college in Pasco, Washington, US
* Columbia Bible College, a college in Abbotsford, British Columbia, Canada
* Covenant Bible College, a closed college in the Covenant, Canada
* Common Basic Cycle or , the basic courses for the University of Buenos Aires
* Christian Brothers College High School, a Christian high school in Town and Country, Missouri

==Science and technology==
* Cannabichromene, a non-psychoactive cannabinoid found in cannabis
* Cap binding complex, a protein complex
* Cipher block chaining, a block cipher mode of operation
* Common Booster Core, part of a Delta IV rocket
* Complete blood count, a blood test panel
* Cornering brake control, a car safety system
* Customer Bar Code, barcode symbology for UK postcodes and delivery point suffixes
* CBC controller, a controller used by Botball
* Clustering By Committee, a clustering algorithm for word-sense induction
* COIN-OR branch and cut, a linear programming optimization solver in the COIN-OR project

==Other uses==
* CBC band, a rock band based in the former South Vietnam
* Caius Boat Club, a boat club for members of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, England
* Central Bedfordshire Council, the local government office in Bedfordshire, England
* Chalmers Ballong Corps, a ballooning club in Sweden
* &#x27;s reporting mark
* Christmas Bird Count, an annual bird census
* , the governing body for cycling in Brazil
* Congressional Bike Caucus, an organization of US congressmen promoting cycling
* Cross-border cooperation, one of the forms of territorial cooperation in the European Union

==See also==
* Calvary Baptist Church (disambiguation)
* CBBC (disambiguation)
* Central Baptist Church (disambiguation), Baptist churches in various places
* Children&#x27;s Book Council (disambiguation)
* Christian Brothers College (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225644" start="0" end="3" title="CBC" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016358" start="31" end="53" title="Cadena Baja California" label="Cadena Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="118" end="151" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="210" end="224" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009037" start="228" end="241" title="CBC Radio One" label="CBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009015" start="245" end="254" title="CBC Music" label="CBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931014" start="258" end="266" title="CBC News" label="CBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008982" start="270" end="276" title="CBC.ca" label="CBC.ca"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079848" start="280" end="288" title="CBC Arts" label="CBC Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935781" start="292" end="320" title="Canadian Broadcasting Centre" label="Canadian Broadcasting Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546311" start="323" end="350" title="Capital Broadcasting Center" label="Capital Broadcasting Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039360" start="398" end="432" title="Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation" label="Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648556" start="538" end="545" title="CBC TV 8 (Barbados)" label="CBC-TV8"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079622" start="590" end="599" title="CBC Benna" label="CBC Benna"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753251" start="634" end="660" title="CBC Film Sales Corporation" label="CBC Film Sales Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="703" end="720" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q528448" start="723" end="748" title="Chubu-Nippon Broadcasting" label="Chubu-Nippon Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084609" start="807" end="825" title="Comments by Celebs" label="Comments by Celebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035843" start="919" end="947" title="Capitol Broadcasting Company" label="Capitol Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16415062" start="950" end="978" title="CBC (Azerbaijani TV channel)" label="CBC (Azerbaijani TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21017051" start="1035" end="1053" title="Carolina Bird Club" label="Carolina Bird Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015366" start="1099" end="1125" title="Congressional Black Caucus" label="Congressional Black Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120670267" start="1215" end="1224" title="CBC Group" label="CBC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q198642" start="1264" end="1310" title="Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan)" label="Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152468" start="1358" end="1383" title="Commercial Bank of Ceylon" label="Commercial Bank of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641711" start="1415" end="1451" title="Commercial Banking Company of Sydney" label="Commercial Banking Company of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153705" start="1482" end="1511" title="Commonwealth Business Council" label="Commonwealth Business Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986597" start="1599" end="1624" title="Copyright Board of Canada" label="Copyright Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060451" start="1644" end="1665" title="Central Bible College" label="Central Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138254" start="1708" end="1728" title="Coastal Bend College" label="Coastal Bend College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149615" start="1774" end="1796" title="Columbia Basin College" label="Columbia Basin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149619" start="1845" end="1867" title="Columbia Bible College" label="Columbia Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178976" start="1921" end="1943" title="Covenant Bible College" label="Covenant Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q194223" start="2038" end="2064" title="University of Buenos Aires" label="University of Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109374" start="2067" end="2105" title="Christian Brothers College High School" label="Christian Brothers College High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q410949" start="2191" end="2206" title="Cannabichromene" label="Cannabichromene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113185" start="2259" end="2278" title="Cap binding complex" label="Cap binding complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q154021" start="2300" end="2321" title="Cipher block chaining" label="Cipher block chaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q967369" start="2358" end="2377" title="Common Booster Core" label="Common Booster Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="2407" end="2427" title="Complete blood count" label="Complete blood count"/>
<link wikidata="Q253595" start="2450" end="2473" title="Cornering brake control" label="Cornering brake control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428493" start="2497" end="2514" title="Customer Bar Code" label="Customer Bar Code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2599" end="2625" title="Botball#Robot controllers used in Botball" label="controller used by Botball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798410" start="2680" end="2700" title="word-sense induction" label="word-sense induction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2775" end="2782" title="COIN-OR#CBC" label="COIN-OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822321" start="2809" end="2817" title="CBC band" label="CBC band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017944" start="2867" end="2882" title="Caius Boat Club" label="Caius Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986562" start="2960" end="2988" title="Central Bedfordshire Council" label="Central Bedfordshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069008" start="3045" end="3067" title="Chalmers Ballong Corps" label="Chalmers Ballong Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q836563" start="3124" end="3144" title="Christmas Bird Count" label="Christmas Bird Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160922" start="3215" end="3240" title="Congressional Bike Caucus" label="Congressional Bike Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545904" start="3296" end="3320" title="Cross-border cooperation" label="Cross-border cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027564" start="3404" end="3443" title="Calvary Baptist Church (disambiguation)" label="Calvary Baptist Church (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008975" start="3446" end="3467" title="CBBC (disambiguation)" label="CBBC (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053708" start="3470" end="3509" title="Central Baptist Church (disambiguation)" label="Central Baptist Church (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122104" start="3548" end="3593" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Book Council (disambiguation)" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Book Council (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109364" start="3596" end="3639" title="Christian Brothers College (disambiguation)" label="Christian Brothers College (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66921" wikidata="Q1142327" url="?curid=66921" title="Global Television Network">
<text>The Global Television Network (more commonly called Global, or occasionally Global TV) is a Canadian English-language terrestrial television network. It is currently Canada&#x27;s second most-watched private terrestrial television network after CTV, and has fifteen owned-and-operated stations throughout the country. Global is owned by Corus Entertainment — the media holdings of JR Shaw and other members of his family.

Global has its origins in a regional television station of the same name, serving Southern Ontario, which launched in 1974. The Ontario station was soon purchased by the now-defunct CanWest Global Communications, and that company gradually expanded its national reach in the subsequent decades through both acquisitions and new station launches, building up a quasi-network of independent stations, known as the CanWest Global System, until the stations were unified under the Ontario station&#x27;s branding in 1997.

==History==
===NTV===
The network has its origins in NTV, a new network first proposed in 1966 by Hamilton media proprietor Ken Soble, the co-founder and owner of independent station CHCH-TV through his Niagara Television company. Financially backed by Power Corporation of Canada, Soble submitted a brief to the Board of Broadcast Governors in 1966 proposing a national satellite-fed network. Under the plan, Soble&#x27;s company would launch Canada&#x27;s first broadcast satellite, and would use it to relay the programming of CHCH to 96 new transmitters across Canada. Soble died in December of that year; his widow Frances took over as president of Niagara Television, while former CTV executive Michael Hind-Smith and Niagara Television vice-president Al Bruner handled the network application. Soble had originally formulated the plan after failing in a bid to acquire CTV.

The original proposal was widely criticized on various grounds, including claims that it exceeded the board&#x27;s concentration of media ownership limits and that it was overly ambitious and financially unsustainable. As well, it failed to include any plan for local news content on any of its individual stations beyond possibly the metropolitan Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver markets.

By 1968, NTV put forward its first official licence application, under which the original 96 transmitters would be supplemented by 43 more transmitters to distribute a separate French language service, along with provisions for the free distribution of CBC Television, Radio-Canada and a new noncommercial educational television service on the network&#x27;s satellite. Transponder space would also be leased to CTV and Télé-Métropole, but as competing commercial services they would not have been granted the free distribution rights the plan offered to the public television services. However, after federal communications minister Paul Hellyer announced plans to move forward with the publicly owned Anik series of broadcast satellites through Telesat Canada instead of leaving the rollout of satellite technology in the hands of private corporations, Power Corporation backed out of the application and left NTV in limbo.

===Global Communications===

Bruner was fired from Niagara Television in 1969, purportedly because his efforts to rescue the network application were leading him to neglect his other duties with the company&#x27;s existing media operations. He then put together another investment team to form Global Communications, which carried the network application forward thereafter. By 1970, the Canadian Radio and Television Commission had put out a formal call for &quot;third&quot; stations in several major cities. Global Communications put forward a revised application under which the network would launch with transmitters only in Ontario, as an interim step toward the eventual buildout of the entire network originally envisioned by Soble. Because Niagara Television and CHCH were no longer involved in the proposal, the 1970 application also requested a licence to launch a new station in Toronto as the chain&#x27;s flagship.

The network licence was approved by the CRTC on July 21, 1972. The group was granted a six-transmitter network in Southern Ontario, stretching from Windsor to Ottawa. They had also sought a seventh transmitter in Maxville that could reach Montreal, but were turned down because of a CRTC moratorium on new English stations in the Montreal market. The transmitters would all be fed from a central studio in Toronto. The group promised a high level of Canadian content and agreed not to accept local advertising.

The station&#x27;s initial plan was to broadcast only during prime time hours from 5 p.m. to midnight, while leasing daytime hours to the Ontario Educational Communications Authority to broadcast educational programming. However, the offer never came to fruition, with the OECA opting instead to expand what would eventually become TVOntario by launching its own transmitters.

The new Global Television Network, with the callsign CKGN-TV (now CIII-DT), launched on January 6, 1974 from studios located at a former factory in the Don Mills neighbourhood in North York (now in Toronto) at 6 p.m. local time. Global remains based there today. Although the Ontario station has always been based in Toronto, its main transmitter was licensed to Paris, Ontario; halfway between Kitchener-Waterloo and Hamilton, transmitting on Channel 6, until 2009. Repeating transmitters were originally located near Windsor, Ontario on Channel 22; Sarnia, Channel 29, Uxbridge, Ontario on Channel 22 to serve the metro Toronto area; Bancroft, on Channel 2; and Hull, Quebec to cover the Ottawa area, on Channel 6.

===Launch===
Global&#x27;s original prime time schedule included Patrick Watson&#x27;s documentary series &quot;Witness to Yesterday&quot;, Pierre Berton&#x27;s political debate show &quot;The Great Debate&quot;, a Canadian edition of Bernard Braden&#x27;s British consumer affairs newsmagazine &quot;The Braden Beat&quot;, William Shatner&#x27;s film talk show &quot;Flick Flack&quot;, Sunday night Toronto Toros hockey games and a nightly variety series called &quot;Everything Goes&quot;, as well as a few imported American series including &quot;Chopper One&quot;, &quot;Dirty Sally&quot; and &quot;Doc Elliot&quot;. In March, the station drew a formal complaint from MP James McGrath against its airing of the 1969 Western film &quot;Heaven with a Gun&quot;, as the film featured scenes of violence which McGrath considered inappropriate.

The station ran into a financial crisis within just three months. Due to the CRTC decision, it was forced to launch at midseason. Many companies had already allocated their advertising budgets for the season and had little money left to buy time on the newly minted network, and even some of the advertisers who had booked time on the network backed out in light of the 1973 oil crisis. In addition, the short-lived American adoption of year-round daylight saving time in January 1974, and the Ontario government&#x27;s refusal to follow suit, had unexpectedly forced &quot;Everything Goes&quot;, promoted as the network&#x27;s flagship show, into airing directly opposite &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot; and thus attracting disastrous ratings. As a result of the crisis, the station quickly lost access to its line of credit.

Unable to meet daily expenses, Global initially approached potential bidders including Channel Seventynine, Denison Mines, Standard Broadcasting and the Jim Pattison Group, and was soon bailed out by IWC Communications, owned by broadcaster Allan Slaight, and Global Ventures Western Ltd., a syndicate which included Winnipeg movie theater owner Paul Morton and Izzy Asper, a Manitoba politician turned broadcaster. Asper&#x27;s company, CanWest Capital, was in the process of obtaining the licence for what would become CKND-TV in Winnipeg, which planned to carry some of Global&#x27;s programs under a syndication deal.

===1970s–1990s===
A considerable number of programs featured on Global&#x27;s schedule were cancelled in the spring of 1974. By that fall, it was obvious that Global&#x27;s original model was unsustainable, and it was forced to pick up a large amount of American programming to fill in the gaps. With American imports filling as much of the schedule as Canadian content rules would allow (60% Canadian overall, 50% Canadian in prime time), Global had effectively become &quot;another CTV.&quot; With the exception of the nightly newscasts, few other Canadian-produced programs remained on the station, and the ones that did exist were largely criticized as cheaply-produced filler. John Spalding, the station&#x27;s original program director, quit in 1975 after being unable to convince the station&#x27;s owners to invest more money into higher-quality production. To replace him the company recruited programmer Bill Stewart away from CKCO-TV, Kitchener. Stewart&#x27;s savvy program purchases in the ensuing years were largely credited with keeping the network viable while its viewership grew. The company enhanced its senior talent pool in 1979 with the arrival of sales guru Dave Mintz, formerly of KVOS-TV, as the network&#x27;s president, a post he held until his retirement in 1993, taking Global from the lowest-rated station in Toronto to the ratings leader along the way.
Over several years, the prime late evening newscast shifted between 10 and 11 p.m., and between 30 and 60 minutes. CKGN changed its callsign to CIII-TV in 1984, deferring to its widespread CATV distribution on Cable 3.

Asper bought controlling interest in 1985, making him the first western-based owner of a major Canadian broadcaster. In 1989, Asper and Morton tried to buy each other out, a struggle which was resolved in favour of Asper and Canwest.

The network continued to be limited to its six-transmitter chain in Ontario for its first decade. However, soon after Asper bought controlling interest in Global, he seemed eager to grow his chain of stations into a third national network. He started by launching CFRE-DT in Regina and CFSK-DT in Saskatoon, and winning a legal battle for CKVU-DT in Vancouver during the second half of the 1980s. He also acquired the fledgling CIHF-DT in Halifax in the early 1990s. Canwest&#x27;s stations now reached seven of Canada&#x27;s ten provinces. The Canwest stations purchased many of their programs collectively, and consequently had similar – although not identical – broadcast schedules. They did not share common branding, however – although stations were sometimes indicated as being part of the &quot;CanWest Global System&quot; as a secondary brand, throughout the 1980s and early 1990s they each retained their own branding and continued to function as an ownership group of independent stations rather than as a fully unified network.
In 1997, Canwest bought controlling interest in the CBC affiliate in Quebec City, CKMI-TV, from TVA, which retained a 49% interest until 2002. With the acquisition of CKMI, Canwest now had enough coverage of Canada that it seemed logical to rebrand its station group as a network. Accordingly, on August 18, 1997, Canwest scrubbed all local branding from its stations and rebranded them as the &quot;Global Television Network&quot;, the brand previously used solely by the Ontario outlet. On the same day, CKMI disaffiliated from CBC, set up rebroadcasters in Montreal and Sherbrooke, and became the Quebec outlet of the newly minted network. It also built a new studio in Montreal and moved most of its operations there, though the licence nominally remained in Quebec City until 2009. Canwest&#x27;s purchase of CKMI extended Global&#x27;s footprint to eight of Canada&#x27;s 10 largest markets (though Ottawa and Montreal were only served by rebroadcasters).

Even so, Global was still not a fully national network, as it did not have stations in Calgary and Edmonton. The CRTC turned down bids by Canwest for stations in those cities in the 1980s. As a result, Global continued its long-standing secondary affiliations in those cities on independent stations CICT-TV and CITV-TV, respectively. Similarly, Global lacked a full-time station in St. John&#x27;s, where Global programming was carried by longtime CTV affiliate CJON-TV.

===2000s===
In 2000, Canwest acquired the conventional television assets of Western International Communications (WIC). WIC&#x27;s stations in Calgary, Edmonton and Lethbridge had been airing some Global programs since 1988, and those stations formally joined the network on September 4, 2000.

The following fall, WIC&#x27;s long-dominant Vancouver station CHAN-TV was brought into the fold after its existing affiliation agreement with CTV expired, setting off a massive realignment of television affiliations in southwestern British Columbia. Indeed, one main reason why Canwest bought WIC&#x27;s television assets was because of CHAN&#x27;s massive translator network, which covered 97% of British Columbia. Global&#x27;s previous Vancouver station, CKVU-TV, as well as WIC-owned Montreal CTV affiliate CFCF-TV, were sold off. WIC&#x27;s remaining stations were maintained as twinstick stations and were eventually integrated into a secondary system known as CH (rebranded as E! in 2007 in a partnership with the American channel of the same name), although financial pressures forced Canwest to sell or fold the E! stations in 2009.

Full network service is still not available over-the-air in Newfoundland and Labrador. However, CJON, having disaffiliated from CTV in 2002, now clears the vast majority of Global programming in that province, most recently adding the network&#x27;s national newscast in mid-2009. Any remaining programs there may be accessed on cable or satellite through Global stations from other markets (most commonly Edmonton&#x27;s CITV), or through the network&#x27;s website.

Following Canwest&#x27;s purchase of Southam Newspapers (later Canwest Publishing) and the &quot;National Post&quot; from Conrad Black in 2001, their media interests were merged under a policy of cross-promotion and synergy. Journalists from the &quot;Post&quot; and other Canwest papers made frequent appearances on Global&#x27;s news programs, passengers on the now-defunct serial drama &quot;Train 48&quot; habitually read the &quot;Post&quot;, and Global programs were promoted in Canwest newspapers. However, this practice has now been largely abandoned, particularly after Canwest&#x27;s breakup in 2010.

In late 2004, with CTV beginning to dominate the ratings, Canwest reorganized its Canadian operations and hired a number of new executives, all formerly of various U.S. media firms, leading to a major overhaul of Global announced in December 2005. The most obvious change was a new logo, replacing the &quot;crescent&quot; with a new &quot;greater than&quot; logo, with the Global wordmark in a new font, that was introduced on February 5, 2006 (coinciding with Global&#x27;s broadcast of Super Bowl XL). New logos and graphics were designed for news and network promotions, and several newscasts received new timeslots and formats. The crescent, which had been used as a common design element in many Canwest logos, was subsequently removed from other properties owned or sponsored by the company over time.

On April 10, 2008, the network announced that its Toronto and Vancouver stations would start broadcasting their over-the-air signals in those markets in high definition. CIII and CHAN officially started transmitting in HD on April 18, 2008. The network has also launched digital signals at its stations in Calgary (CICT-DT) and Edmonton (CITV-DT) as of July 2009.

===2010s===
Following Canwest seeking creditor protection in late 2009, Shaw Communications acquired Canwest&#x27;s broadcasting assets on October 27, 2010, and folded them into a new division, Shaw Media, of which Global is the flagship. Canwest&#x27;s newspaper assets had been sold off earlier in the year as Postmedia Network.

On April 1, 2016, as part of a corporate re-organization (marketed as being an acquisition), Shaw Media was subsumed by Shaw&#x27;s sister company Corus Entertainment.

==Television listings==
In television listings such as &quot;TV Guide&quot;, where space limitations usually require television networks to be referred to by a three-letter abbreviation, the abbreviations &quot;GLO&quot;, &quot;GLB&quot; or &quot;GTV&quot; are commonly used, depending on the publication. None of these abbreviations has any standing as an official name for the network, however – the network&#x27;s own shortform name for itself is always &quot;Global&quot;.

==Programming==
===News===

Global News is the news and current affairs division of the Global Television Network, which is based in Vancouver. National programs broadcast by the division include Global&#x27;s flagship national newscast &quot;Global National&quot; and newsmagazine shows such as &quot;16x9&quot;. The network also offers various amounts of local news programming on its eleven O&amp;Os. Local news programming on most of Global&#x27;s O&amp;Os mirror the newscast schedules of many U.S. television stations; most Global-owned stations carry a morning newscast of three or four hours in length, a noon newscast, supper hour newscasts of between 30 and 90 minutes and a half-hour to hour-long late evening newscast. Global-owned stations in certain major markets also carry locally based public affairs programs under the &quot;Focus&quot; brand.

In addition, Corus also operates several Global-branded news/talk radio stations across Canada under the &quot;Global News Radio&quot; moniker.

===Entertainment===
Global does not have what can be called a main schedule, apart from news. Even before the WIC purchase, the Global stations had widely varying program lineups, and the WIC purchase only exacerbated the differences. For example, CHAN held the British Columbia rights to many shows that aired on CTV until 2001, except for &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot;. Factors influencing the stations&#x27; programming include time zone differences, local programming, and ratings for non-Global shows.

Global has built its business on profitable entertainment programming produced in the United States and has long been criticized for not investing enough in Canadian content. Canadian programming carried on the network, such as a revival of 1960s American science fiction series &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;, or the Chicago-set drama &quot;Zoe Busiek: Wild Card&quot;, has often avoided Canadian themes, presumably to focus on sales to United States and international cable or syndication markets – although &quot;Psi Factor&quot; did include Canadian themes, including a &quot;killer wheat&quot; episode and episodes set in Northern Quebec and Halifax. Series initially intended for the U.S. and international market are sometimes called &quot;industrial&quot; productions and largely disappeared with the collapse of the international action hour market.

From the late-1990s to the mid-2000s, Global aired somewhat more identifiably Canadian entertainment programming, including the long-running finance drama &quot;Traders&quot;, the British-Canadian animated comedy &quot;Bob and Margaret&quot;, the police procedural drama &quot;Blue Murder&quot;, the nightly improvised drama &quot;Train 48&quot;, the sitcom &quot;The Jane Show&quot; and the reality show &quot;My Fabulous Gay Wedding&quot;. In 2003, Global signed comedian Mike Bullard, host of the nightly &quot;Open Mike with Mike Bullard&quot; on CTV and The Comedy Network, to a multi-year contract for a new nightly talk show on Global, but that series was cancelled after 60 episodes amid poor ratings.

Global purchased the rights to produce a Canadian version of the popular entertainment magazine &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;; &quot;ET Canada&quot; launched on September 12, 2005. It also secured Canadian production rights to the American reality series &quot;The Apprentice&quot;, but a Canadian version of the program never came to fruition. They also produce a Canadian version of the reality series &quot;Big Brother&quot;.

Global, like all Canadian broadcast outlets, benefits from Canada&#x27;s simultaneous substitution (or &quot;simsub&quot;) regulations, which allow content owners to control programming rights for a particular show in Canada. When an American broadcast network is broadcasting the same show at the same time that Global is (such as the programs mentioned above), Canadian cable subscribers may only watch the Global Television broadcast, even when trying to view the American stations. This law gives them double exposure for their content and a larger share of advertising revenue, effectively blocking American border cities from access to the Canadian market. This was done to help give money to the networks to fund Canadian content development. Global is not the only Canadian broadcaster to use simsubs; nonetheless, some complaints, specific to Global, have arisen due to the following related practices:
* Some Global stations have superimposed the phrase &quot;on Global&quot; on a program&#x27;s main titles, often in a font that poorly replicates that of the title itself. This sometimes meant that a single superimposed version was used with each episode, potentially interfering with running gags within the opening credits. For instance, the opening of &quot;American Dad!&quot; during the early seasons featured a news headline that changed with each episode, but for a time, the same headline might be shown on multiple episodes on Global, an issue that was later rectified. This practice was discontinued altogether with the start of the fall 2006 season.
* Split-screen credits are also used to allow for network promos (as of the 2009–10 season, the show&#x27;s own stylized production credits are displayed rather than a network-generated uniform credit sequence). On some shows, including &quot;The Simpsons&quot; and &quot;Family Guy&quot;, there are special closing credits that may use additional scenes or special music that is altered or lost when Global uses a split screen. While the use of split-screen credits is common among networks in Canada and the U.S., how Global treats one program and how the U.S. network treats the same episode may be different.
* In some cases, next-episode previews, such as those on &quot;The Apprentice&quot;, are not shown. This may be because these promos are made in-house by the network (in this case, NBC), and cannot be edited ahead of broadcast.
* Since the late 2000s, several American networks have begun to start certain shows shortly before or after :00 or :30 past the hour to avert audience loss. Global does not necessarily follow this practice, meaning the last few minutes of the preceding show may be lost to those watching the U.S. network. For instance, if NBC schedules &quot;The Apprentice&quot; to start at 9:02, but Global schedules its start for exactly 9:00, the last two minutes of NBC&#x27;s 8:00 program may be blocked by the Global signal. This is not unique to Global and may vary by service provider, since cable and satellite providers, not the networks, are responsible for scheduling and initiating simsubs.
* If an American program on a U.S. network is delayed due to breaking news or a sporting event on the American network and is scheduled for broadcast at that time on Global, Global will also delay that episode until it starts on the American network to intentionally simsub. One example is an episode of &quot;House&quot; that aired after Super Bowl XLII in 2008 (see below).
* Global was the Canadian broadcast-television rightsholder for the National Football League and, hence, the Super Bowl, through the end of the 2006 season (these rights were bought by CTV starting with the 2007 season). As with any other U.S. network program, Global could and did simsub the American feed. However, the Super Bowl is particularly controversial, as the U.S. network Super Bowl commercials, likely the most anticipated set of commercials of any given year, could not be seen on either Global or the applicable U.S. station. Instead, while some international advertisers (such as Budweiser) did buy time on Global for the U.S. ads, many Canadian companies simply ran ads introduced long before the game. Nonetheless, in recent years, nearly all American commercials have been available via various websites after the game, which may have placated some complainants.

Global cross-promotes heavily with other Corus Entertainment properties in the markets where both services operate in parallel.

On June 6, 2007, the Canadian actors&#x27; union ACTRA picketed Global&#x27;s fall upfronts presentation to protest the lack of Canadian content on current television network schedules.

===Sports===
In 1979, Global – then a regional network in Ontario – purchased the Toronto Blizzard soccer team and produced and aired coverage of the team&#x27;s games in-house. The team was not a success on the field, in attendance or ratings, and Global sold the franchise in 1981 but continued to broadcast seven games a year until 1983.

Aside from its brief experiment with soccer, the Global network has never had an in-house sports production division as do CBC, CTV/TSN, &amp; Citytv/Sportsnet. Network sports broadcasts are either simulcast with American networks or outsourced to independent producers such as Molstar. During the 1987 and 1988 Stanley Cup playoffs, Global aired NHL games syndicated by Carling O&#x27;Keefe. Global was the longtime broadcaster of National Football League football games in Canada, an association that ended in 2007 when CTV outbid Global for the NFL broadcast package. The network was a long-time broadcaster of PGA Tour events.

Beyond event coverage, many Global stations were well known for local late-night sports highlights shows, such as &quot;Sportsline&quot; in Ontario, &quot;Sports Page&quot; in Vancouver (later moved to former sister station CHEK-TV), &quot;2&amp;7 Sports at 11&quot; in Calgary and &quot;Sports Night&quot; in Edmonton. Most of these programs were later unified under the &quot;Global Sports&quot; brand. However, due to declining audiences, by fall 2005 all but the Ontario program had been cancelled, although stations continued to cover sports in their local newscasts. Global Ontario&#x27;s sports program was finally cancelled in January 2007; at that point, the station closed its sports department entirely, and for a time outsourced sports coverage to Sportsnet and The Score / Sportsnet 360.

Some Global O&amp;Os outside of Ontario (such as CHAN Vancouver and CITV Edmonton) continue to feature locally produced sports segments on their local newscasts. On the other hand, the sports segments aired during local newscasts on CIHF-DT in Saint John and CKMI-DT in Montreal are produced from CHAN&#x27;s Vancouver studio, presented by that station&#x27;s sports anchors.

Until the discontinuation of Fox Sports World Canada, CKND-DT in Winnipeg also produced the &quot;Fox Soccer Report&quot;, which was seen on the network and Fox Soccer in the United States. It was replaced in 2012 by the Sportsnet-produced &quot;Fox Soccer News&quot;.

In 2015, Global broadcast coverage of the Canada West conference&#x27;s university football championship, including coverage of one semi-final game, and the Hardy Cup game the following week. The telecasts were produced through Shaw TV&#x27;s &quot;Canada West Football on Shaw&quot; package.

===Video on-demand===
Global streams live and on-demand programming via its website and apps for mobile devices and digital media players. In 2020, the Global apps were relaunched to include streaming for subscribers of most of Corus Entertainment&#x27;s specialty channels, mirroring a similar move announced by CTV.

==Global HD==

In October 2004, Global launched a 1080i high definition simulcast feed of its Toronto station CIII-TV called Global HD and started airing select American programs in HD; some Canadian series such as &quot;Falcon Beach&quot; eventually began to be included among its HD programs. At the time, the service was only available via digital cable. On April 18, 2008, Global officially launched a digital transmitter in Toronto, making the HD simulcast of CIII-TV available over-the-air. The network also launched an HD simulcast feed of its Vancouver station (CHAN-TV) on the same day.

Global HD is available nationally via satellite and on digital cable as well as for free over-the-air using a regular TV antenna and a digital tuner (included in most new television sets) on the following channels:
The above noted transmitters were converted to digital by August 31, 2011, as part of Canada&#x27;s over-the-air transition deadline in mandatory markets from analog to digital. As part of its purchase by Shaw Communications in 2011, Shaw committed to converting all of the network&#x27;s over-the-air analog transmitters to digital by 2016.

==Global stations==
The Global network has long been much more decentralized than either CBC or CTV. For most programs, there is no &quot;network&quot; feed &quot;per se&quot;, and in effect every commercial break is a station break. National advertising is certainly available, but such ads are seamlessly integrated into local ad blocks.

In fact, it is not uncommon to see different lengths of commercial breaks from one station to the next even during identical programming. This occurs even though all Global stations have had their master control operations centralized in Calgary since fall 2006.

From 2010 to 2016, with the exception of CIII-DT in Toronto, stations used sustained on-screen bugs using each station&#x27;s full local brand as opposed to simply &quot;Global&quot;. In September 2016, except for local newscasts, Global has updated its bug back to &quot;Global&quot; without an additional local station city below it.

===Owned-and-operated stations===
&quot;Notes:&lt;br&gt;&quot;
:&quot;1) Two boldface asterisks appearing following a station&#x27;s call letters (**) indicate a flagship station of the Global Television Network;&lt;br&gt;&quot;
:&quot;2) Two boldface plus signs appearing following a station&#x27;s call letters (++) indicate a station that was part of the Canwest Global System until it was merged with the Global Television Network brand in 1997;&quot;

Several O&amp;Os predate the first appearance of the Global banner in 1974. Specifically, CKMI, CICT, CHBC, CHEX, CISA and CKWS launched in the 1950s as CBC Television affiliates, while CHAN-TV launched in 1960 and soon became Vancouver&#x27;s original CTV affiliate. All of these were eventually supplanted by network-owned stations or transmitters.

Most of these stations serve their entire province or region through a network of relay stations as a part of the key station&#x27;s licence, although some of their transmitters may air separate advertising targeted to their local community.

===Affiliates and secondary carriers===
===Former stations===
====Owned-and-operated====
====Secondary affiliates====
===Other Global-branded channels===

Global previously maintained a secondary television system similar to CTV 2. CH was originally launched on February 12, 2001, by Canwest Global Communications after acquiring the Western International Communications properties in 2000. The system was launched in September of that year when the large network shuffle in Vancouver occurred, only to provide a secondary schedule parallel to Canwest&#x27;s larger Global Television Network. It initially focused on airing programs from the U.S. broadcast networks that could not fit on Global&#x27;s own schedule, to avail of simultaneous substitution opportunities. The system became &quot;E!&quot; in fall 2007, as a result of a deal with Comcast to carry programming from that company&#x27;s U.S.-based E!: Entertainment Television, although it continued to air much the same American network series in primetime and the afternoon.

The E! television system ceased operations on September 1, 2009, due to low ratings and corporate financial difficulties that eventually led to Canwest filing for bankruptcy protection and selling its properties to Shaw Media; the E! O&amp;O stations experienced varied fates (CHCH Hamilton and CJNT Montreal were sold to Channel Zero, CHEK Victoria was sold to an employee-led group; CHBC Kelowna remained with Canwest and was converted into a Global O&amp;O, and CHCA Red Deer ceased operations outright), while the Pattison Group stations affiliated with the Rogers Media-owned Citytv system. As E!, local news and other regional programming, as well as most local community sponsorships on the O&amp;O stations, used local branding (using the callsign branding scheme common with Canadian stations not owned by a network or television system). This decision was at least partly made to avoid confusion with &quot;E! News&quot;, but likely intended to ensure that local newscasts were not perceived as celebrity-oriented. E! in the U.S. later reached an agreement to bring the channel&#x27;s brand and programming to Bell Media&#x27;s Category 2 specialty channel Star! (which had a similar format to E! U.S. and had carried some of its programming prior to the 2007 rebranding of CH), rebranding it as a Canadian version of E! on November 29, 2010.

Other Global-branded channels included the Global Reality Channel that was devoted to reality shows launched in 2010 and ceased operations in 2012, Prime, DejaView and Mystery TV, which the latter three channels formerly wore the previous Global logo.

==See also==
* List of Global Television Network personalities
* 2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment
* CBS 
* CITV

==References==
==External links==
*Global Television history at Canadian Communications Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="4" end="29" title="Global Television Network" label="Global Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="52" end="58" title="Global Television Network" label="Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="76" end="85" title="Global Television Network" label="Global TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983009" start="92" end="100" title="Television in Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="101" end="117" title="English language" label="English-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="118" end="148" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial television network"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="245" end="248" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="266" end="292" title="owned-and-operated station" label="owned-and-operated station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135686" start="337" end="356" title="Corus Entertainment" label="Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106881" start="381" end="388" title="JR Shaw" label="JR Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931513" start="451" end="478" title="CIII-DT" label="regional television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033752" start="505" end="521" title="Southern Ontario" label="Southern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031818" start="605" end="634" title="Canwest" label="CanWest Global Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="835" end="856" title="Global Television Network" label="CanWest Global System"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="1040" end="1048" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070094" start="1066" end="1075" title="Ken Soble" label="Ken Soble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407543" start="1125" end="1132" title="CHCH-DT" label="CHCH-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q908444" start="1195" end="1222" title="Power Corporation of Canada" label="Power Corporation of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931305" start="1255" end="1283" title="Board of Broadcast Governors" label="Board of Broadcast Governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860665" start="1313" end="1322" title="broadcast satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="1629" end="1632" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703616" start="1700" end="1709" title="Al Bruner" label="Al Bruner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="1939" end="1971" title="concentration of media ownership" label="concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2172" end="2179" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2181" end="2189" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="2195" end="2204" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="2468" end="2482" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q986985" start="2484" end="2496" title="Ici Radio-Canada Télé" label="Radio-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931378" start="2635" end="2649" title="CFTM-DT" label="Télé-Métropole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896776" start="2849" end="2861" title="Paul Hellyer" label="Paul Hellyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q546687" start="2918" end="2922" title="Anik (satellite)" label="Anik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401935" start="2962" end="2976" title="Telesat Canada" label="Telesat Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="3530" end="3570" title="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission" label="Canadian Radio and Television Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="3772" end="3779" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033752" start="4186" end="4202" title="Southern Ontario" label="Southern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="4220" end="4227" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="4231" end="4237" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q50347614" start="4285" end="4293" title="Maxville, Ontario" label="Maxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4311" end="4319" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="4522" end="4538" title="Canadian content" label="Canadian content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512565" start="4722" end="4766" title="Ontario Educational Communications Authority" label="Ontario Educational Communications Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512565" start="4916" end="4925" title="TVOntario" label="TVOntario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931513" start="5015" end="5022" title="CIII-DT" label="CKGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875138" start="5114" end="5123" title="Don Mills" label="Don Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586510" start="5141" end="5151" title="North York" label="North York"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="5357" end="5375" title="Regional Municipality of Waterloo" label="Kitchener-Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="5481" end="5497" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="5513" end="5519" title="Sarnia" label="Sarnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q386959" start="5533" end="5550" title="Uxbridge, Ontario" label="Uxbridge, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995979" start="5626" end="5638" title="Hull, Quebec" label="Hull, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q947657" start="5745" end="5759" title="Patrick Watson (journalist)" label="Patrick Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028408" start="5792" end="5812" title="Witness to Yesterday" label="Witness to Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q606553" start="5820" end="5833" title="Pierre Berton" label="Pierre Berton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085651" start="5869" end="5885" title="The Great Debate (Canadian TV series)" label="The Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892946" start="5915" end="5929" title="Bernard Braden" label="Bernard Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="6004" end="6019" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459061" start="6048" end="6059" title="Flick Flack" label="Flick Flack"/>
<link wikidata="Q747088" start="6080" end="6093" title="Toronto Toros" label="Toronto Toros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417985" start="6149" end="6164" title="Everything Goes (Canadian TV series)" label="Everything Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623819" start="6230" end="6241" title="Chopper One" label="Chopper One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281081" start="6255" end="6266" title="Dirty Sally" label="Dirty Sally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712419" start="6283" end="6293" title="Doc Elliot" label="Doc Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139350" start="6355" end="6368" title="James McGrath (Canadian politician)" label="James McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795162" start="6419" end="6436" title="Heaven with a Gun" label="Heaven with a Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="6895" end="6910" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36669" start="6973" end="6993" title="daylight saving time" label="daylight saving time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="7204" end="7243" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931559" start="7460" end="7479" title="CITY-DT" label="Channel Seventynine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257824" start="7481" end="7494" title="Denison Mines" label="Denison Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538511" start="7496" end="7517" title="Standard Broadcasting" label="Standard Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356524" start="7526" end="7544" title="Jim Pattison Group" label="Jim Pattison Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598348" start="7614" end="7627" title="Allan Slaight" label="Allan Slaight"/>
<link wikidata="Q125545468" start="7719" end="7730" title="Paul Morton (television executive)" label="Paul Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155643" start="7735" end="7745" title="Izzy Asper" label="Izzy Asper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="7749" end="7757" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931647" start="7894" end="7901" title="CKND-DT" label="CKND-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="8480" end="8483" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340198" start="9201" end="9208" title="KVOS-TV" label="KVOS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931513" start="9524" end="9531" title="CIII-DT" label="CIII-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023494" start="10099" end="10106" title="CFRE-DT" label="CFRE-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123" start="10110" end="10116" title="Regina, Saskatchewan" label="Regina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023504" start="10121" end="10128" title="CFSK-DT" label="CFSK-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566" start="10132" end="10141" title="Saskatoon" label="Saskatoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012596" start="10174" end="10181" title="CKVU-DT" label="CKVU-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931509" start="10263" end="10270" title="CIHF-DT" label="CIHF-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="10274" end="10281" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="10926" end="10929" title="CBC Television" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="10943" end="10954" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931644" start="10956" end="10963" title="CKMI-DT" label="CKMI-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188923" start="10970" end="10973" title="TVA (Canada)" label="TVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q139473" start="11447" end="11457" title="Sherbrooke" label="Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="11924" end="11931" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="11936" end="11944" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931492" start="12137" end="12144" title="CICT-DT" label="CICT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931556" start="12149" end="12156" title="CITV-DT" label="CITV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="12220" end="12235" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012157" start="12300" end="12307" title="CJON-DT" label="CJON-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987970" start="12386" end="12422" title="Western International Communications" label="Western International Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q270887" start="12475" end="12485" title="Lethbridge" label="Lethbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931429" start="12668" end="12675" title="CHAN-DT" label="CHAN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599208" start="12773" end="12794" title="2001 Vancouver TV realignment" label="a massive realignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012596" start="13064" end="13071" title="CKVU-DT" label="CKVU-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931304" start="13117" end="13124" title="CFCF-DT" label="CFCF-TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13190" end="13199" title="Duopoly (broadcasting)#Canada" label="twinstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321348" start="13290" end="13292" title="E! (Canadian TV system)" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="13323" end="13360" title="E!" label="the American channel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="13509" end="13534" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234369" start="13955" end="13973" title="Southam Newspapers" label="Southam Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="14015" end="14028" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q336444" start="14040" end="14052" title="Conrad Black" label="Conrad Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q662340" start="14114" end="14129" title="cross-promotion" label="cross-promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="14134" end="14141" title="synergy" label="synergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832854" start="14313" end="14321" title="Train 48" label="Train 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113351" start="14870" end="14882" title="greater than" label="greater than"/>
<link wikidata="Q904928" start="15019" end="15032" title="Super Bowl XL" label="Super Bowl XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="15493" end="15508" title="high-definition television" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="15646" end="15653" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931492" start="15655" end="15662" title="CICT-DT" label="CICT-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="15668" end="15676" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931556" start="15678" end="15685" title="CITV-DT" label="CITV-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="15743" end="15762" title="bankruptcy protection" label="creditor protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516849" start="15777" end="15796" title="Shaw Communications" label="Shaw Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481600" start="15899" end="15909" title="Shaw Media" label="Shaw Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352022" start="16017" end="16034" title="Postmedia Network" label="Postmedia Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135686" start="16184" end="16203" title="Corus Entertainment" label="Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672336" start="16267" end="16275" title="TV Guide (Canada)" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570508" start="16927" end="16942" title="Global National" label="Global National"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551998" start="16986" end="16990" title="16x9 (TV series)" label="16x9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257679" start="17487" end="17501" title="Public affairs (broadcasting)" label="public affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q694106" start="18039" end="18061" title="The Oprah Winfrey Show" label="The Oprah Winfrey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="18362" end="18378" title="Canadian content" label="Canadian content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="18490" end="18506" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333571" start="18545" end="18566" title="Wild Card (TV series)" label="Zoe Busiek: Wild Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="18673" end="18678" title="cable television" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="18682" end="18693" title="television syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q120624" start="18719" end="18729" title="Psi Factor" label="Psi Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832168" start="19224" end="19231" title="Traders (TV series)" label="Traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467570" start="19282" end="19298" title="Bob and Margaret" label="Bob and Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134979" start="19340" end="19351" title="Blue Murder (Canadian TV series)" label="Blue Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="19371" end="19381" title="improvisation" label="improvised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832854" start="19394" end="19402" title="Train 48" label="Train 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742956" start="19427" end="19440" title="The Jane Show" label="The Jane Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945333" start="19474" end="19497" title="My Fabulous Gay Wedding" label="My Fabulous Gay Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313241" start="19537" end="19549" title="Mike Bullard (television)" label="Mike Bullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096135" start="19577" end="19604" title="Open Mike with Mike Bullard" label="Open Mike with Mike Bullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="19614" end="19617" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520351" start="19622" end="19640" title="The Comedy Network" label="The Comedy Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751397" start="19685" end="19694" title="The Mike Bullard Show" label="talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="19876" end="19897" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380473" start="19911" end="19920" title="Entertainment Tonight Canada" label="ET Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="20018" end="20032" title="reality series" label="reality series"/>
<link wikidata="Q863122" start="20039" end="20053" title="The Apprentice (American TV series)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="20167" end="20181" title="Reality television" label="reality series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905347" start="20188" end="20199" title="Big Brother Canada" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502680" start="20281" end="20306" title="simultaneous substitution" label="simultaneous substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="21481" end="21494" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="22024" end="22036" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="22053" end="22063" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q863122" start="22457" end="22471" title="The Apprentice (American TV series)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="22575" end="22578" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="23621" end="23626" title="House (TV series)" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="23650" end="23665" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="23755" end="23779" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="23796" end="23806" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="23872" end="23875" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122130" start="24070" end="24092" title="Advertising in the Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="24282" end="24291" title="Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650858" start="24747" end="24752" title="ACTRA" label="ACTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006247" start="24781" end="24789" title="upfronts" label="upfronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13404889" start="24967" end="24983" title="Toronto Blizzard (NASL)" label="Toronto Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="25425" end="25434" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148414" start="25505" end="25512" title="Molson" label="Molstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583920" start="25525" end="25529" title="1987 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584713" start="25534" end="25559" title="1988 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1988 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954076" start="25561" end="25583" title="NHL on Global" label="Global aired NHL games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041310" start="25598" end="25618" title="Carling O&amp;#x27;Keefe" label="Carling O&amp;#x27;Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="25659" end="25683" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="25749" end="25752" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="25841" end="25849" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579765" start="26014" end="26025" title="Sports Page" label="Sports Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931433" start="26083" end="26090" title="CHEK-DT" label="CHEK-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629768" start="26619" end="26628" title="Sportsnet" label="Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522618" start="26633" end="26658" title="Sportsnet 360" label="The Score / Sportsnet 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931509" start="26894" end="26901" title="CIHF-DT" label="CIHF-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931644" start="26920" end="26927" title="CKMI-DT" label="CKMI-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q582225" start="27067" end="27090" title="Fox Sports World Canada" label="Fox Sports World Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931647" start="27092" end="27099" title="CKND-DT" label="CKND-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476930" start="27136" end="27153" title="Fox Soccer Report" label="Fox Soccer Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792002" start="27195" end="27205" title="Fox Soccer" label="Fox Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629768" start="27259" end="27268" title="Sportsnet" label="Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476926" start="27284" end="27299" title="Soccer Central" label="Fox Soccer News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868159" start="27350" end="27361" title="Canada West Universities Athletic Association" label="Canada West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656635" start="27465" end="27474" title="Hardy Trophy" label="Hardy Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491195" start="27536" end="27543" title="Shaw TV" label="Shaw TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955199" start="27557" end="27585" title="Canada West Football on Shaw" label="Canada West Football on Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567371" start="27718" end="27739" title="Digital media player" label="digital media players"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672323" start="27793" end="27818" title="TV Everywhere" label="streaming for subscribers"/>
<link wikidata="Q168614" start="27971" end="27976" title="1080i" label="1080i"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="27977" end="27992" title="High-definition television" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931513" start="28031" end="28038" title="CIII-DT" label="CIII-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724875" start="28142" end="28154" title="Falcon Beach" label="Falcon Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="28264" end="28277" title="digital cable" label="digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931429" start="28491" end="28498" title="CHAN-DT" label="CHAN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="28607" end="28619" title="Digital terrestrial television" label="over-the-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134090" start="29776" end="29780" title="digital on-screen graphics" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="30628" end="30642" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416102" start="30643" end="30653" title="network affiliate" label="affiliates"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="30728" end="30731" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509383" start="31266" end="31283" title="television system" label="television system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932063" start="31295" end="31300" title="CTV 2" label="CTV 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031818" start="31354" end="31383" title="Canwest" label="Canwest Global Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987970" start="31404" end="31440" title="Western International Communications" label="Western International Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599208" start="31520" end="31563" title="2001 Vancouver TV realignment" label="large network shuffle in Vancouver occurred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502680" start="31798" end="31823" title="simultaneous substitution" label="simultaneous substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="31913" end="31920" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="31978" end="32006" title="E!" label="E!: Entertainment Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="32271" end="32292" title="bankruptcy protection" label="bankruptcy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481600" start="32323" end="32333" title="Shaw Media" label="Shaw Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="32342" end="32358" title="Owned-and-operated station" label="O&amp;amp;O stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407543" start="32385" end="32389" title="CHCH-DT" label="CHCH"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="32390" end="32398" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931605" start="32403" end="32407" title="CJNT-DT" label="CJNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956117" start="32430" end="32442" title="Channel Zero (company)" label="Channel Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931433" start="32444" end="32448" title="CHEK-DT" label="CHEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="32449" end="32457" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931432" start="32493" end="32497" title="CHBC-DT" label="CHBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q232226" start="32498" end="32505" title="Kelowna" label="Kelowna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011064" start="32573" end="32577" title="CHCA-TV" label="CHCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23025" start="32578" end="32586" title="Red Deer, Alberta" label="Red Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386987" start="32670" end="32682" title="Rogers Media" label="Rogers Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532871" start="32689" end="32695" title="Citytv" label="Citytv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321351" start="33025" end="33032" title="E! News" label="E! News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815697" start="33246" end="33256" title="Category A services" label="Category 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q561068" start="33257" end="33274" title="specialty channel" label="specialty channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321347" start="33416" end="33438" title="E! (Canadian TV channel)" label="Canadian version of E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383973" start="33505" end="33527" title="Global Reality Channel" label="Global Reality Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956895" start="33610" end="33615" title="DTour" label="Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q749856" start="33617" end="33625" title="DejaView" label="DejaView"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424365" start="33630" end="33640" title="Crime &amp;amp; Investigation (Canadian TV channel)" label="Mystery TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065757" start="33730" end="33777" title="List of Global Television Network personalities" label="List of Global Television Network personalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608149" start="33780" end="33816" title="2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment" label="2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="33819" end="33822" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931556" start="33826" end="33830" title="CITV-DT" label="CITV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66924" wikidata="Q2308807" url="?curid=66924" title="Memory management">
<text>Memory management (also dynamic memory management, dynamic storage allocation, or dynamic memory allocation) is a form of resource management applied to computer memory. The essential requirement of memory management is to provide ways to dynamically allocate portions of memory to programs at their request, and free it for reuse when no longer needed. This is critical to any advanced computer system where more than a single process might be underway at any time. 

Several methods have been devised that increase the effectiveness of memory management. Virtual memory systems separate the memory addresses used by a process from actual physical addresses, allowing separation of processes and increasing the size of the virtual address space beyond the available amount of RAM using paging or swapping to secondary storage. The quality of the virtual memory manager can have an extensive effect on overall system performance. The system allows a computer to appear as if it may have more memory available than physically present, thereby allowing multiple processes to share it. 

In some operating systems, e.g. Burroughs/Unisys MCP, and OS/360 and successors, memory is managed by the operating system. In other operating systems, e.g. Unix-like operating systems, memory is managed at the application level.

Memory management within an address space is generally categorized as either manual memory management or automatic memory management.

== Manual memory management ==
The task of fulfilling an allocation request consists of locating a block of unused memory of sufficient size. Memory requests are satisfied by allocating portions from a large pool of memory called the &quot;heap&quot; or &quot;free store&quot;. At any given time, some parts of the heap are in use, while some are &quot;free&quot; (unused) and thus available for future allocations.
In the C language, the function which allocates memory from the heap is called and the function which takes previously allocated memory and marks it as &quot;free&quot; (to be used by future allocations) is called . 

Several issues complicate the implementation, such as external fragmentation, which arises when there are many small gaps between allocated memory blocks, which invalidates their use for an allocation request. The allocator&#x27;s metadata can also inflate the size of (individually) small allocations. This is often managed by chunking. The memory management system must track outstanding allocations to ensure that they do not overlap and that no memory is ever &quot;lost&quot; (i.e. that there are no &quot;memory leaks&quot;).

=== Efficiency ===
The specific dynamic memory allocation algorithm implemented can impact performance significantly. A study conducted in 1994 by Digital Equipment Corporation illustrates the overheads involved for a variety of allocators. The lowest average instruction path length required to allocate a single memory slot was 52 (as measured with an instruction level profiler on a variety of software).

=== Implementations ===
Since the precise location of the allocation is not known in advance, the memory is accessed indirectly, usually through a pointer reference. The specific algorithm used to organize the memory area and allocate and deallocate chunks is interlinked with the kernel, and may use any of the following methods:

==== Fixed-size blocks allocation ====

Fixed-size blocks allocation, also called memory pool allocation, uses a free list of fixed-size blocks of memory (often all of the same size). This works well for simple embedded systems where no large objects need to be allocated but suffers from fragmentation especially with long memory addresses. However, due to the significantly reduced overhead, this method can substantially improve performance for objects that need frequent allocation and deallocation, and so it is often used in video games.

==== Buddy blocks ====

In this system, memory is allocated into several pools of memory instead of just one, where each pool represents blocks of memory of a certain power of two in size, or blocks of some other convenient size progression. All blocks of a particular size are kept in a sorted linked list or tree and all new blocks that are formed during allocation are added to their respective memory pools for later use. If a smaller size is requested than is available, the smallest available size is selected and split. One of the resulting parts is selected, and the process repeats until the request is complete. When a block is allocated, the allocator will start with the smallest sufficiently large block to avoid needlessly breaking blocks. When a block is freed, it is compared to its buddy. If they are both free, they are combined and placed in the correspondingly larger-sized buddy-block list.

==== Slab allocation ====

This memory allocation mechanism preallocates memory chunks suitable to fit objects of a certain type or size. These chunks are called caches and the allocator only has to keep track of a list of free cache slots. Constructing an object will use any one of the free cache slots and destructing an object will add a slot back to the free cache slot list. This technique alleviates memory fragmentation and is efficient as there is no need to search for a suitable portion of memory, as any open slot will suffice.

==== Stack allocation ====

Many Unix-like systems as well as Microsoft Windows implement a function called for dynamically allocating stack memory in a way similar to the heap-based . A compiler typically translates it to inlined instructions manipulating the stack pointer. Although there is no need of manually freeing memory allocated this way as it is automatically freed when the function that called returns, there exists a risk of overflow. And since alloca is an &quot;ad hoc&quot; expansion seen in many systems but never in POSIX or the C standard, its behavior in case of a stack overflow is undefined.

A safer version of alloca called , which reports errors, exists on Microsoft Windows. It requires the use of . gnulib provides an equivalent interface, albeit instead of throwing an SEH exception on overflow, it delegates to malloc when an overlarge size is detected. A similar feature can be emulated using manual accounting and size-checking, such as in the uses of in glibc.

== Automated memory management ==

The proper management of memory in an application is a difficult problem, and several different strategies for handling memory management have been devised.

=== Automatic management of call stack variables ===

In many programming language implementations, the runtime environment for the program automatically allocates memory in the call stack for non-static local variables of a subroutine, called automatic variables, when the subroutine is called, and automatically releases that memory when the subroutine is exited. Special declarations may allow local variables to retain values between invocations of the procedure, or may allow local variables to be accessed by other subroutines. The automatic allocation of local variables makes recursion possible, to a depth limited by available memory.

=== Garbage collection ===

Garbage collection is a strategy for automatically detecting memory allocated to objects that are no longer usable in a program, and returning that allocated memory to a pool of free memory locations. This method is in contrast to &quot;manual&quot; memory management where a programmer explicitly codes memory requests and memory releases in the program. While automatic garbage collection has the advantages of reducing programmer workload and preventing certain kinds of memory allocation bugs, garbage collection does require memory resources of its own, and can compete with the application program for processor time.

=== Reference counting ===

Reference counting is a strategy for detecting that memory is no longer usable by a program by maintaining a counter for how many independent pointers point to the memory. Whenever a new pointer points to a piece of memory, the programmer is supposed to increase the counter. When the pointer changes where it points, or when the pointer is no longer pointing to any area or has itself been freed, the counter should decrease. When the counter drops to zero, the memory should be considered unused and freed. Some reference counting systems require programmer involvement and some are implemented automatically by the compiler. A disadvantage of reference counting is that circular references can develop which cause a memory leak to occur. This can be mitigated by either adding the concept of a &quot;weak reference&quot; (a reference that does not participate in reference counting, but is notified when the area it is pointing to is no longer valid) or by combining reference counting and garbage collection together.

=== Memory pools ===

A memory pool is a technique of automatically deallocating memory based on the state of the application, such as the lifecycle of a request or transaction. The idea is that many applications execute large chunks of code which may generate memory allocations, but that there is a point in execution where all of those chunks are known to be no longer valid. For example, in a web service, after each request the web service no longer needs any of the memory allocated during the execution of the request. Therefore, rather than keeping track of whether or not memory is currently being referenced, the memory is allocated according to the request or lifecycle stage with which it is associated. When that request or stage has passed, all associated memory is deallocated simultaneously.

== Systems with virtual memory ==

Virtual memory is a method of decoupling the memory organization from the physical hardware. The applications operate on memory via &quot;virtual addresses&quot;. Each attempt by the application to access a particular virtual memory address results in the virtual memory address being translated to an actual &quot;physical address&quot;. In this way the addition of virtual memory enables granular control over memory systems and methods of access.

In virtual memory systems the operating system limits how a process can access the memory. This feature, called memory protection, can be used to disallow a process to read or write to memory that is not allocated to it, preventing malicious or malfunctioning code in one program from interfering with the operation of another.

Even though the memory allocated for specific processes is normally isolated, processes sometimes need to be able to share information. Shared memory is one of the fastest techniques for inter-process communication.

Memory is usually classified by access rate into primary storage and secondary storage. Memory management systems, among other operations, also handle the moving of information between these two levels of memory.

==Memory management in Burroughs/Unisys MCP systems==

An operating system manages various resources in the computing system. The memory subsystem is the system element for managing memory. The memory subsystem combines the hardware memory resource and the MCP OS software that manages the resource.

The memory subsystem manages the physical memory and the virtual memory of the system (both part of the hardware resource). The virtual memory extends physical memory by using extra space on a peripheral device, usually disk. The memory subsystem is responsible for moving code and data between main and virtual memory in a process known as overlaying. Burroughs was the first commercial implementation of virtual memory (although developed at Manchester University for the Ferranti Atlas computer) and integrated virtual memory with the system design of the B5000 from the start (in 1961) needing no external memory management unit (MMU).

The memory subsystem is responsible for mapping logical requests for memory blocks to physical portions of memory (segments) which are found in the list of free segments. Each allocated block is managed by means of a segment descriptor, a special control word containing relevant metadata about the segment including address, length, machine type, and the p-bit or ‘presence’ bit which indicates whether the block is in main memory or needs to be loaded from the address given in the descriptor.

Descriptors are essential in providing memory safety and security so that operations cannot overflow or underflow the referenced block (commonly known as buffer overflow). Descriptors themselves are protected control words that cannot be manipulated except for specific elements of the MCP OS (enabled by the UNSAFE block directive in NEWP).

Donald Knuth describes a similar system in Section 2.5 ‘Dynamic Storage Allocation’ of ‘Fundamental Algorithms’.

== Memory management in OS/360 and successors ==
IBM System/360 does not support virtual memory. Memory isolation of jobs is optionally accomplished using protection keys, assigning storage for each job a different key, 0 for the supervisor or 1–15. Memory management in OS/360 is a supervisor function. Storage is requested using the codice_1 macro and freed using the codice_2 macro, which result in a call to the supervisor (SVC) to perform the operation.

In OS/360 the details vary depending on how the system is generated, e.g., for PCP, MFT, MVT.

In OS/360 MVT, suballocation within a job&#x27;s &quot;region&quot; or the shared &quot;System Queue Area&quot; (SQA) is based on &quot;subpools&quot;, areas a multiple of 2 KB in size—the size of an area protected by a protection key. Subpools are numbered 0–255. Within a region subpools are assigned either the job&#x27;s storage protection or the supervisor&#x27;s key, key 0. Subpools 0–127 receive the job&#x27;s key. Initially only subpool zero is created, and all user storage requests are satisfied from subpool 0, unless another is specified in the memory request. Subpools 250–255 are created by memory requests by the supervisor on behalf of the job. Most of these are assigned key 0, although a few get the key of the job. Subpool numbers are also relevant in MFT, although the details are much simpler. MFT uses fixed &quot;partitions&quot; redefinable by the operator instead of dynamic regions and PCP has only a single partition.

Each subpool is mapped by a list of control blocks identifying allocated and free memory blocks within the subpool. Memory is allocated by finding a free area of sufficient size, or by allocating additional blocks in the subpool, up to the region size of the job. It is possible to free all or part of an allocated memory area.

The details for OS/VS1 are similar to those for MFT and for MVT; the details for OS/VS2 are similar to those for MVT, except that the page size is 4 KiB. For both OS/VS1 and OS/VS2 the shared &quot;System Queue Area&quot; (SQA) is nonpageable.

In MVS the address space includes an additional pageable shared area, the &quot;Common Storage Area&quot; (CSA), and two additional private areas, the nonpageable &quot;local system queue area&quot; (LSQA) and the pageable &quot;System Work area&quot; (SWA). Also, the storage keys 0–7 are all reserved for use by privileged code.

== See also ==
* Dynamic array
* Out of memory
* Heap pollution

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Donald Knuth. &quot;Fundamental Algorithms&quot;, Third Edition. Addison-Wesley, 1997. . Section 2.5: Dynamic Storage Allocation, pp. 435–456.
* Simple Memory Allocation Algorithms (originally published on OSDEV Community)
* 

; OS360Sup
; OSVS1Dig

== External links ==

* &quot;Generic Memory Manager&quot; C++ library
* Sample bit-mapped arena memory allocator in C
* TLSF: a constant time allocator for real-time systems
* Slides on Dynamic memory allocation
* Inside A Storage Allocator
* The Memory Management Reference
:* The Memory Management Reference, Beginner&#x27;s Guide Allocation
* Linux Memory Management
* VMem - general malloc/free replacement. Fast thread safe C++ allocator
* Operating System Memory Management</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="0" end="17" title="Memory management" label="Memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="24" end="49" title="Memory management" label="dynamic memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="51" end="77" title="Memory management" label="dynamic storage allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="82" end="107" title="Memory management" label="dynamic memory allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156588" start="122" end="141" title="Resource management (computing)" label="resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="153" end="168" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="428" end="435" title="Process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="557" end="571" title="Virtual memory" label="Virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="593" end="607" title="memory address" label="memory address"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451721" start="724" end="745" title="virtual address space" label="virtual address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="777" end="780" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q656083" start="787" end="793" title="paging" label="paging"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="809" end="826" title="secondary storage" label="secondary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197550" start="917" end="928" title="Computer performance" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1093" end="1109" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326534" start="1117" end="1137" title="Burroughs MCP" label="Burroughs/Unisys MCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="1143" end="1164" title="OS/360 and successors" label="OS/360 and successors"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="1242" end="1251" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752316" start="1393" end="1417" title="manual memory management" label="manual memory management"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2139" end="2161" title="fragmentation (computer)#External fragmentation" label="external fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="2316" end="2324" title="metadata (computing)" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116433" start="2413" end="2421" title="chunking (computing)" label="chunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q751740" start="2596" end="2607" title="memory leak" label="memory leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="2765" end="2794" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006368" start="2811" end="2820" title="computational overhead" label="overheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041761" start="2878" end="2901" title="instruction path length" label="instruction path length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138496" start="2990" end="2998" title="Profiling (computer programming)" label="profiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="3174" end="3181" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334113" start="3182" end="3191" title="reference (computer science)" label="reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="3308" end="3314" title="kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500256" start="3472" end="3481" title="free list" label="free list"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="3570" end="3585" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132459" start="3648" end="3661" title="Fragmentation (computing)" label="fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="3890" end="3901" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="4071" end="4083" title="power of two" label="power of two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="4199" end="4210" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="4214" end="4218" title="Tree data structure" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="5391" end="5400" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="5420" end="5437" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574496" start="6085" end="6091" title="gnulib" label="gnulib"/>
<link wikidata="Q759899" start="6724" end="6734" title="call stack" label="call stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q960279" start="6750" end="6764" title="local variable" label="local variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="6771" end="6781" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091711" start="6790" end="6808" title="automatic variable" label="automatic variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="7130" end="7139" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205808" start="8545" end="8563" title="circular reference" label="circular reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="9739" end="9753" title="Virtual memory" label="Virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="10250" end="10257" title="Process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q163585" start="10302" end="10319" title="memory protection" label="memory protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q764810" start="10655" end="10668" title="Shared memory (interprocess communication)" label="Shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="10706" end="10733" title="inter-process communication" label="inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="10785" end="10800" title="primary storage" label="primary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="10805" end="10822" title="secondary storage" label="secondary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000489" start="12389" end="12400" title="Burroughs large systems descriptors" label="Descriptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359776" start="12724" end="12728" title="NEWP" label="NEWP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82438" start="12819" end="12843" title="The Art of Computer Programming" label="‘Fundamental Algorithms’"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="12899" end="12909" title="System/360" label="System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q25211948" start="12963" end="12967" title="Job (computing)" label="jobs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13001" end="13016" title="Memory protection#Protection keys" label="protection keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="13117" end="13123" title="OS/360 and successors" label="OS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644325" start="13129" end="13139" title="Supervisory program" label="supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644318" start="13274" end="13277" title="Supervisor Call instruction" label="SVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093781" start="13364" end="13373" title="System generation" label="generated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13385" end="13388" title="OS/360 and successors#PCP" label="PCP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13390" end="13393" title="OS/360 and successors#MFT" label="MFT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13395" end="13398" title="OS/360 and successors#MVT" label="MVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072966" start="14694" end="14700" title="OS/VS1" label="OS/VS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072967" start="14759" end="14765" title="OS/VS2" label="OS/VS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q781443" start="14926" end="14929" title="MVS" label="MVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q128555" start="15272" end="15285" title="Dynamic array" label="Dynamic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496640" start="15288" end="15301" title="Out of memory" label="Out of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691516" start="15304" end="15318" title="Heap pollution" label="Heap pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="15370" end="15382" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66925" wikidata="Q8001507" url="?curid=66925" title="Wildside Records">
<text>Wildside Records was an independent New Zealand record label of the 1990s and early 2000s, owned and run by former &quot;Rip It Up&quot; magazine editor, Murray Cammick. Its signings included Shihad, Head Like a Hole, Slim, Pumpkinhead, Hallelujah Picassos, Bailterspace, Breathe, Rumblefish and Dead Flowers.

==See also==
* &quot;Best of Wildside&quot;, a compilation album
* Lists of record labels

== References ==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8001507" start="0" end="16" title="Wildside Records" label="Wildside Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="48" end="60" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335513" start="121" end="130" title="Rip It Up (New Zealand)" label="Rip It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939148" start="154" end="168" title="Murray Cammick" label="Murray Cammick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="192" end="198" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630197" start="200" end="216" title="Head Like a Hole (band)" label="Head Like a Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540556" start="218" end="222" title="Slim (band)" label="Slim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="224" end="235" title="Pumpkinhead (band)" label="Pumpkinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642879" start="237" end="256" title="Hallelujah Picassos" label="Hallelujah Picassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q676395" start="258" end="270" title="Bailterspace" label="Bailterspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959860" start="272" end="279" title="Breathe (New Zealand band)" label="Breathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897009" start="332" end="348" title="Best of Wildside" label="Best of Wildside"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="378" end="400" title="Lists of record labels" label="Lists of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66926" wikidata="Q1185939" url="?curid=66926" title="Demodulation">
<text>Demodulation is the process of extracting the original information-bearing signal from a carrier wave. A demodulator is an electronic circuit (or computer program in a software-defined radio) that is used to recover the information content from the modulated carrier wave. There are many types of modulation, and there are many types of demodulators. The signal output from a demodulator may represent sound (an analog audio signal), images (an analog video signal) or binary data (a digital signal).

These terms are traditionally used in connection with radio receivers, but many other systems use many kinds of demodulators. For example, in a modem, which is a contraction of the terms modulator/demodulator, a demodulator is used to extract a serial digital data stream from a carrier signal which is used to carry it through a telephone line, coaxial cable, or optical fiber.

== History ==
Demodulation was first used in radio receivers. In the wireless telegraphy radio systems used during the first 3 decades of radio (1884–1914) the transmitter did not communicate audio (sound) but transmitted information in the form of pulses of radio waves that represented text messages in Morse code. Therefore, the receiver merely had to detect the presence or absence of the radio signal, and produce a click sound. The device that did this was called a detector. The first detectors were coherers, simple devices that acted as a switch. The term &quot;detector&quot; stuck, was used for other types of demodulators and continues to be used to the present day for a demodulator in a radio receiver.

The first type of modulation used to transmit sound over radio waves was amplitude modulation (AM), invented by Reginald Fessenden around 1900. An AM radio signal can be demodulated by rectifying it to remove one side of the carrier, and then filtering to remove the radio-frequency component, leaving only the modulating audio component. This is equivalent to peak detection with a suitably long time constant. The amplitude of the recovered audio frequency varies with the modulating audio signal, so it can drive an earphone or an audio amplifier. Fessendon invented the first AM demodulator in 1904 called the electrolytic detector, consisting of a short needle dipping into a cup of dilute acid. The same year John Ambrose Fleming invented the Fleming valve or thermionic diode which could also rectify an AM signal.

== Techniques ==

There are several ways of demodulation depending on how parameters of the base-band signal such as amplitude, frequency or phase are transmitted in the carrier signal. For example, for a signal modulated with a linear modulation like amplitude modulation (AM), we can use a synchronous detector. On the other hand, for a signal modulated with an angular modulation, we must use a frequency modulation (FM) demodulator or a phase modulation (PM) demodulator. Different kinds of circuits perform these functions.

Many techniques such as carrier recovery, clock recovery, bit slip, frame synchronization, rake receiver, pulse compression, Received Signal Strength Indication, error detection and correction, etc., are only performed by demodulators, although any specific demodulator may perform only some or none of these techniques.

Many things can act as a demodulator, if they pass the radio waves on nonlinearly.

== AM radio ==
An AM signal encodes the information into the carrier wave by varying its amplitude in direct sympathy with the analogue signal to be sent. There are two methods used to demodulate AM signals:

* The envelope detector is a very simple method of demodulation that does not require a coherent demodulator. It consists of a rectifier (anything that will pass current in one direction only) or other non-linear component that enhances one half of the received signal over the other and a low-pass filter. The rectifier may be in the form of a single diode or may be more complex. Many natural substances exhibit this rectification behaviour, which is why it was the earliest modulation and demodulation technique used in radio. The filter is usually an RC low-pass type but the filter function can sometimes be achieved by relying on the limited frequency response of the circuitry following the rectifier. The crystal set exploits the simplicity of AM modulation to produce a receiver with very few parts, using the crystal as the rectifier and the limited frequency response of the headphones as the filter.
* The product detector multiplies the incoming signal by the signal of a local oscillator with the same frequency and phase as the carrier of the incoming signal. After filtering, the original audio signal will result.

SSB is a form of AM in which the carrier is reduced or suppressed entirely, which require coherent demodulation. For further reading, see sideband.

== FM radio ==

Frequency modulation (FM) has numerous advantages over AM such as better fidelity and noise immunity. However, it is much more complex to both modulate and demodulate a carrier wave with FM, and AM predates it by several decades.

There are several common types of FM demodulators:

* The quadrature detector, which phase shifts the signal by 90 degrees and multiplies it with the unshifted version. One of the terms that drops out from this operation is the original information signal, which is selected and amplified.
* The signal is fed into a PLL and the error signal is used as the demodulated signal.
* The most common is a Foster–Seeley discriminator. This is composed of an electronic filter which decreases the amplitude of some frequencies relative to others, followed by an AM demodulator. If the filter response changes linearly with frequency, the final analog output will be proportional to the input frequency, as desired.
* A variant of the Foster–Seeley discriminator called the ratio detector
* Another method uses two AM demodulators, one tuned to the high end of the band and the other to the low end, and feed the outputs into a difference amplifier. 
* Using a digital signal processor, as used in software-defined radio.

== PM ==

== QAM ==
QAM demodulation requires a coherent receiver. It uses two product detectors whose local reference signals are a quarter cycle apart in phase: one for the in-phase component and one for the quadrature component. The demodulator keeps these product detectors tuned to a continuous or intermittent pilot signal.

== See also ==
* Detection theory
* Detector (radio)
* Fax demodulator

==References==
==External links==

* Demodulation chapter on All About Circuits</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1185939" start="0" end="12" title="Demodulation" label="Demodulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="75" end="81" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="89" end="101" title="carrier wave" label="carrier wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185939" start="105" end="116" title="Demodulation" label="demodulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="123" end="141" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="146" end="162" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331892" start="168" end="190" title="software-defined radio" label="software-defined radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="297" end="307" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="412" end="418" title="analog signal" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="419" end="431" title="audio signal" label="audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="452" end="464" title="video signal" label="video signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175022" start="469" end="475" title="binary signal" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q175022" start="484" end="498" title="Digital signal (electronics)" label="digital signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="556" end="570" title="radio receiver" label="radio receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="646" end="651" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="689" end="698" title="modulator" label="modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="781" end="795" title="carrier signal" label="carrier signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="832" end="846" title="telephone line" label="telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="848" end="861" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="866" end="879" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="927" end="942" title="radio receivers" label="radio receivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="951" end="970" title="wireless telegraphy" label="wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="1187" end="1197" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834857" start="1354" end="1362" title="detector (radio)" label="detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q944090" start="1389" end="1396" title="coherer" label="coherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="1618" end="1628" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="1673" end="1693" title="amplitude modulation" label="amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334347" start="1712" end="1730" title="Reginald Fessenden" label="Reginald Fessenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="1785" end="1795" title="rectifying" label="rectifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="2016" end="2025" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045305" start="2214" end="2235" title="electrolytic detector" label="electrolytic detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q128823" start="2315" end="2335" title="John Ambrose Fleming" label="John Ambrose Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q41593454" start="2349" end="2362" title="Fleming valve" label="Fleming valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="2366" end="2382" title="thermionic diode" label="thermionic diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="2675" end="2695" title="amplitude modulation" label="amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970779" start="2715" end="2735" title="synchronous detector" label="synchronous detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="2821" end="2841" title="frequency modulation" label="frequency modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q750463" start="2864" end="2880" title="phase modulation" label="phase modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375705" start="2977" end="2993" title="carrier recovery" label="carrier recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q116245385" start="2995" end="3009" title="clock recovery" label="clock recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q878881" start="3011" end="3019" title="bit slip" label="bit slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477933" start="3021" end="3042" title="frame synchronization" label="frame synchronization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125543" start="3044" end="3057" title="rake receiver" label="rake receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q639897" start="3059" end="3076" title="pulse compression" label="pulse compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195672" start="3078" end="3113" title="Received Signal Strength Indication" label="Received Signal Strength Indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="3115" end="3145" title="error detection and correction" label="error detection and correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="3345" end="3356" title="Nonlinearity" label="nonlinearly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="3377" end="3379" title="amplitude modulation" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="3486" end="3501" title="analog signal" label="analogue signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834857" start="3544" end="3565" title="Detector (radio)" label="demodulate AM signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652250" start="3574" end="3591" title="envelope detector" label="envelope detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="3656" end="3664" title="Coherence (physics)" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="3695" end="3704" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="3920" end="3925" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q567487" start="3936" end="3948" title="Plate detector (radio)" label="more complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q939318" start="4123" end="4125" title="RC circuit" label="RC"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="4126" end="4134" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q695140" start="4281" end="4292" title="crystal radio receiver" label="crystal set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247760" start="4486" end="4502" title="product detector" label="product detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q560348" start="4700" end="4703" title="Single-sideband modulation" label="SSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306319" start="4733" end="4774" title="suppressed carrier" label="carrier is reduced or suppressed entirely"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267009" start="4838" end="4846" title="sideband" label="sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="4865" end="4885" title="Frequency modulation" label="Frequency modulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5154" end="5173" title="Detector (radio)#Quadrature detector" label="quadrature detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="5181" end="5186" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q52637" start="5413" end="5416" title="phase-locked loop" label="PLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228902" start="5496" end="5523" title="Foster–Seeley discriminator" label="Foster–Seeley discriminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q327754" start="5548" end="5565" title="electronic filter" label="electronic filter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5862" end="5876" title="Detector (radio)#Ratio detector" label="ratio detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="6049" end="6073" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331892" start="6086" end="6108" title="software-defined radio" label="software-defined radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q120811" start="6459" end="6475" title="Detection theory" label="Detection theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834857" start="6478" end="6494" title="Detector (radio)" label="Detector (radio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438845" start="6497" end="6512" title="Fax demodulator" label="Fax demodulator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66927" wikidata="Q4999130" url="?curid=66927" title="Jesse Boot, 1st Baron Trent">
<text>Jesse Boot, 1st Baron Trent (2 June 1850 – 13 June 1931) transformed The Boots Company, founded by his father, John Boot, into a national retailer, which branded itself as &quot;Chemists to the Nation&quot;.

==Biography==

Jesse Boot sold his controlling interest to American investors in 1920. Boot offered his close friend and business associate John Harston, the opportunity of going into business with him, but Harston declined, feeling the venture was not worth investing in. Boot was a great benefactor to the City of Nottingham.

In 1920, Boot purchased, and presented to the City of Nottingham, 36 acres of open land that lay along the northern side of the Victoria Embankment alongside the River Trent, opposite Plaisaunce, Jesse Boot&#x27;s summer house which was demolished in 1961. 

Initially named the &#x27;New Park&#x27;, it was laid out with grass and trees, and provided a barrier against flooding as well as a pleasant walkway alongside the river. As part of the development an imposing war memorial gateway was built, with the aid of funds from Jesse Boot. He also donated land for the new University College at Highfields, now the University of Nottingham, which opened in 1928. and was presented with the Freedom of the City of Nottingham in 1920. He was also a significant benefactor to his wife&#x27;s home, Jersey.

Boot was knighted in 1909, created a baronet in 1917, and announced in the New Year&#x27;s Honours of 1929 was elevated to the peerage, and created Baron Trent, of Nottingham in the County of Nottingham on 18 March 1929. 

These latter honours probably owed as much to his solid support of the Liberal Party as to his philanthropy to the city of his birth.
He died in Jersey in 1931. The Sir Jesse Boot Chair in Chemistry at the University of Nottingham was named in his honour. His widow commissioned the French glass artist René Lalique to refit the church of St Matthew, Millbrook (popularly known as the &quot;Glass Church&quot;) as a memorial to him.

In 1935 a Primary school was built in Nottingham, Jesse Boot&#x27;s home town. The School was titled The Jesse Boot Primary School and was located in Bakersfield, Nottingham. The School closed in 2009 after becoming an academy school. There is a pub named after him in the nearby Nottinghamshire town of Beeston, around 1 mile from Highfields Park.

His portrait, by Noel Denholm Davis, is in the collection of the University of Nottingham. Another, by the same artist, is on loan to the National Portrait Gallery.

==Bibliography==
*&quot;Jesse Boot of Boots the Chemist: A study in Business History&quot; by Stanley Chapman (Detail from a copy of the book with black and white plates of Jesse Boot and published by Hodder and Stoughton UK as a special edition for The Boots Company Nottingham in 1973 with an .)

==Arms==
==References==
==External links==
* Portrait by Noel Denholm Davis
* Biography – on Boots corporate website
* Boots family philanthropy – on Boots corporate website
* Chemists to the Nation – article in Pharmaceutical Journal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4999130" start="0" end="27" title="Jesse Boot, 1st Baron Trent" label="Jesse Boot, 1st Baron Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123139" start="69" end="86" title="The Boots Company" label="The Boots Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994315" start="111" end="120" title="John Boot" label="John Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="517" end="535" title="Nottingham" label="City of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="1153" end="1177" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="1333" end="1339" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="1351" end="1359" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="1379" end="1386" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="1506" end="1516" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="1524" end="1544" title="County of Nottingham" label="County of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="1660" end="1672" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="1710" end="1716" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="1771" end="1795" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q451400" start="1868" end="1880" title="René Lalique" label="René Lalique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594698" start="1904" end="1925" title="St Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church, Millbrook" label="St Matthew, Millbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754439" start="2100" end="2129" title="The Jesse Boot Primary School" label="The Jesse Boot Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17362889" start="2366" end="2384" title="Noel Denholm Davis" label="Noel Denholm Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="2414" end="2438" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="2487" end="2512" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496808" start="2609" end="2624" title="Stanley Chapman" label="Stanley Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2737" end="2739" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123139" start="2765" end="2782" title="The Boots Company" label="The Boots Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="2783" end="2793" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17362889" start="2871" end="2889" title="Noel Denholm Davis" label="Noel Denholm Davis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66928" wikidata="Q7969735" url="?curid=66928" title="Warner Music Australia">
<text>Warner Music Australia (WMA) is an Australian division of the Warner Music Group. 

Warner Music Australia distributes in Australia, and also covers distribution in New Zealand.

==History==
In 1969, Warner Bros. Records split and WEA was formed. It was first established in Canada and followed by Australia. The Australian operation began in July 1970, by Paul Turner with five staff members. The official launch was held at the Menzies Hotel in Sydney on 1 October 1970. The company was then based in Riley Street, Darlinghurst, and had three major labels: Warner Bros. Records, Elektra Records, and Atlantic Records

A year later Warner Bros. Records worldwide (including Australia) changed its name to Kinney Music. The monopoly laws in America at the time did not allow the three labels to trade as one, so the umbrella name of Kinney Music was chosen. For the first two years, the Australian Record Company (ARC), now known as Sony Music, handled the Australian distribution.

Turner&#x27;s income for the first year was 1 million dollars. That was achieved in seven months, with the first years sales being just under $2 million. By 1 October 1972, U.S. monopoly laws had changed and WEA, using the first initial of each of the three main labels for its name, was born. From that time, WEA Australia had its own sales and distribution arm.

WEA became a major player in the Australian recording industry, through international successes of artists such as Fleetwood Mac, Phil Collins, Eric Clapton, Led Zeppelin and The Doors.

The company was renamed Warner Music Australia in 1990 and split into two divisions – WEA and East-West Records. With more focus being placed on domestic signings, phenomenal success was achieved with acts such as INXS, Cold Chisel, 1927 and Jenny Morris.

In the mid-to-late 1990s, Warner Music also invested in Brisbane bands, Regurgitator and Pretty Violet Stain. Regurgitator became Warner Music&#x27;s first direct signing and remained with the company until 2004. In 2005, Sire Records invested in Brisbane band The Veronicas, who went straight to number two with their debut single &quot;4 Ever&quot; and their album &quot;The Secret Life of the Veronicas&quot;. Later that year, Warner Music Australia bought out Festival-Mushroom Records for $12 million and closed the label, while retaining the use of the Mushroom label for a couple of acts such as Eskimo Joe and Gabriella Cilmi.

, the company has continued with artists such as Kerser, Lisa Mitchell, Kylie Minogue, the New Zealand band, Evermore, as well as the newly signed Brisbane act, Dead Letter Circus. Warner Music also invested heavily in producers such as ShockOne and Matt Lange.

==Artists==

* A Boogie wit da Hoodie
* A Day to Remember
* Arizona
* AB6IX
* Alec Benjamin
* Ali Gatie
* All Time Low
* Angel Dust
* Anitta
* Anne Marie
* Aretha Franklin
* Asher
* Ashley McBryde
* Ashnikko
* Ava Max
* BabyT
* Bazzi
* BBG Smokey
* Bebe Rexha
* Ben Abraham
* Bhad Bhabie
* Biffy Clyro
* Billie Joe Armstrong
* Billy Talent
* Birdy
* Blake Shelton
* Breland
* Briston Maroney
* Bronson (Odesza and Golden Features)
* Bruno Mars
* Bryce Vine
* Budjerah 
* Burna Boy
* Busby Marou
* Cardi B
* Carlie Hanson
* Cavetown
* Cecily
* Charli XCX
* Charlie Puth
* Chase Zera
* Cher
* Clean Bandit
* Client Liaison
* Code Orange
* Coheed &amp; Cambria
* Coldplay
* Corey Taylor
* Creeper
* Daine
* Dan + Shay
* David Bowie
* David Guetta
* Deftones
* Diplo
* Disturbed
* Don Toliver
* Dua Lipa
* Dutchavelli
* Eagles
* East AV3
* Eco$ystem
* Ed Sheeran
* Ekali
* Elderbrook
* Eskimo Joe
* E^ST
* Faith No More
* Faouzia
* Feki
* Fever 333
* Fitz and the Tantrums
* Fleetwood Mac
* Flowerkid
* Foals
* Galantis
* Galxara
* Glades
* Gojira
* Golden Features
* Goo Goo Dolls
* Gorillaz
* Grandma
* Greenday
* Griff
* Grouplove
* Gucci Mane
* Halestorm
* Hamilton
* Hamzaa
* Harper Finn
* Hartley
* Hayley Kiyoko
* Hayley Williams
* Higher Power
* Highly Suspect
* Hobo Johnson
* Hooligan Hefs
* Honne
* In This Moment
* Illy
* Iron Maiden
* J Rick
* Jack Gray
* Jack Harlow
* James Blunt
* Janelle Monae
* Jason Derulo
* JC Stewart
* Jess Glynne
* John Williamson
* JoJo
* Josh Groban
* Joyous Wolf
* Jubël
* Jxdn
* JXN
* k.d lang
* Kaleo
* Kehlani
* Kelly Clarkson
* Killboy
* Kinder
* Kita Alexander
* Korn
* Kranium
* Kyle
* Kylie Minogue
* L Devine
* Lara Andallo 
* Led Zeppelin
* Liam Gallagher
* Lianne La Havas
* Lil Jaye 
* Lil Pump
* Lil Skies
* Lil Zay Osama
* Linkin Park
* Lizzo
* Lukas Graham
* Mac Miller
* Mahalia
* Maisie Peters
* Major Lazer
* Marina Diamandis
* Master KG
* Mastedon
* Matoma
* Matt Maeson
* Meek Mill
* Melanie Martinez
* Michael Buble
* Missy Elliot
* Mist
* MisterWives
* Monique Lawz
* Morgan Evans
* Motionless in White
* Muse
* My Chemical Romance
* Nasty Cherry
* Nathan Dawe
* Needtobreathe
* Neil Young
* Nickelback
* NLE Choppa
* No Comply
* Nomad
* Nothing, Nowhere.
* Oliver Tree
* One Ok Rock
* Pa Salieu
* Panic! at the Disco
* Paramore
* PartyNextDoor
* Perto
* Phil Collins
* Pink Sweats
* Prince
* Pvris
* Ramones
* Red Hot Chili Peppers
* Rico Nasty
* Rita Ora
* RINI
* RMR
* Rob Thomas
* Robin Schulz
* Rod Stewart
* Roddy Ricch
* Rory Noble Copy
* Royal Blood
* Rudimental
* S1mba
* Sabrina Claudio
* Safia
* Saint Motel
* Sam Feldt
* Saweetie
* Scott Helman
* Shihad
* Shinedown
* ShockOne
* Shoreline Mafia
* Sia
* Skrillex
* Slipknot
* Sloan Peterson 
* Smith &amp; Myers
* Stone Sour
* Stormzy
* Sub Urban
* Sueco the Child
* Tayla Parx
* The Adults
* The Amity Affliction
* The Band Camino
* The Black Keys
* The Doors
* The Flaming Lips
* The Front Bottoms
* The Highwomen
* The Kite String Tangle
* The Knocks
* The Magic Gang 
* The Snuts
* The Wombats
* Thelma Plum
* Theory of a Deadman
* Thomston
* Tiesto
* Tina Turner
* Tinie Tempah
* Trey Songz
* Trivium
* Turnstile
* Tviling
* Twenty One Pilots
* Ty Dolla Sign
* UNO Stereo
* Wafia
* Wale
* Wallows
* Weezer
* Whethan 
* Whipped Cream
* Why Don&#x27;t We 
* Wiz Khalifa
* YBN Cordae
* YFN Lucci
* YoungBoy Never Broke Again
==Former artists==

* 1927
* Archie Roach
* Bang the Drum
* Bardot
* Ben Abraham
* Boom Crash Opera
* Brothers 3
* Christina Parie
* Cold Chisel
* Cookin&#x27; on 3 Burners
* Dane Rumble
* Dead Letter Circus
* Dylan Joel
* Evermore
* Euphoria
* Goanna
* Gyan
* Gyroscope
* Hopium
* INXS
* Jenny Morris
* Karmadella
* Kasey Chambers
* Katie Noonan
* Kerser
* Kiley Gaffney
* Kim Churchill
* Lisa Mitchell
* Magic Dirt
* Make Them Suffer
* Mass Collective Mind
* Moonlight
* Pretty Violet Stain
* Regurgitator
* Ross Wilson
* Shannon Noll
* Stone Temple Pilots
* Super Cruel
* Thirsty Merc
* The Sundance Kids
* The Whitlams
* The Ferrets
* The Sharp
* The Superjesus
* Throttle
* Titanium
* Turquoise Prince
* Vassy
* Xavier Dunn
* Zoë Badwi
==Warner Vision Australia==
&quot;Warner Vision Australia&quot;, a company of &quot;Warner Music Australasia&quot;, released a series of VHS and DVD on the &quot;History of the Olympic Games&quot;:

*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: London 1948 (Volume 1)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Melbourne 1956 (Volume 2)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Rome 1960 (Volume 3)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Tokyo 1964 (Volume 4)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Mexico City 1968 (Volume 5)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Montreal 1976 (Volume 6)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Moscow 1980 (Volume 7)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Los Angeles 1984 (Volume 8)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Seoul 1988 (Volume 9)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Barcelona 1992 (Volume 10)
*The Official Films of the Olympic Games: Atlanta 1996 (Volume 11)

&quot;Warner Music Vision Australia&quot; released a series of DVDs as a joint-venue with the Nine Network:
*Ray Martin Presents: Graham Kennedy – The King of Television
*The Best of the Paul Hogan Show
*Channel Nine Salutes Bert Newton
*The Best of the Don Lane Show
*Paul Hogan&#x27;s England
*Studio 9 Unplugged
*Laughs &amp; Larrikins: Midday With Ray Martin
*Golden Logies Moments
*Hey Hey It&#x27;s Saturday ... By Request
*Hey Hey It&#x27;s Saturday ... By Request 2

==See also==

*Lists of record labels

==References==
==External links==
*Artists listed at Warner Music Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7969735" start="0" end="22" title="Warner Music Australia" label="Warner Music Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969735" start="24" end="27" title="Warner Music Australia" label="WMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="62" end="80" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="165" end="176" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="200" end="220" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="231" end="234" title="Warner Music Group" label="WEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="447" end="453" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011478" start="517" end="529" title="Darlinghurst" label="Darlinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="581" end="596" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="602" end="618" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q13452796" start="706" end="718" title="Kinney National Company" label="Kinney Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q118570370" start="887" end="912" title="Australian Record Company" label="Australian Record Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="933" end="943" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="1463" end="1476" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="1478" end="1490" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="1492" end="1504" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="1506" end="1518" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="1523" end="1532" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q489801" start="1749" end="1753" title="INXS" label="INXS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107765" start="1755" end="1766" title="Cold Chisel" label="Cold Chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562027" start="1768" end="1772" title="1927 (band)" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179410" start="1777" end="1789" title="Jenny Morris (musician)" label="Jenny Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1848" end="1856" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309724" start="1864" end="1876" title="Regurgitator" label="Regurgitator"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="2014" end="2026" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q721992" start="2053" end="2066" title="The Veronicas" label="The Veronicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445732" start="2256" end="2264" title="Festival Records" label="Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299832" start="2265" end="2281" title="Mushroom Records" label="Mushroom Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367820" start="2395" end="2405" title="Eskimo Joe" label="Eskimo Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q234767" start="2410" end="2425" title="Gabriella Cilmi" label="Gabriella Cilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15880391" start="2477" end="2483" title="Kerser" label="Kerser"/>
<link wikidata="Q460496" start="2485" end="2498" title="Lisa Mitchell" label="Lisa Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q898598" start="2537" end="2545" title="Evermore (band)" label="Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180813" start="2589" end="2607" title="Dead Letter Circus" label="Dead Letter Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222047" start="2665" end="2673" title="ShockOne" label="ShockOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731226" start="2678" end="2688" title="Matt Lange" label="Matt Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927826" start="2706" end="2728" title="A Boogie wit da Hoodie" label="A Boogie wit da Hoodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q300386" start="2731" end="2748" title="A Day to Remember" label="A Day to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q28606306" start="2751" end="2758" title="Arizona (American band)" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q63852480" start="2761" end="2766" title="AB6IX" label="AB6IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560068" start="2769" end="2782" title="Alec Benjamin" label="Alec Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962050" start="2785" end="2794" title="Ali Gatie" label="Ali Gatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q909731" start="2797" end="2809" title="All Time Low" label="All Time Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741671" start="2812" end="2822" title="Angel Dust (American band)" label="Angel Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476301" start="2825" end="2831" title="Anitta (singer)" label="Anitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396976" start="2834" end="2844" title="Anne Marie" label="Anne Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="2847" end="2862" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47035389" start="2873" end="2887" title="Ashley McBryde" label="Ashley McBryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q76314844" start="2890" end="2898" title="Ashnikko" label="Ashnikko"/>
<link wikidata="Q56755505" start="2901" end="2908" title="Ava Max" label="Ava Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q48720231" start="2919" end="2924" title="Bazzi (singer)" label="Bazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185856" start="2940" end="2950" title="Bebe Rexha" label="Bebe Rexha"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184143" start="2953" end="2964" title="Ben Abraham (musician)" label="Ben Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q28784685" start="2967" end="2978" title="Bhad Bhabie" label="Bhad Bhabie"/>
<link wikidata="Q858365" start="2981" end="2992" title="Biffy Clyro" label="Biffy Clyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q712592" start="2995" end="3015" title="Billie Joe Armstrong" label="Billie Joe Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q154815" start="3018" end="3030" title="Billy Talent" label="Billy Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q288525" start="3033" end="3038" title="Birdy (singer)" label="Birdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q94831" start="3041" end="3054" title="Blake Shelton" label="Blake Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104178966" start="3057" end="3064" title="Breland (musician)" label="Breland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65643395" start="3067" end="3082" title="Briston Maroney" label="Briston Maroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159462" start="3085" end="3092" title="Bronson (group)" label="Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964414" start="3094" end="3100" title="Odesza" label="Odesza"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530097" start="3105" end="3120" title="Golden Features" label="Golden Features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450" start="3124" end="3134" title="Bruno Mars" label="Bruno Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324725" start="3137" end="3147" title="Bryce Vine" label="Bryce Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106510429" start="3150" end="3158" title="Budjerah" label="Budjerah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305712" start="3162" end="3171" title="Burna Boy" label="Burna Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001297" start="3174" end="3185" title="Busby Marou" label="Busby Marou"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033668" start="3188" end="3195" title="Cardi B" label="Cardi B"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184715" start="3198" end="3211" title="Carlie Hanson" label="Carlie Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q64577327" start="3214" end="3222" title="Cavetown (musician)" label="Cavetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084390" start="3234" end="3244" title="Charli XCX" label="Charli XCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810390" start="3247" end="3259" title="Charlie Puth" label="Charlie Puth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="3275" end="3279" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838808" start="3282" end="3294" title="Clean Bandit" label="Clean Bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056637" start="3297" end="3311" title="Client Liaison" label="Client Liaison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140037" start="3314" end="3325" title="Code Orange (band)" label="Code Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299" start="3328" end="3348" title="Coheed &amp;amp; Cambria" label="Coheed &amp;amp; Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="3351" end="3359" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q295120" start="3362" end="3374" title="Corey Taylor" label="Corey Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023097" start="3377" end="3384" title="Creeper (band)" label="Creeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959408" start="3395" end="3405" title="Dan + Shay" label="Dan + Shay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="3408" end="3419" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8298" start="3422" end="3434" title="David Guetta" label="David Guetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="3437" end="3445" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q533781" start="3448" end="3453" title="Diplo" label="Diplo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131366" start="3456" end="3465" title="Disturbed (band)" label="Disturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q56513383" start="3468" end="3479" title="Don Toliver" label="Don Toliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914464" start="3482" end="3490" title="Dua Lipa" label="Dua Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q96197830" start="3493" end="3504" title="Dutchavelli" label="Dutchavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="3507" end="3513" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="3539" end="3549" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q105906191" start="3552" end="3557" title="Ekali (DJ)" label="Ekali"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613326" start="3560" end="3570" title="Elderbrook" label="Elderbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367820" start="3573" end="3583" title="Eskimo Joe" label="Eskimo Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47500308" start="3586" end="3590" title="E^ST" label="E^ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="3593" end="3606" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281603" start="3609" end="3616" title="Faouzia" label="Faouzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958724" start="3626" end="3635" title="Fever 333" label="Fever 333"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746211" start="3638" end="3659" title="Fitz and the Tantrums" label="Fitz and the Tantrums"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="3662" end="3675" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q105637492" start="3678" end="3687" title="Flowerkid" label="Flowerkid"/>
<link wikidata="Q728958" start="3690" end="3695" title="Foals (band)" label="Foals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18071093" start="3698" end="3706" title="Galantis" label="Galantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612692" start="3719" end="3725" title="Glades (band)" label="Glades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011412" start="3728" end="3734" title="Gojira (band)" label="Gojira"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530097" start="3737" end="3752" title="Golden Features" label="Golden Features"/>
<link wikidata="Q730046" start="3755" end="3768" title="Goo Goo Dolls" label="Goo Goo Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="3771" end="3779" title="Gorillaz" label="Gorillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="3792" end="3800" title="Greenday" label="Greenday"/>
<link wikidata="Q101025890" start="3803" end="3808" title="Griff (singer)" label="Griff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153346" start="3811" end="3820" title="Grouplove" label="Grouplove"/>
<link wikidata="Q206032" start="3823" end="3833" title="Gucci Mane" label="Gucci Mane"/>
<link wikidata="Q935503" start="3836" end="3845" title="Halestorm" label="Halestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q108901803" start="3868" end="3879" title="Harper Finn" label="Harper Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q239195" start="3892" end="3905" title="Hayley Kiyoko" label="Hayley Kiyoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q201562" start="3908" end="3923" title="Hayley Williams" label="Hayley Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q84763107" start="3926" end="3938" title="Higher Power (band)" label="Higher Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q20527609" start="3941" end="3955" title="Highly Suspect" label="Highly Suspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q51077506" start="3958" end="3970" title="Hobo Johnson" label="Hobo Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q96695044" start="3973" end="3986" title="Hooligan Hefs" label="Hooligan Hefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740961" start="3989" end="3994" title="Honne (band)" label="Honne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468680" start="3997" end="4011" title="In This Moment" label="In This Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q969999" start="4014" end="4018" title="Illy" label="Illy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="4021" end="4032" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q64748011" start="4035" end="4041" title="J Rick" label="J Rick"/>
<link wikidata="Q108304261" start="4044" end="4053" title="Jack Gray (musician)" label="Jack Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q59727812" start="4056" end="4067" title="Jack Harlow" label="Jack Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q130799" start="4070" end="4081" title="James Blunt" label="James Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q234356" start="4084" end="4097" title="Janelle Monae" label="Janelle Monae"/>
<link wikidata="Q243639" start="4100" end="4112" title="Jason Derulo" label="Jason Derulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105103226" start="4115" end="4125" title="JC Stewart" label="JC Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15744507" start="4128" end="4139" title="Jess Glynne" label="Jess Glynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702184" start="4142" end="4157" title="John Williamson (singer)" label="John Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215219" start="4160" end="4164" title="JoJo (singer)" label="JoJo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218083" start="4167" end="4178" title="Josh Groban" label="Josh Groban"/>
<link wikidata="Q18628" start="4181" end="4192" title="Joyous Wolf" label="Joyous Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327183" start="4195" end="4200" title="Jubël (duo)" label="Jubël"/>
<link wikidata="Q98714287" start="4203" end="4207" title="Jxdn" label="Jxdn"/>
<link wikidata="Q84266654" start="4210" end="4213" title="JXN (Australian musician)" label="JXN"/>
<link wikidata="Q230454" start="4216" end="4224" title="k.d lang" label="k.d lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851422" start="4227" end="4232" title="Kaleo (band)" label="Kaleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657541" start="4235" end="4242" title="Kehlani" label="Kehlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q483507" start="4245" end="4259" title="Kelly Clarkson" label="Kelly Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004781" start="4281" end="4295" title="Kita Alexander" label="Kita Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="4298" end="4302" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187004" start="4305" end="4312" title="Kranium" label="Kranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28606665" start="4315" end="4319" title="Kyle (musician)" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="4322" end="4335" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q59192251" start="4338" end="4346" title="L Devine" label="L Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="4365" end="4377" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="4380" end="4394" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q451812" start="4397" end="4412" title="Lianne La Havas" label="Lianne La Havas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38002101" start="4427" end="4435" title="Lil Pump" label="Lil Pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q47544109" start="4438" end="4447" title="Lil Skies" label="Lil Skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="4466" end="4477" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232225" start="4480" end="4485" title="Lizzo" label="Lizzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q300935" start="4488" end="4500" title="Lukas Graham" label="Lukas Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q324726" start="4503" end="4513" title="Mac Miller" label="Mac Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q20000568" start="4516" end="4523" title="Mahalia" label="Mahalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63248118" start="4526" end="4539" title="Maisie Peters" label="Maisie Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604214" start="4542" end="4553" title="Major Lazer" label="Major Lazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234174" start="4556" end="4572" title="Marina Diamandis" label="Marina Diamandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q87368609" start="4575" end="4584" title="Master KG" label="Master KG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851552" start="4587" end="4595" title="Mastedon" label="Mastedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845354" start="4598" end="4604" title="Matoma" label="Matoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q66712455" start="4607" end="4618" title="Matt Maeson" label="Matt Maeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897911" start="4621" end="4630" title="Meek Mill" label="Meek Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211162" start="4633" end="4649" title="Melanie Martinez" label="Melanie Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q153694" start="4652" end="4665" title="Michael Buble" label="Michael Buble"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="4668" end="4680" title="Missy Elliot" label="Missy Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735227" start="4683" end="4687" title="Mist (rapper)" label="Mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608997" start="4690" end="4701" title="MisterWives" label="MisterWives"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122234" start="4719" end="4731" title="Morgan Evans (singer)" label="Morgan Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583306" start="4734" end="4753" title="Motionless in White" label="Motionless in White"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="4756" end="4760" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q483285" start="4763" end="4782" title="My Chemical Romance" label="My Chemical Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q78208617" start="4785" end="4797" title="Nasty Cherry" label="Nasty Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q91044263" start="4800" end="4811" title="Nathan Dawe" label="Nathan Dawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817575" start="4814" end="4827" title="Needtobreathe" label="Needtobreathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="4830" end="4840" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="4843" end="4853" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009351" start="4856" end="4866" title="NLE Choppa" label="NLE Choppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043908" start="4869" end="4878" title="No Comply" label="No Comply"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846804" start="4881" end="4886" title="Nomad (NZ band)" label="Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42336667" start="4889" end="4906" title="Nothing, Nowhere." label="Nothing, Nowhere."/>
<link wikidata="Q55956050" start="4909" end="4920" title="Oliver Tree" label="Oliver Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072736" start="4923" end="4934" title="One Ok Rock" label="One Ok Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q100490194" start="4937" end="4946" title="Pa Salieu" label="Pa Salieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q277551" start="4949" end="4968" title="Panic! at the Disco" label="Panic! at the Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q473466" start="4971" end="4979" title="Paramore" label="Paramore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15929398" start="4982" end="4995" title="PartyNextDoor" label="PartyNextDoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398896" start="4998" end="5003" title="Perto (musician)" label="Perto"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="5006" end="5018" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q60688836" start="5021" end="5032" title="Pink Sweats" label="Pink Sweats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="5035" end="5041" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158468" start="5044" end="5049" title="Pvris" label="Pvris"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="5052" end="5059" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="5062" end="5083" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55092461" start="5086" end="5096" title="Rico Nasty" label="Rico Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q229760" start="5099" end="5107" title="Rita Ora" label="Rita Ora"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357327" start="5117" end="5120" title="RMR (singer)" label="RMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q754094" start="5123" end="5133" title="Rob Thomas (musician)" label="Rob Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231940" start="5136" end="5148" title="Robin Schulz" label="Robin Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="5151" end="5162" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q59209423" start="5165" end="5176" title="Roddy Ricch" label="Roddy Ricch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632343" start="5197" end="5208" title="Royal Blood (band)" label="Royal Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q50971" start="5211" end="5221" title="Rudimental" label="Rudimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q96243288" start="5224" end="5229" title="S1mba" label="S1mba"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058258" start="5232" end="5247" title="Sabrina Claudio" label="Sabrina Claudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908442" start="5250" end="5255" title="Safia (band)" label="Safia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401935" start="5258" end="5269" title="Saint Motel" label="Saint Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972330" start="5272" end="5281" title="Sam Feldt" label="Sam Feldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50486592" start="5284" end="5292" title="Saweetie" label="Saweetie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090889" start="5295" end="5307" title="Scott Helman" label="Scott Helman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="5310" end="5316" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063812" start="5319" end="5328" title="Shinedown" label="Shinedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222047" start="5331" end="5339" title="ShockOne" label="ShockOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q59155690" start="5342" end="5357" title="Shoreline Mafia" label="Shoreline Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181484" start="5360" end="5363" title="Sia" label="Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19004" start="5366" end="5374" title="Skrillex" label="Skrillex"/>
<link wikidata="Q254138" start="5377" end="5385" title="Slipknot (band)" label="Slipknot"/>
<link wikidata="Q106625863" start="5388" end="5402" title="Sloan Peterson" label="Sloan Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725469" start="5426" end="5436" title="Stone Sour" label="Stone Sour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055659" start="5439" end="5446" title="Stormzy" label="Stormzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81772971" start="5449" end="5458" title="Sub Urban (musician)" label="Sub Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q435807" start="5479" end="5489" title="Tayla Parx" label="Tayla Parx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712421" start="5492" end="5502" title="The Adults" label="The Adults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764491" start="5505" end="5525" title="The Amity Affliction" label="The Amity Affliction"/>
<link wikidata="Q107241193" start="5528" end="5543" title="The Band Camino" label="The Band Camino"/>
<link wikidata="Q606226" start="5546" end="5560" title="The Black Keys" label="The Black Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="5563" end="5572" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="5575" end="5591" title="The Flaming Lips" label="The Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735357" start="5594" end="5611" title="The Front Bottoms" label="The Front Bottoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q66342594" start="5614" end="5627" title="The Highwomen" label="The Highwomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24997567" start="5630" end="5652" title="The Kite String Tangle" label="The Kite String Tangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744878" start="5655" end="5665" title="The Knocks" label="The Knocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560878" start="5668" end="5682" title="The Magic Gang" label="The Magic Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q104828360" start="5686" end="5695" title="The Snuts" label="The Snuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347289" start="5698" end="5709" title="The Wombats" label="The Wombats"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394070" start="5712" end="5723" title="Thelma Plum" label="Thelma Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q744242" start="5726" end="5745" title="Theory of a Deadman" label="Theory of a Deadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183508" start="5759" end="5765" title="Tiesto" label="Tiesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="5768" end="5779" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q46321" start="5782" end="5794" title="Tinie Tempah" label="Tinie Tempah"/>
<link wikidata="Q320190" start="5797" end="5807" title="Trey Songz" label="Trey Songz"/>
<link wikidata="Q390684" start="5810" end="5817" title="Trivium (band)" label="Trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719133" start="5820" end="5829" title="Turnstile (band)" label="Turnstile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857806" start="5842" end="5859" title="Twenty One Pilots" label="Twenty One Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859785" start="5862" end="5875" title="Ty Dolla Sign" label="Ty Dolla Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q84716723" start="5878" end="5888" title="UNO Stereo" label="UNO Stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25768297" start="5891" end="5896" title="Wafia" label="Wafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458519" start="5899" end="5903" title="Wale (rapper)" label="Wale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55184769" start="5906" end="5913" title="Wallows" label="Wallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="5916" end="5922" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28748039" start="5925" end="5932" title="Whethan" label="Whethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993721" start="5936" end="5949" title="Whipped Cream (band)" label="Whipped Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113721" start="5952" end="5969" title="Why Don&amp;#x27;t We" label="Why Don&amp;#x27;t We"/>
<link wikidata="Q117139" start="5973" end="5984" title="Wiz Khalifa" label="Wiz Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56073470" start="5987" end="5997" title="YBN Cordae" label="YBN Cordae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28000403" start="6000" end="6009" title="YFN Lucci" label="YFN Lucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q36490532" start="6012" end="6038" title="YoungBoy Never Broke Again" label="YoungBoy Never Broke Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562027" start="6061" end="6065" title="1927 (band)" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q633977" start="6068" end="6080" title="Archie Roach" label="Archie Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q73030313" start="6083" end="6096" title="Bang the Drum (band)" label="Bang the Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634931" start="6099" end="6105" title="Bardot (Australian band)" label="Bardot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184143" start="6108" end="6119" title="Ben Abraham (musician)" label="Ben Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943424" start="6122" end="6138" title="Boom Crash Opera" label="Boom Crash Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975642" start="6141" end="6151" title="Brothers 3" label="Brothers 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110852" start="6154" end="6169" title="Christina Parie" label="Christina Parie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107765" start="6172" end="6183" title="Cold Chisel" label="Cold Chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951401" start="6186" end="6211" title="Cookin&amp;#x27; on 3 Burners" label="Cookin&amp;#x27; on 3 Burners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215843" start="6214" end="6225" title="Dane Rumble" label="Dane Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180813" start="6228" end="6246" title="Dead Letter Circus" label="Dead Letter Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043404" start="6249" end="6259" title="Dylan Joel" label="Dylan Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q898598" start="6262" end="6270" title="Evermore (band)" label="Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410635" start="6273" end="6281" title="Euphoria (Australian band)" label="Euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351221" start="6284" end="6290" title="Goanna" label="Goanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623968" start="6293" end="6297" title="Gyan Evans" label="Gyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380112" start="6300" end="6309" title="Gyroscope (band)" label="Gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q107361066" start="6312" end="6318" title="Hopium" label="Hopium"/>
<link wikidata="Q489801" start="6321" end="6325" title="INXS" label="INXS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179410" start="6328" end="6340" title="Jenny Morris (musician)" label="Jenny Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q462221" start="6356" end="6370" title="Kasey Chambers" label="Kasey Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377523" start="6373" end="6385" title="Katie Noonan" label="Katie Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15880391" start="6388" end="6394" title="Kerser" label="Kerser"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729138" start="6397" end="6410" title="Kiley Gaffney" label="Kiley Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408491" start="6413" end="6426" title="Kim Churchill" label="Kim Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q460496" start="6429" end="6442" title="Lisa Mitchell" label="Lisa Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276881" start="6445" end="6455" title="Magic Dirt" label="Magic Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880653" start="6458" end="6474" title="Make Them Suffer" label="Make Them Suffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488199" start="6512" end="6531" title="Pretty Violet Stain" label="Pretty Violet Stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309724" start="6534" end="6546" title="Regurgitator" label="Regurgitator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369713" start="6549" end="6560" title="Ross Wilson (musician)" label="Ross Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488920" start="6563" end="6575" title="Shannon Noll" label="Shannon Noll"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="6578" end="6597" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067997" start="6600" end="6611" title="Super Cruel" label="Super Cruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785151" start="6614" end="6626" title="Thirsty Merc" label="Thirsty Merc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767364" start="6629" end="6646" title="The Sundance Kids" label="The Sundance Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774612" start="6649" end="6661" title="The Whitlams" label="The Whitlams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733685" start="6664" end="6675" title="The Ferrets (band)" label="The Ferrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763694" start="6678" end="6687" title="The Sharp" label="The Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767480" start="6690" end="6704" title="The Superjesus" label="The Superjesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436870" start="6718" end="6726" title="Titanium (band)" label="Titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916978" start="6748" end="6753" title="Vassy (singer)" label="Vassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66205545" start="6756" end="6767" title="Xavier Dunn" label="Xavier Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024856" start="6770" end="6779" title="Zoë Badwi" label="Zoë Badwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="6957" end="6970" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="7021" end="7032" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="London 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="7086" end="7100" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="Melbourne 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="7154" end="7163" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="Rome 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="7217" end="7227" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="Tokyo 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="7281" end="7297" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="Mexico City 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="7351" end="7364" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="Montreal 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="7418" end="7429" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="Moscow 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="7483" end="7499" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="Los Angeles 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="7553" end="7563" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="Seoul 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="7617" end="7631" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="Barcelona 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="7686" end="7698" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="Atlanta 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="7806" end="7818" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111930" start="7842" end="7856" title="Graham Kennedy" label="Graham Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756378" start="7899" end="7914" title="Paul Hogan Show" label="Paul Hogan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895246" start="7937" end="7948" title="Bert Newton" label="Bert Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954471" start="7966" end="7979" title="Don Lane Show" label="Don Lane Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q296641" start="7981" end="7991" title="Paul Hogan" label="Paul Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841142" start="8052" end="8074" title="Midday (Australian TV program)" label="Midday With Ray Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749290" start="8099" end="8125" title="Hey Hey It&amp;#x27;s Saturday" label="Hey Hey It&amp;#x27;s Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="8202" end="8224" title="Lists of record labels" label="Lists of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66929" wikidata="Q858782" url="?curid=66929" title="Big Day Out">
<text>The Big Day Out (BDO) was an annual music festival that was held in five Australian cities: Sydney, Melbourne, Gold Coast, Adelaide, and Perth, as well as Auckland, New Zealand. The festival was held during summer, typically in January of each year but was sometimes held as late as early February in some cities including Perth.

The event was conceptualised after the Violent Femmes announced a tour of Australia. Promoters Ken West and Vivian Lees sought another act as middle-level support for the band&#x27;s tour. They succeeded in securing Nirvana to play the Sydney leg at the Hordern Pavilion. 

The Big Day Out debuted on the 1992 Australia Day public holiday in Sydney and eventually expanded to Melbourne, Adelaide, and Perth the following year. The Gold Coast and Auckland were added to the schedule in 1994. As of 2003, it featured seven or eight stages (depending on the venue), accommodating popular contemporary rock music, electronic music, mainstream international acts, and local acts. Auckland was taken out of the tour schedule in 2013, but the festival returned to the city for its last run in 2014.

After the partnership between Ken West and Vivian Lees was dissolved in 2011, Lees sold his stake in the event to American festival promoters C3 Presents. In early June 2014, C3 attained full ownership of the Big Day Out festival and announced the cancellation of the 2015 event on 26 June 2014 with the option for the festival to return in the future left open. Despite this, the event has yet to return in subsequent years and as of 2022 there are currently no plans for any event to be held in future. Founder Ken West died in April 2022 at the age of 64.

==History==

===1992–1997===
Annual music festivals had been gaining momentum for some time, and the United States had launched Lollapalooza in Chicago, Illinois in 1991. Australia had seen various music festivals but nothing annual. Big Day Out was founded by Ken West and Vivian Lees–the festival began in 1992 as a Sydney-only show, with the headline act, Violent Femmes, playing alongside Nirvana, and a range of other foreign and local alternative music acts, at the Hordern Pavilion. In 1993 the scope of the festival was extended to include Melbourne, Perth and Adelaide. West revealed in an interview that he was looking to create &quot;urban mayhem&quot; and &quot;controlled chaos&quot;.

In 1994 the Big Day Out was extended further to include Auckland, New Zealand and the Gold Coast, and was held over a three-week period. The geographical locations of the 1994 festival occurred on an annual basis until 1997, when organisers West and Lees announced a year-long hiatus, causing concern that the festival was nearing the end of its existence; however, the festival returned in 1999.

===1999–2013===
Following the start of the 21st century, the festival was involved in two major controversies. Firstly, 16-year-old Jessica Michalik was killed after she was crushed at a 2001 Sydney show during a performance by the band Limp Bizkit. Michalik&#x27;s death temporarily placed the future of the BDO festival in jeopardy, but the event continued after the Sydney Coroner&#x27;s Court criticised the crowd control measures at the site and inflammatory comments made by Limp Bizkit&#x27;s Fred Durst after the crush occurred.

The festival celebrated its 100th performance in 2010. In the period leading up to the 100-show milestone, which occurred at the second of two Sydney dates in 2010, Lees claimed in an &quot;Australian&quot; article that the BDO&#x27;s ability to build relationships with acts during their careers had become an important part of the BDO culture. In the same &quot;Australian&quot; article, journalist Iain Shedden described the BDO as one of the &quot;most successful and long-running rock festivals in the world&quot;, aligning the festival with the established Australian horse-racing event, the Melbourne Cup.

Lees also explained the growth and increased complexity of the festival in the 2010 &quot;Australian&quot; article, stating that, while a crew of 70 people crossed Australia in 1993 for the inaugural event, the 2010 festival consisted of 700 people. Lees highlighted the increased needs of Australian bands in his explanation:
It does get easier but it&#x27;s also getting bigger and that makes it more complicated ... You&#x27;re more confident about what you&#x27;re doing and having some gravitas, but at the same time, because we&#x27;re having more and more expectations put on us by everyone, the complexities are increasing. Even Aussie bands that used to take five or six people on the road are now taking 11. That seems to be the magic number, even for a new starting-off band. What they are doing is working to put on the best show they can. Through that the festival needs more production, more riders, more hotel rooms, more everything.

Due to the increasing popularity of the event, a second Sydney show was occasionally held. The extreme popularity of Metallica in 2004 led to this addition, followed by another second-show addition in Sydney for the 2010 event, when Muse was the headline act. A second Sydney date returned in 2011, in response to the co-headline acts, Tool and Rammstein.

In November 2011, the business partnership between Lees and West was dissolved, and the latter next partnered with Austin, United States (US)-based company C3 Presents, which runs the Lollapalooza festival in the US. C3 purchased a 51 per cent stake in the company following a split that was caused by &quot;internal and external&quot; pressures, whereby Lees severed all connections with the business. Prior to November 2011, Creative Festival Entertainment was the production company of the BDO festival.

On 17 January 2012, West announced that the Auckland BDO event, held on 20 January 2012, would be the last Big Day Out in New Zealand, explaining that the festival would only be held in Australia in 2013. However, in April 2013, the promoters said that they were seeking to reschedule an Auckland event in 2014 (at Western Springs Stadium instead of Mt Smart).

The 2012 festival was beset by difficulties and was described as &quot;disastrous&quot; by the &quot;Faster Louder&quot; website in June 2014. Headline act Kanye West did not appear at the Perth and Adelaide events, while a media report at the time alleged that &quot;staging and fencing contractors had not been paid, sponsors were angry and the festival was beset by internal rifts, namely the firing and then apparent re-hiring of CEO Adam Zammit.&quot;

In 2013 the festival received staunch opposition from the Town of Claremont&#x27;s mayor Jock Barker, who stated that music festivals in general introduce &quot;appalling antisocial and criminal behaviour into a residential area.&quot; Although a study revealed that large-scale music festivals contribute approximately A$5.2 million to the state&#x27;s economy, in addition to increased tourism and employment levels, Claremont councilor Peter Browne supported Barker&#x27;s position by stating that the benefits of events such as the Big Day Out are &quot;hopelessly outweighed by the intolerable noise, the late finish, the high level of criminal activity and general social misbehaviour in and outside of the grounds.&quot; Despite such opposition, the Claremont Showground venue in Perth, Western Australia was used by the BDO organisers for the 2013 event. The Perth leg of the 2014 BDO was held at the Arena Joondalup venue.

West announced to the media on 17 September 2013 that Arash &quot;AJ&quot; Maddah, a fellow Australian music festival promoter, had joined the Big Day Out enterprise. Although West explained that &quot;the BDO team will now be C3, AJ Maddah and yours truly&quot;, Maddah stated to the media: &quot;It&#x27;s Ken&#x27;s vision and I&#x27;m working for him. For 20 years it&#x27;s been my ambition to work for the Big Day Out. It&#x27;s been a great festival for 22 years. I don&#x27;t need to fuck with that.&quot; As of the date of the announcement, Adam Zammit was the CEO of the company and Fairfax Media reported numerous job cuts.

An October 2013 Fairfax Media article then reported that the company&#x27;s office space in the inner-city Sydney suburb of Surry Hills was being sold for A$5 million and an unnamed source informed Fairfax that the BDO company had also &quot;recently lost some or all control over the lucrative sideshows.&quot; During the same time period, Lees publicly revealed that West had sold his stake in the company and the festival was facing serious problems.

===2014–present===
Shortly after Maddah joined the BDO team, the headlining act for the 2014 festival, Blur, cancelled eight weeks prior to the commencement of their first 2014 BDO show. The band announced the cancellation on their Facebook fan page:
Devastated to report that Blur won&#x27;t be performing at BDO in 2014. It&#x27;s a shock that it has come to this. Only 8 weeks to go, the band feels that with the constantly shifting goalposts and challenging conditions of the organisers, they can&#x27;t let it drag on any longer and want to make this announcement, to be clear to Blur fans that they won&#x27;t be there. We&#x27;ve done our very best to work with the organisers and considered every option to make it happen, but they&#x27;ve let us down and let everyone else down too.

West previously explained in July 2013 that he had attempted to secure Blur for 14 years and their high status meant that they were considered a &quot;white whale&quot; act: &quot;That [securing Blur] was a long negotiation ... Blur were going to be a headliner in various years but they couldn&#x27;t get it together and more importantly they weren&#x27;t connecting as a band.&quot; BDO organisers were as shocked by the cancellation as those people who had purchased tickets, as they had not received prior notification. Social media was the forum in which the public and media received updates, with Maddah first stating on Twitter that, in the time he had been with the festival, he had only seen the BDO team work as hard as possible to fulfil each of Blur&#x27;s requests. Maddah later stated on Twitter that refund options would be available for those ticket-holders who no longer wished to attend due to Blur&#x27;s announcement.

The second 2014 Sydney show was then officially cancelled on 26 September 2013 due to poor ticket sales—the show was merged into the first show on 26 January. In an official statement, West explained, &quot;Perhaps we were a bit ambitious expanding to two dates in Sydney for this year&#x27;s Big Day Out.&quot; Overall, the attendance figures for the 2014 festival were equivalent to around 50 per cent of the 2013 event. Approximately 15,000 tickets were sold for the Perth leg of the festival, leading to an announcement that the Big Day Out would not return to the western capital city. Maddah confirmed to the media that 31,000 people attended the Sydney leg on 26 January.

Maddah participated in an interview with the triple j radio station in February 2014 and said that he had not expected the festival to be financially successful in 2014:
I was under no illusion that it was going to be [anything but] a financial catastrophe—to say the least—this year. That was not even remotely in my mind, that I was going to walk in there and make any money this year.

Maddah further explained that the festival lost around A$10 million, but at the time of the interview, he was still awaiting the final financial results. Maddah cited overhead cost issues from the Perth leg as detrimental to the festival:
When you look through the financial history of most of the national festivals, the east coast has to subsidise events in Perth ... That&#x27;s another reason why Big Day Out ticket prices were so high this year, because generally speaking you lose money in Perth. You&#x27;ve got two days to get there, three days to get back, all the trucking, all the production... a hotel room that you would pay $180 in Sydney is $320 a night in Perth in the same hotel chain. The price of hiring everything is ridiculous over there. Combine that will dropping public support for festivals over there and attendance figures and then for all your trouble you get a kicking from the local government and state government. It just got to a point where it&#x27;s become unbearable.

On 25 June 2014, the Australian &quot;Music Feeds&quot; website published an article after it received documents showing that Maddah &quot;stepped down as Big Day Out director and transferred his stake in the Australian festival entirely over to American partners, the Austin, Texas-based C3 Presents&quot;—the arrangement was effective on 4 June 2014. Maddah&#x27;s shares (held under the business name &quot;Madjo BDO Pty Ltd&quot;) were transferred from West and an unnamed company in November 2013, thereby removing the last remaining cofounder from the business. The documents also revealed that the newly appointed director of the &quot;BDO Presents&quot; company, as of 4 June 2014, is a person named Blake Kendrick, while the company&#x27;s new registered address belongs to an Australian law firm.

On 26 June 2014, the C3 company—founded by its managers, Charles Attal, Charlie Jones and Charlie Walker, in 2007—released an official statement in which it announced the cancellation of the 2015 Big Day Out; however, the company also stated that it enjoyed its involvement in the BDO festival and intends to &quot;bring back the festival in future years&quot;.

In the wake of Maddah&#x27;s sale and the C3 announcement, differing perspectives emerged in the media. On 26 June 2014, following the release of C3&#x27;s official statement, Maddah insisted in a triple j interview that he remained involved with the festival and holds the option of buying back his stake in the company for 2016, the year that he insisted the festival will return. However, an anonymous source stated that Maddah is no longer involved, with C3 in control of all aspects of the BDO brand—from social media to intellectual property—while another unnamed source believes that C3 will &quot;bankrupt the company, go back to America and forget about Australia.&quot; Lees also spoke with triple j on 26 June and, in addition to stating &quot;It&#x27;s a very dysfunctional arrangement with AJ [Maddah] being in the driver&#x27;s seat&quot;, expressed an ongoing belief in the high status of the BDO festival:
The Big Day Out has been, and will always be, the festival in Australia. And if people are expecting something better to come along tomorrow, then they shouldn&#x27;t be holding their breath, because it&#x27;s not going to happen. Big Day Out set the high benchmark which is not going to be succeeded by a one-day festival in the near future for sure.

After the &quot;New York Times&quot; announced &quot;advanced talks&quot; between Live Nation and C3 Presents in early October 2014, the purchase of a 51-per cent stake in the Austin company was confirmed on 22 December of the same year. Described at the time of the acquisition as &quot;the largest independent concerts company in its space&quot;, C3 reported revenue to the value of US$124 million in 2013 and was targeted by Live Nation for its festival portfolio. The C3 founders told reporters that they were &quot;excited&quot; by the development, but made no mention of the Big Day Out festival. It has not returned since then.

==Artist lineups==

Since its inception in 1992, Big Day Out has attracted a large range of artists, with headlining acts including Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Kanye West, The Smashing Pumpkins, The White Stripes, Chemical Brothers, Blink 182, The Strokes, Muse, Hole, Violent Femmes, Iggy Pop and the Stooges, The Ramones, Soundgarden, Rammstein, System of a Down, Limp Bizkit, Nine Inch Nails, Rage Against the Machine, The Prodigy, Marilyn Manson, Foo Fighters, Metallica, Tool, The Offspring, Neil Young and Red Hot Chili Peppers. The annual festival has also been a launching platform for many Australian artists, with various acts performing on the tour multiple times, such as Silverchair, Regurgitator, Powderfinger, You Am I, The Living End, Jebediah, The Vines, Grinspoon, Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Kisschasy, and Wolfmother.

==Festival venues==
==Venues within the festival==
===Boiler Room===
The Boiler Room was an indoor dance venue hosting dance and electronica artists at the Big Day Out. The concept was started in 1993, when only two bands, Severed Heads and Itch-E &amp; Scratch-E, performed. The Boiler Room was established as a fixture from 1994 (the first with solely dance music) as the first big dance music stage of the Big Day Out, and soon became very popular, with DJ Fatboy Slim leading the lineup in 1999. Ben Suthers programmed the lineup for 15 years, until 2014. Also in 1999, British band Underworld played the Boiler Room in Sydney and Melbourne. In 1996, The Prodigy played, and in 1997, British artist Aphex Twin. Australian DJ and producer Groove Terminator said of his first Boiler Room experience &quot;In Adelaide, we played a lot harder and faster than anywhere else&quot;. As LCD Soundsystem rose to popularity (2006-2007), the programming moved towards indie rock and slightly away from &quot;the club sound&quot;. Other performers in the Boiler Room over the years included Simian Mobile Disco, Dizzee Rascal, The Chemical Brothers, Basement Jaxx, Goldie, and The Presets (2006).

The Boiler Room was a significant cultural phenomenon, which changed Australian music fans&#x27; perception of dance music, and was credited with bringing electronic music and culture to rock fans. DJ BeXta said &quot;genres were developing as Big Day Out and the Boiler Room was developing&quot;. Programmer Sutherland said in 2019: &quot;Trying to get a whole bunch of people who maybe only ever listened to Nirvana, listening to dance music. That&#x27;s its legacy.&quot;

==Controversy==
===Death of Jessica Michalik===

During the 2001 Big Day Out festival in Sydney, Jessica Michalik was crushed in a mosh pit during a performance by the band Limp Bizkit. The crush reportedly occurred as the band began playing &quot;My Generation&quot;. The band were then cut short as they attempted to play by medical personnel and security staff, after which the band took a 15-minute break before resuming their performance. Michalik was revived and rushed to Concord Hospital, but died of a heart attack five days later.

According to a review of the band&#x27;s performance by &quot;Metal Hammer&quot;, Limp Bizkit&#x27;s frontman, Fred Durst, encouraged the crowd &quot;to settle down&quot; twice during the performance. Durst also claimed the band had attempted to take precautions that fell on deaf ears, &quot;We begged, we screamed, we sent letters, we tried to take precautions, because we are Limp Bizkit, we know we cause this big emotional blister of a crowd&quot;. The following day, Limp Bizkit had left Australia without telling the organisers, who only discovered the band&#x27;s departure through a note left at the hotel.

Senior deputy state coroner Jacqueline Milledge issued a statement saying responsibility was on the Big Day Out&#x27;s promoters Creative Entertainment Australia, saying there was overwhelming evidence that crowd density was dangerous when Limp Bizkit went on stage. Limp Bizkit was also criticised in the report, Milledge saying that Durst could have taken the situation more seriously, with his comments on stage during the attempt to rescue Michalik &quot;alarming and inflammatory&quot;.

Michalik&#x27;s parents filed separate wrongful death claims naming promoters and security personnel, and in one claim, Limp Bizkit. A New South Wales court dismissed the band and all parties connected with the band from the claim, finding they were not liable.

In 2005, United National Insurance sued Limp Bizkit in an attempt to avoid paying legal fees arising from Michalik&#x27;s death. The company claimed in the lawsuit, which was filed on 11 August 2005, that Durst had incited the audience at the festival to rush the stage.

===Flag ban===

On 21 January 2007, a decision was made by the organisers to discourage Big Day Out patrons in Sydney from bringing and displaying the Australian flag. The organisers said the decision was a result of recent ethnic tensions in Sydney and complaints that the previous year&#x27;s festival had been marred by roving packs of aggressive flag-draped youths.

Sections of the community had strong views in support of or objection to the policy. Prime Minister John Howard, New South Wales Premier Morris Iemma, and Federal Leader of the Opposition Kevin Rudd all condemned the move. Iemma suggested the event be cancelled if the organisers could not secure the attendees&#x27; safety. Main stage act Jet performed in front of a large backdrop of a black-and-white Australian flag cut-out of their name, with lead vocalist Nic Cester adding, &quot;I can&#x27;t tell anyone else what to do but we as a band are very proud to be Australian and we don&#x27;t want to feel we are not allowed to feel proud&quot;.

Other people including Andrew Bartlett of the Australian Democrats, sports writer Peter FitzSimons, and members of the hip-hop outfit The Herd expressed concern that the flag was being misused by a handful of aggressive attendees in a jingoist manner and that rock concerts were not the appropriate venue to be waving a flag.

On the first day of the 2007 Sydney Big Day Out, significant numbers of patrons attended the event wearing Australian flag-related apparel or carrying Australian flags. No one was refused entry and no flag-related material or clothing was confiscated. After that date, there were no further suggestions of banning the Australian flag from Big Day Out events.

===Drugs===
Drug use is associated with many Australian music festivals, including Big Day Out, with anecdotal reports strongly indicating that alcohol continues to be the most prevalent drug at all events. Police have intercepted suspected users and dealers by placing drug sniffing dogs at some entrances of each festival and patrolling the event (see New South Wales Police Force strip search scandal). At the 2008 festival in Sydney, police made 86 drug-related arrests. In 2009, 107 people were detained for drug violations. At the 2009 Perth leg of the festival tour, more than 70 arrests were charged with drug-related offences.

====Death of Gemma Thoms====
At the 2009 Big Day Out festival in Perth, 17-year-old Gemma Thoms collapsed after allegedly taking three ecstasy tablets. She died 12 hours later in Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, after being transferred from the event&#x27;s first-aid post. The girl and her friend reportedly took one tablet each whilst at home before the event. After arriving, she saw police near the entrance, panicked, and swallowed another two tablets. Police later denied responsibility for Thoms&#x27; death, suggesting that no sniffer dogs were being used to search patrons at the entrance she had used. They agreed that &quot;There may have been a perceived fear of being detected&quot;. Thoms had been driven by car and had not taken the train to the station where police were searching.

===Beenie Man and Odd Future===
In November 2009, gay rights groups in New Zealand protested after controversial rapper Beenie Man was included in the second round of announcements for the 2010 tour. Groups such as GayNZ.com cited controversial and homophobic lyrics from Beenie Man&#x27;s songs such as &quot;I&#x27;m dreaming of a new Jamaica/Come to execute all the gays&quot;. The group called for Big Day Out organisers to drop Beenie Man from the lineup &quot;to send a message that homophobia is unacceptable&quot;, and over 850 people joined a Facebook group to oppose his appearance.

On 15 November 2009, the festival&#x27;s Australian organisers issued a statement on their website confirming that Beenie Man had indeed been dropped from the lineup. Whilst they acknowledged his commitment to the 2007 Reggae Compassionate Act and his promises to not perform the offending songs on his tour, they ultimately made the decision to drop Beenie Man because they felt his appearance would &quot;be divisive amongst our audience members and would mar the enjoyment of the event for many.&quot;

In early November in 2011, ahead of the 2012 Big Day Out, a request was made by Auckland City Council to remove Odd Future from line up due to some of their lyrics being allegedly homophobic. The promoters agreed, and put an Odd Future sideshow on in Auckland outside of the Big Day Out.

==Compilation albums==

* &quot;Big Day Out 00&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Big Day Out 01&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Disrespective&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Big Day Out 03&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Big Day Out 04&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Big Day Out 05&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Big Day Out 06&quot; (2006)
==See also==

*List of historic rock festivals
*List of hip hop music festivals
*List of festivals in Australia
*Tony Mott

==References==

===Footnotes===
==External links==

*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q858782" start="4" end="15" title="Big Day Out" label="Big Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="92" end="98" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="100" end="109" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="111" end="121" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="123" end="131" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="137" end="142" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="155" end="163" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="370" end="384" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q112071671" start="426" end="434" title="Ken West" label="Ken West"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="547" end="554" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902970" start="585" end="601" title="Hordern Pavilion" label="Hordern Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="641" end="654" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="941" end="957" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008163" start="1266" end="1277" title="C3 Presents" label="C3 Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="1812" end="1824" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1828" end="1845" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q112071671" start="1945" end="1953" title="Ken West" label="Ken West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="2043" end="2057" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="2077" end="2084" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902970" start="2156" end="2172" title="Hordern Pavilion" label="Hordern Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="2243" end="2248" title="Perth, Western Australia" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="2439" end="2460" title="Auckland, New Zealand" label="Auckland, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187368" start="2913" end="2929" title="Jessica Michalik" label="Jessica Michalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="3018" end="3029" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="3281" end="3291" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="3509" end="3519" title="The Australian" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311060" start="3917" end="3930" title="Melbourne Cup" label="Melbourne Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="5000" end="5009" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="5116" end="5120" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="5219" end="5223" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25177" start="5228" end="5237" title="Rammstein" label="Rammstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="5355" end="5361" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008163" start="5396" end="5407" title="C3 Presents" label="C3 Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="5424" end="5436" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988322" start="6063" end="6086" title="Western Springs Stadium" label="Western Springs Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="6266" end="6276" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q543331" start="6626" end="6643" title="Town of Claremont" label="Town of Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126332" start="7325" end="7345" title="Claremont Showground" label="Claremont Showground"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489735" start="7555" end="7582" title="Arash &amp;quot;AJ&amp;quot; Maddah" label="Arash &amp;quot;AJ&amp;quot; Maddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393218" start="8094" end="8107" title="Fairfax Media" label="Fairfax Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915698" start="8261" end="8272" title="Surry Hills" label="Surry Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="8695" end="8699" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="8824" end="8832" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="10013" end="10020" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522899" start="11050" end="11058" title="triple j" label="triple j"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="11449" end="11451" title="Australian dollar" label="A$"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="15613" end="15620" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="15622" end="15631" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="15633" end="15643" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="15645" end="15666" title="The Smashing Pumpkins" label="The Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="15668" end="15685" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208507" start="15687" end="15704" title="Chemical Brothers" label="Chemical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="15706" end="15715" title="Blink 182" label="Blink 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q211583" start="15717" end="15728" title="The Strokes" label="The Strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="15730" end="15734" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="15736" end="15740" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="15742" end="15756" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="15758" end="15782" title="The Stooges" label="Iggy Pop and the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="15784" end="15795" title="The Ramones" label="The Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="15797" end="15808" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25177" start="15810" end="15819" title="Rammstein" label="Rammstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q45165" start="15821" end="15837" title="System of a Down" label="System of a Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="15839" end="15850" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="15852" end="15867" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="15869" end="15893" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="15895" end="15906" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485893" start="15908" end="15922" title="Marilyn Manson (band)" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="15924" end="15936" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="15938" end="15947" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="15949" end="15953" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="15955" end="15968" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="15970" end="15980" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="15985" end="16006" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157327" start="16157" end="16168" title="Silverchair" label="Silverchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309724" start="16170" end="16182" title="Regurgitator" label="Regurgitator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192255" start="16184" end="16196" title="Powderfinger" label="Powderfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113014" start="16198" end="16206" title="You Am I" label="You Am I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423098" start="16208" end="16222" title="The Living End" label="The Living End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689367" start="16224" end="16232" title="Jebediah" label="Jebediah"/>
<link wikidata="Q289405" start="16234" end="16243" title="The Vines (band)" label="The Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031845" start="16245" end="16254" title="Grinspoon" label="Grinspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051182" start="16256" end="16283" title="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds" label="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417156" start="16285" end="16294" title="Kisschasy" label="Kisschasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736766" start="16300" end="16310" title="Wolfmother" label="Wolfmother"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="16432" end="16437" title="dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="16442" end="16453" title="electronic music" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495158" start="16536" end="16549" title="Severed Heads" label="Severed Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094217" start="16554" end="16576" title="Itch-E and Scratch-E" label="Itch-E &amp;amp; Scratch-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="16773" end="16784" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q849429" start="16900" end="16910" title="Underworld (band)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="16968" end="16979" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="17016" end="17026" title="Aphex Twin" label="Aphex Twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610319" start="17055" end="17072" title="Groove Terminator" label="Groove Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q45752" start="17196" end="17211" title="LCD Soundsystem" label="LCD Soundsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="17274" end="17284" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q585470" start="17396" end="17415" title="Simian Mobile Disco" label="Simian Mobile Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q366506" start="17417" end="17430" title="Dizzee Rascal" label="Dizzee Rascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208507" start="17432" end="17453" title="The Chemical Brothers" label="The Chemical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q544018" start="17455" end="17468" title="Basement Jaxx" label="Basement Jaxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="17470" end="17476" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061634" start="17482" end="17493" title="The Presets" label="The Presets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899811" start="17704" end="17709" title="Bexta" label="BeXta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="17913" end="17920" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187368" start="18076" end="18092" title="Jessica Michalik" label="Jessica Michalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463560" start="18110" end="18114" title="moshing" label="mosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="18152" end="18163" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q427126" start="18227" end="18240" title="My Generation (Limp Bizkit song)" label="My Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158851" start="18458" end="18474" title="Concord Repatriation General Hospital" label="Concord Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="18583" end="18595" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="18632" end="18642" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q81676" start="20317" end="20332" title="Flag of Australia" label="Australian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q339883" start="20383" end="20405" title="2005 Cronulla riots" label="recent ethnic tensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="20622" end="20636" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="20637" end="20648" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="20650" end="20673" title="Premiers of New South Wales" label="New South Wales Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191545" start="20674" end="20686" title="Morris Iemma" label="Morris Iemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="20692" end="20724" title="List of Australian Opposition Leaders" label="Federal Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="20725" end="20735" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q750460" start="20877" end="20880" title="Jet (band)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q779588" start="20999" end="21009" title="Nic Cester" label="Nic Cester"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152123" start="21209" end="21224" title="Andrew Bartlett" label="Andrew Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q781392" start="21232" end="21252" title="Australian Democrats" label="Australian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376570" start="21268" end="21284" title="Peter FitzSimons" label="Peter FitzSimons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739433" start="21320" end="21328" title="The Herd (Australian band)" label="The Herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="22124" end="22131" title="Illegal drug trade" label="dealers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38523" start="22143" end="22161" title="Detection dog" label="drug sniffing dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654619" start="22227" end="22276" title="New South Wales Police Force strip search scandal" label="New South Wales Police Force strip search scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="22645" end="22652" title="MDMA" label="ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526207" start="22689" end="22718" title="Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital" label="Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q589846" start="23427" end="23437" title="Beenie Man" label="Beenie Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528537" start="23522" end="23531" title="GayNZ.com" label="GayNZ.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="23556" end="23566" title="homophobic" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="23859" end="23867" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q289822" start="24120" end="24144" title="Reggae Compassionate Act" label="Reggae Compassionate Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819500" start="24487" end="24508" title="Auckland City Council" label="Auckland City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q575789" start="24519" end="24529" title="OFWGKTA" label="Odd Future"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24728" end="24742" title="Big Day Out 00" label="Big Day Out 00"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24764" end="24778" title="Big Day Out 01" label="Big Day Out 01"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282719" start="24800" end="24813" title="Disrespective" label="Disrespective"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243856" start="24835" end="24849" title="Big Day Out 03" label="Big Day Out 03"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905555" start="24871" end="24885" title="Big Day Out 04" label="Big Day Out 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905556" start="24907" end="24921" title="Big Day Out 05" label="Big Day Out 05"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905558" start="24943" end="24957" title="Big Day Out 06" label="Big Day Out 06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154859" start="24986" end="25017" title="List of historic rock festivals" label="List of historic rock festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q21026195" start="25019" end="25050" title="List of hip hop music festivals" label="List of hip hop music festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619467" start="25052" end="25082" title="List of festivals in Australia" label="List of festivals in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27942495" start="25084" end="25093" title="Tony Mott" label="Tony Mott"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66931" wikidata="Q41116" url="?curid=66931" title="Red Square">
<text>Red Square () is one of the oldest and largest squares in Moscow, Russia. It is located in Moscow&#x27;s historic centre, along the eastern walls of the Kremlin. It is the city&#x27;s most prominent landmark, with famous buildings such as Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, Lenin&#x27;s Mausoleum and the GUM department store. It has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1990. Red Square has been the scene of executions, demonstrations, riots, parades, and speeches. Almost 73,000 square metres (800,000 square feet), it lies directly east of the Kremlin and north of the Moskva River. A moat that separated the square from the Kremlin was paved over in 1812.

== Location ==

Red Square has an almost rectangular shape and is 70 meters wide and 330 meters long. It extends lengthways from northwest to southeast along part of the wall of the Kremlin that forms its boundary on the southwest side. In the northeast, the square is bounded by the GUM department store building and the old district of Kitay-gorod, in the northwest by the State Historical Museum and the Resurrection Gate and in the southeast by Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral. Tverskaya Street begins to the northwest of the square behind the building of the State Historical Museum, and to the southeast is the so-called Basilius slope, which leads to the Moskva River, which goes down and over a bridge to the Zamoskvorechye District. Two streets branch off to the northeast from Red Square: Nikolskaya Street, which is named after the Nikolaus Tower of the Kremlin, which is directly opposite, and the Ilyinka (Ильинка), both of which have existed since the 14th century and were once important arteries of old Moscow. Today the square itself, with the exception of the access road leading through it to the Savior Gate of the Kremlin, is a pedestrian zone.

== Origin and name ==
The main squares in Russian cities, such as those in Suzdal, Yelets, and Pereslavl-Zalessky, are frequently named &quot;Krasnaya ploshchad&quot;, or Beautiful Square. Archaically, the Russian word (&quot;krasnaya&quot;) meant &#x27;beautiful&#x27;, but now means &#x27;red&#x27;. The current word for &#x27;beautiful&#x27; is (&quot;krasivaya&quot;), which is derived from it.

In Moscow, the name &quot;Red Square&quot; originally described the small area between St. Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, the Spasskaya Tower of the Kremlin, and the Lobnoye Mesto herald&#x27;s platform. Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich officially extended the name to encompass the entire square, which had previously been called &quot;Pozhar&quot;, or &quot;burnt-out place&quot;, reflecting that previous buildings occupying the site had burned down.

==History==
The history of Red Square is reflected in paintings by Vasily Surikov, Konstantin Yuon and others. The square was meant to serve as Moscow&#x27;s main marketplace. It was also the site of various public ceremonies and proclamations, and occasionally a coronation for Russia&#x27;s Tsars would take place. The square has been gradually built up since that point and has been used for official ceremonies by all Russian governments since it was established.

=== Before the 18th century ===

The East side of the Kremlin triangle, lying adjacent to Red Square and situated between the rivers Moskva and the now underground Neglinnaya River was deemed the most vulnerable side of the Kremlin to attack, since it was neither protected by the rivers, nor any other natural barriers, as the other sides were. Therefore, the Kremlin wall was built to its greatest height on this side, and the Italian architects involved in the building of these fortifications convinced Ivan the Great to clear the area outside of the walls to create a field for shooting. The relevant decrees were issued in 1493 and 1495. They called for the demolition of all buildings within 110 sazhens () of the wall.

From 1508 to 1516, the Italian architect Aloisio the New arranged for the construction of a moat in front of the Eastern wall, which would connect the Moskva and Neglinnaya and be filled in with water from Neglinnaya. This moat, known as the Alevizov moat having a length of and width of , as well as a depth of 9.5–13 m was lined with limestone and, in 1533, fenced on both sides with low, -thick cogged brick walls. Three square gates existed on this side of the wall, which in the 17th century, were known as: Konstantino-Eleninsky, Spassky, Nikolsky (owing their names to the icons of Constantine and Helen, as well as Christ the Savior and St. Nicholas which hung over them). The last two are directly opposite Red Square, while the Konstantino-Elenensky gate was located behind Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral. In the early 19th century, the Arch of Konstantino-Elenensky gate was paved with bricks, but the Spassky Gate was the main front gate of the Kremlin and used for royal entrances. From this gate, wooden and (following the 17th century improvements) stone bridges stretched across the moat. Books were sold on this bridge and stone platforms were built nearby for guns – &quot;raskats&quot;. The Tsar Cannon was located on the platform of the Lobnoye mesto.

The square was called &quot;Veliky Torg&quot; (&#x27;Great Market&#x27;) or simply &quot;Torg&quot; (&#x27;Market&#x27;), then &quot;Troitskaya&quot; by the name of the small Troitskaya (&#x27;Trinity&#x27;) Church, burnt down in the great fire during the Tatar invasion in 1571. After that, the square held the name &quot;Pozhar&quot;, which means &#x27;burnt&#x27;. It was not until 1661–62 that it was first mentioned by its contemporary &quot;Krasnaya&quot; name.
Red Square was then the foremost landing stage and trading center for Moscow. Even though Ivan the Great decreed that trade should only be conducted from person to person, in time, these rules were relaxed, and permanent market buildings began appearing on the square. After a fire in 1547, Ivan the Terrible reorganized the wooden shops that lined its eastern side into market lines. The streets Ilyinka and Varvarka were divided into the Upper lines (now GUM department store), Middle lines and Bottom lines, although Bottom Lines were already in Zaryadye.

After a few years, the Cathedral of Intercession of the Virgin, commonly known as Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, was built on the moat under the rule of Ivan IV. This was the first building which gave the square its present-day characteristic silhouette (pyramidal roofs had not yet been built on the Kremlin towers). In 1595, the wooden market lines were replaced with stone. By that time, a brick platform for the proclamation of the tsar&#x27;s edicts, known as Lobnoye Mesto, had also been constructed.

Red Square was considered a sacred place. Various festive processions were held there, and during Palm Sunday, the famous &quot;procession on a donkey&quot; was arranged, in which the patriarch, sitting on a donkey, accompanied by the tsar and the people went out of Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral in the Kremlin.

During the expulsion of the Polish army from Moscow in 1612, Prince Dmitry Pozharsky entered the Kremlin through the square. In memory of this event, he built the Kazan Cathedral in honor of the &quot;Kazan Icon of the Mother of God&quot;, which had followed his army in a campaign.

At the same time (1624–1625), the Spasskaya tower received contemporary tent roofs. This was done on the proposal and subsequent draft of Christopher Galloway from Scotland, who was summoned to design the new tower&#x27;s clock and suggested the arrangement of the tent roof over the clock. In mid-century, a gilded double-headed eagle was set on top of the tower. After this, the square became known as &quot;Krasivaya&quot; ().

In the late 17th century (1679–1680), the square was cleared of all wooden structures. Then all Kremlin towers received tent roofs, except Nikolskaya. One tent was erected on the wall above Red Square (the so‑called Tsarskaya Tower, so that the tsar could watch from this spot the ceremonies in the square). Tent roofs were also constructed at Voskrerensky (Iberian) gates, arranged in the wall of Kitai-gorod. These were the fortified gates at Voskresensky Bridge over the River Neglinnaya.

In 1697 and 1699, gates on both sides of Voskresensky Bridge were rebuilt into large stone buildings: the Mint and Zemsky prikaz (department in charge of urban and police matters). Zemsky prikaz (on the site of current Historical Museum) was then known as the Main Pharmacy, founded under orders of Peter The Great. In 1755 the first Russian University was originally housed in the building of Zemsky prikaz, before moving to the better known building on Mokhovaya street further across Manege Square. At the same time the (by then already drained) Alevizov moat was used as a state Pharmacy&#x27;s garden for growing medicinal plants.

=== 18th century ===
In 1702, the first public theater in Russia was built near the Nikolsky gate. It existed until 1737, when it was destroyed in a fire.
In the 1730s, a new mint building, called the Gubernskoye pravlenie (Provincial Board), was built in front of the old one.

During her reign, Catherine the Great decided to make improvements to the square. In 1786, the upper floor of the market lines was made of stone. This line was built on the opposite side of the square, near a moat between the Spasskaya and Nikolskaya towers. Then architect Matvey Kazakov built (in the old forms) the new Lobnoye mesto of hewn stone, slightly West of the place where it was before.

=== 19th and early 20th centuries ===

In 1804, at the request of merchants, the square was paved in stone. In 1806 Nikolskaya Tower was reconstructed in the Gothic style, and received a tent roof. The new phase of improvement of the square began after the Napoleonic invasion and fire in 1812. The moat was filled in 1813 and in its place, rows of trees were planted. The market Line along the moat, dilapidated after the fire, had been demolished, and on the Eastern side, Joseph Bové constructed new building of lines in the Empire style. In 1818 the Monument to Minin and Pozharsky, was erected; its construction symbolized the rise in patriotic consciousness during the war.

In 1874 the historic building of Zemsky prikaz was demolished. In its place the Imperial Historical Museum was built in pseudo-Russian style. After Bové&#x27;s lines were demolished, new large buildings were erected between 1888 and 1893, also in the pseudo-Russian style: upper lines (GUM department store) and middle lines. The upper lines were intended for retail sale and together in fact comprised the first department store in Moscow. Middle lines were intended for wholesale trade. At the same time (in 1892) the square was illuminated by electric lanterns. In 1909 a tram appeared on the square for the first time.

=== Soviet era and modern era ===
During the Soviet era, Red Square maintained its significance, becoming a focal point for the new state. Besides being the official address of the Soviet government, it was renowned as a showcase for military parades from 1919 onward. Lenin&#x27;s Mausoleum would from 1924 onward be a part of the square complex, and also as the grandstand for important dignitaries in all national celebrations. In the 1930s, Kazan Cathedral and Iverskaya Chapel with the Resurrection Gates were demolished to make room for heavy military vehicles driving through the square (both were later rebuilt after the fall of the Soviet Union). There were plans to demolish Moscow&#x27;s most recognized building, Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, as well to make way for a larger Red Square, as well as the State Historical Museum. The legend is that Lazar Kaganovich, Stalin&#x27;s associate and director of the Moscow reconstruction plan, prepared a special model of Red Square, in which the cathedral could be removed, and brought it to Stalin to show how the cathedral was an obstacle for parades and traffic. But when he jerked the cathedral out of the model, Stalin objected with his rather famous quote: &quot;Lazar! Put it back!&quot;. However, no documented evidence exists of this encounter.

In 1963, a group of African students organized a protest on Red Square in response to the alleged murder of a medical student named Edmund Assare-Addo. This was the first recorded political protest on Red Square since the late 1920s. On 28 May 1987 a West German pilot named Mathias Rust landed a Cessna F172P light aircraft at St. Basil next to Red Square, causing a major scandal in the Soviet Air Defense Forces.

In 1990 the Kremlin and Red Square were among the first sites in the USSR added to UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage List.

Red Square has also served as a venue for high-profile concerts. Linkin Park, The Prodigy, t.A.T.u., Shakira, Scorpions, Paul McCartney, Roger Waters, Red Hot Chili Peppers, and other celebrities performed there. For the New Year 2006, 2007, and 2008 celebrations, a skating rink was set up on Red Square. Paul McCartney&#x27;s performance there was a historic moment for many, as The Beatles were banned in the Soviet Union, preventing any live performances there of any of The Beatles. The Soviet Union also banned the sales of Beatles records. While McCartney&#x27;s performance was historic, he was not the first Beatle to perform in Russia. Former Beatle Ringo Starr and His All Starr Band performed at Moscow&#x27;s Russia Hall in August 1998. On 4 December 2008 the KHL announced they would be holding their first all-star game outdoors on 10 January at Red Square.

==== Venue for parades ====

Two of the most significant military parades on Red Square were 1941 October Revolution Parade, when the city was besieged by Germans and troops were leaving Red Square straight to the front lines, and the Victory Parade in 1945, when the banners of defeated Nazi armies were thrown at the foot of Lenin&#x27;s Mausoleum. The Soviet Union held many parades in Red Square for May Day (until 1969), Victory Day, and October Revolution Day, which consisted of propaganda, flags, labor demonstration, marching troops, and showing off of tanks and missiles. Individual parades have been held on Defender of the Fatherland Day (23 February 1925), the Day of Tankmen (8 September 1946), and the state funeral of Joseph Stalin (9 March 1953). On Victory Day in 1945, 1965, 1985, and 1990, there were Soviet military marches and parades as well, and since 1995, the annual Moscow Victory Day Parade has been held on the square, marking anniversary of the defeat of Nazi Germany in World War II.

In January 2008, Russia announced it would resume parading military vehicles through Red Square, although recent restoration of Iverski Gate complicated this, by closing one of existing passages along Historical Museum for the heavy vehicles. In May 2008, Russia held its annual Victory day parade, during which for the first time since the collapse of the USSR in 1991, Russian military vehicles paraded through the square. On 9 May 2010, to commemorate the 65th anniversary of the capitulation of Germany in 1945, the armed forces of France, the United Kingdom, and the United States marched in the Moscow Victory Day parade for the first time in history.

== Buildings ==
In the following, all of the buildings located directly on Red Square will be presented in a clockwise direction, starting with the State Historical Museum at the northwest end of the square.

=== State Historical Museum ===
The striking dark red building of the State Historical Museum forms the end of Red Square from the north-western side. It was built in the years 1875–1883 and is therefore one of the younger components of the architectural ensemble of Red Square. Before it was built, the first pharmacy building in Moscow stood on this site from the beginning of the 18th century, which was rebuilt in 1755 and served as the first campus of the then newly founded Moscow State University for two decades.

Today&#x27;s museum building was built especially for the historical museum, which was newly founded in 1872, and was ceremoniously handed over to its destination in May 1883. Its architect was Vladimir Osipovich Sherwood, who is considered to be one of the main representatives of the &quot;Russian style&quot;, a variant of historicism based on traditional Russian architecture, which was widely used at the time. The museum building looks correspondingly &quot;Old Russian&quot;: the facades are decorated with arched windows and ornaments reminiscent of traditional Russian Orthodox churches, several decorative towers reminiscent of some of the Kremlin towers are attached to the sides, and the shape of the roof is reminiscent of the Great Kremlin Palace in the Kremlin, a form of the Russian mansion that was particularly preferred in the 16th and 17th centuries.

Today the Historical Museum is the largest and most famous history museum in Russia. In 16 specialist departments, it houses around 4.5 million exhibits on Russian history from almost all epochs and also organizes themed special exhibitions several times a year. In addition to the actual museum building, the historical museum complex also includes Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral and the Novodevichy Convent, which is a UNESCO World Heritage site.

=== Resurrection Gate ===
The Resurrection Gate forms one of the two entrances to Red Square from the northwest side. This structure, built for the first time in 1680, was initially part of the Kitai-Gorod fortifications. In its base part it consists of two arched portals, which are crowned in a symmetrical manner by two rectangular towers, the tops of which are strongly reminiscent of the Kremlin towers. Originally, the Resurrection Gate represented part of the architectural ensemble at the northern end of Red Square, which, in addition to the gate, included the affiliated building of the government administration (see below) and the no longer preserved pharmacy building, which had to give way to the History Museum at the end of the 19th century. During the times of the Russian Empire, the gate served as a symbolic entrance gate to the heart of Moscow, especially during major celebrations: the tsars always passed the gate at their coronation celebrations before the coronation was proclaimed in front of the people on Red Square.

In 1931, the new state authorities had the gate dismantled so that it would not obstruct the passage of military technology during major military parades on Red Square. Today&#x27;s gate is largely a replica of the original and dates from 1996. Between the two portals on the north side of the gate, the chapel of the icon of the Mother of God of Iviron, originally built in 1781, was rebuilt at the same time. A new copy of the icon was made for this chapel on Mount Athos, where the Iviron monastery is located.

=== Former government administration ===

The building standing between the Resurrection Gate and the Kazan Cathedral is one of the less conspicuous buildings on Red Square. It was built between 1733 and 1740 and since then has served as the headquarters of the administration of the city of Moscow and the Moscow Governorate (the latter partially corresponds to today&#x27;s Moscow Oblast). The government administration building was not spared from the war against Napoleon in 1812, in which large parts of Moscow were destroyed. In the 1810s it was then rebuilt, under the direction of the architect Joseph Bové, who was instrumental in the reconstruction of the city at that time. In the course of this reconstruction, a tower was added to the roof of the house, which for a long time served as an observation tower for a fire station. At the beginning of the 20th century, however, this tower was dismantled.

In the courtyard of the former government administration building, the old building of the state mint has been preserved to this day. This was built in 1697 by decree of Peter the Great and since then has housed a production facility for silver coins for almost a quarter of a century before the money issuing system of the tsarist Empire was essentially relocated to Saint Petersburg. After the end of minting, the lower part of the building, which had no windows, was temporarily used as a Debtors&#x27; prison for insolvent merchants. Today, both the former government building and the old mint belong to the neighbouring historical museum.

=== Kazan Cathedral ===
The Kazan Cathedral is to the right of the former government administration building, on the corner of Red Square and Nikolskaya Street. Today&#x27;s cathedral is a replica from 1993; originally there was a church at this site since the 1620s, initially a wooden one, then a stone one from 1636 onwards.

The Kazan Cathedral owes its name to the icon of Our Lady of Kazan, which has been venerated by the believers of the Russian Orthodox Church for centuries. According to a legend, it was precisely this icon of the Russian People&#x27;s army, led by the national heroes Kuzma Minin and Dmitri Pozharsky, who defeated the Military of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1612. A few years after the victory, the devout Prince Pozharsky founded the cathedral dedicated to this icon. This corresponded to the then usual Russian tradition of building churches in memory of historically important victories in Russia.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, the Kazan Cathedral on Red Square was one of the most important Moscow places of worship and was the scene of solemn cross processions led by the patriarch and the tsar, especially on the anniversary of the victory over the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.

In 1936 the cathedral, like many other Moscow places of worship, was demolished at the approval of Joseph Stalin. It was not until the early 1990s that the reconstruction, which was called for by the public on several occasions, began and was completed in 1993. This made the Kazan Cathedral one of the first places of worship in Moscow to be destroyed during the Soviet era, to be rebuilt in the 1990s.

=== GUM department store ===
The GUM department store, situated at the eastern side of the square, occupies the entire section between Nikolskaya and Ilyinka streets. Due to its location directly on Red Square, and its considerable size, the sales area is around . Owing to the building&#x27;s striking architecture, the GUM is the best-known shopping center in Russia.

Built in 1893, it replaced an Empire style building that had housed the Upper Trading Ranks since 1815, which united a large part of Kitai-Gorod&#x27;s trading activities under one roof. After this building began to deteriorate in the middle of the 19th century, there were plans for a building to replace it. However, due to organisational difficulties, these could only be implemented in the 1890s, for which a special company was founded and an ideas competition among architects was advertised. This was won by a project by the architecture professor Alexander Pomeranzewas, as well as the little-known engineer Vladimir Schuchow. The construction of the new trade rows lasted from 1890 to 1893. When they were ceremoniously opened on 2 December 1893, the new structure was able to impress the Russian and foreign public, not only with an unprecedented range of all kinds of consumer goods, but also with a completely new glass roof construction of the three passages, designed by Schuchow and built using around 60,000 panes of glass. The building&#x27;s architectural style, like the neighbouring Historical Museum a decade earlier, was in the historical &quot;Russian style&quot; with a roof gable based on typical boyar palaces of the 16th century, two decorative towers based on the Kremlin and a main facade reminiscent of historical Russian buildings.

During the Soviet era, the new upper trading ranks had an eventful history. In 1921, they were given their current name GUM («ГУМ»), which, at the time, was the abbreviation for «Государственный Универсальный Магазин» (&#x27;State Department Store&#x27;); today it stands for «Главный Универсальный Магазин» (&#x27;Main Universal Store&#x27;). In the early 1930s, they were closed for two decades and served as office and residential buildings, and from the end of 1953, until the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the store was considered a model department store in the middle of the real socialist shortage economy. In the 1990s, the store was privatised and thoroughly renovated, and today, it presents itself to the locals and tourists as a noble shopping centre characterised by boutiques in the upper price ranges. Since 2013, GUM operates a yearly Christmas fair in front of its department store, the biggest one in all of Russia.

=== Middle Trade Rows ===

The building at the easternmost point of the square, on the corner of Ilyinka Street, stands exactly where the Middle Trading Rows stood in the 17th century. These formed, along with the Upper Trading Rows, where today&#x27;s GUM store is located, as part of the broader market trading area that helped shape the Kitay-gorod district, adjacent to the Red Square. This massive expanse of assorted market stalls and self-made wooden huts was for the first time replaced at the end of the 18th century, by a building complex specially built for trade, whose authorship is attributed to the Italian builder Giacomo Quarenghi. In the war of 1812, however, these buildings were burned down and were replaced by the Middle Trading Rows building, rebuilt by Joseph Bové, which has been preserved to this day and is located on Ilyinka Street a few hundred meters east of Red Square.

The Middle Trade Rows was not built until 1894, as was the GUM store. Planned from the start as a supplement to the latter, the upper rows were supposed to accommodate retail trade, while the premises to their right were reserved for the wholesale trade, which is why both of the buildings look very similar architecturally. The building&#x27;s architect was Roman Klein, who also designed numerous other well-known Moscow structures in the late 19th century, including the Pushkin Museum.

After the Bolsheviks came to power, the building was no longer used as a trading house, but became the headquarters of various public bodies. Until recent times, it belonged to the Russian Armed Forces. At the beginning of 2007, four inner structures of the former trading rows were demolished while plans were made to reconstruct the entire building true to the original to house an exclusive hotel. These plans came under criticism from both Russian and foreign media as circumventing the preservation order by cleverly exploiting a loophole in the law. Work is currently underway to set up a museum in the building&#x27;s interior space, to designs by Meganom and Nowadays Office. The new museum is going to form a part of the UNESCO protected ensemble of Moscow Kremlin Museums, and will bring a part of the Kremlin Armoury collection outside the Kremlin walls.

=== Lobnoye Mesto ===

The Lobnoye Mesto (Russian: Лобное место) is a round, grandstand-like structure made of white stone in the southeastern part of the square, in front of Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral. At the same time, it is one of the oldest buildings on the square that has been documented to this day. Lobnoye Mesto was first mentioned in 1549, when the then 19 year old tsar Ivan The Terrible gave a speech there. Thus, it must have been conceived from the beginning as a platform from which, above all, tsar decrees were announced to the people. The name &quot;Lobnoye Mesto&quot; could literally mean &#x27;forehead&#x27; or &#x27;skull&#x27; (and thus a literal translation of Golgotha), however, according to other hypotheses, it has nothing to do with a forehead, but with its location near the praise, as a steep river bank was called in medieval Russia.

According to tradition, the grandstand on Red Square was originally made of wood, and the current stone building with a gate made of iron grating dates from the late 1590s. In the course of time, the Lobnoye Mesto was not only used as a platform for state announcements and announcements, but also as the centre of solemn events; the patriarchs of the Russian Orthodox Church gave speeches to the crowd here, at solemn services on Red Square. At the same time, the Lobnoye Mesto became notorious as the scene of executions, such as the one of Stenka Rasin in 1671, and many others. Although, these executions were not carried out directly in the stand, but a few meters away.

After Saint Petersburg became Imperial Russia&#x27;s capital, the Lobnoye Mesto lost its function as the tsar&#x27;s tribune and has been a monument ever since. In 1786, it was rebuilt according to a design by the architect Matvey Kazakov, and moved a few meters to the east.

=== Monument to Minin and Pozharsky ===
The monument to the two Russian national heroes Kuzma Minin and Prince Dmitri Poszharsky, erected between 1812 and 1818, stands directly in front of Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral. Just like the Kazan Cathedral donated by the latter at the time in the northern part of the square, this monument also commemorates the liberation of Moscow from the Polish–Lithuanian occupation troops in 1612, to which the popular army led by Minin and Poszharsky made a decisive contribution.

The bronze monument, which weighs 20 tons, and was financed entirely from donations at the time, was designed by the sculptor Ivan Martos. After almost 15 years of planning and construction, it was unveiled in a festive ceremony in February 1818. Since at the time, it had been five years since Russia successfully stopped the French invasion led by Napoleon, and the reconstruction of Moscow had just been completed, the monument was celebrated when it was erected as a symbol of the invincibility of Russia and the heroism of its sons. Originally, however, the sculpture did not stand in front of Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, but in front of today&#x27;s GUM department store at the level of the main entrance. It was only moved to its current location in 1930, to make more space for military parades and large-scale demonstrations.

=== Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral ===
Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral, which delimits the square on its southern side, is undoubtedly the square&#x27;s most famous building, and one of Russia&#x27;s cultural icons. Once, the church was the main place of worship in Moscow, but today the cathedral mainly functions as a museum that is part of the complex of the State Historical Museum in the opposite. Since the early 1990s, services have been held in the cathedral at irregular intervals.

In the middle of the 16th century, the wooden Church of the Holy Trinity, stood exactly on the site of Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral. In 1555, Tsar Ivan the Terrible ordered a monumental church to be built on the site, which was a token of the victory of Russia over the Khanate of Kazan three years earlier. This was according to the tradition of the time to have churches built to commemorate military victories. The wooden church was then demolished and the present cathedral was built on this site by 1561, making it one of the oldest buildings on the square. The name of the cathedral, which is still more common today, was given in memory of Basil the Blessed, who was venerated by tsar Ivan at the time, and after his death in 1522, he was buried near the cathedral. Ivan Barma and Postnik Yakovlev were among the most popular architects of the church.

From the completion of the cathedral to the relocation of Russia&#x27;s capital from Moscow to Saint Petersburg, it remained the most important church in the city and the venue for solemn services on all major Orthodox festivals. In its history, the cathedral was threatened with destruction several times; legend has it that Napoleon ordered the cathedral to be blown up when he withdrew from Moscow in 1812, but a sudden downpour extinguished the fuses that had already been ignited. In 1918, after the October Revolution, the cathedral was closed by the Bolsheviks and its head was executed. At the same time, there were demolition plans for the cathedral, only the personal commitment of the architect Pyotr Baranovsky, who was commissioned to prepare the demolition against the plans ultimately prevented their implementation.

What is particularly striking about the cathedral is its asymmetrical and unique architectural style, which greatly distinguishes it from most other Russian Orthodox church buildings. The central element of the house are its nine church towers with brightly painted onion-shaped domes, some of which are very different in size and colour. The latter also has the effect that the building does not have a main facade and therefore offers the viewer an unusual view from every side. Originally built of white stone, the cathedral was decorated in places with red bricks during a renovation in the middle of the 17th century, which gives it its striking colour heterogeneity to this day. The inside of the cathedral is also very imposing with a labyrinth-like system of corridors and galleries.

=== Eastern Kremlin Wall ===

The eastern segment of the Kremlin wall, and the Red Square behind it, emerged on its present site in the 15th century, during the reign of Ivan III; the wall and the square were separated with a wide defensive moat filled with water diverted from the Neglinnaya River. The moat was lined with a secondary fortress wall, and spanned by three bridges connecting the Kremlin to the posad.

The northernmost of the three Kremlin towers is the 70 meter high Nikolskaya Tower named after Saint Nicholas, whose icon originally adorned the lower part of the tower. The tower is one of the four towers of the Moscow Kremlin today that have an entrance gate to the Kremlin. It was originally built in 1491, to a design by the master builder Pietro Antonio Solari, who as one of several Italian architects who were active in Moscow at the time, playing a key role in the construction of the Kremlin ensemble. In 1806, Nikolskaya Tower was significantly redesigned and under Gothic architectural style, which was completely unusual for the Kremlin. Only a few years later, it was destroyed by the troops of Napoleon, and was finally rebuilt in 1816 with the participation of Joseph Bové. Owning its Gothic style, Nikolskaya Tower is still the most unusual of the twenty Kremlin towers.

The Spasskaya Tower, is the main tower of the eastern wall of the Kremlin, and is arguably the most famous tower of all of Kremlin. It also has an entrance gate, which closes Red Square together with the neighboring Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral from the south. Owing its name to an image of the Savior that once hung over the gate, the tower rises over 71 meters, and like Nikolskaya Tower, was also built by Pietro Antonio Solari in 1491. However, it was then about half as high as it is today. The tower has roughly the current shape since a reconstruction in the years 1624–1625, when it was supplemented by a bell tower with a large tower clock designed by Christopher Galloway, which today, is the most famous architectural element of the tower. The clock&#x27;s four dials, one on each side of the tower, date up to 1852, and each of them has a diameter of 6.12 meters. The high-precision clockwork occupies three floors of the tower, and a dozen bells below the top of the tower ring every quarter of an hour.

Both the Nikolskaya and the Spasskaya Tower are crowned by a three-meter-wide red star made of three-layer ruby and agate glass. These stars, were symbols of Communism, and were placed on a total of five Kremlin towers in 1937, which were previously adorned with the Imperial Russian double-headed eagle.

The small tower at the level of Lenin&#x27;s Mausoleum between the Nikolskaya and the Spasskaya Tower is the Senatskaya Tower. It was built in 1491, also by Pietro Antonio Solari, and was purely defensive in nature: it guarded the Kremlin on the Red Square side. For a long time it remained nameless. It was only in 1787, after architect Matvei Kazakov constructed the Kremlin Senate on the Kremlin&#x27;s territory, that it was given its present name. The dome of the Senate can be seen from Red Square. Inside the central part of the tower there are three tiers of vaulted chambers. In 1860, the flat tower was topped with a stone tent roof crowned, in turn, with a gilt weather vane. The tower contains a through-passage that allows VIPs to travel from the kremlin to Red Square. Its height is .

=== Lenin Mausoleum ===
An important monument of the Soviet-era is the Lenin Mausoleum, which is located in the western side of the square. It stands by the Kremlin wall at the height of the Senate Tower, almost exactly where the protective moat ran until the 18th century, and a tram line ran from 1909 to 1930. Inside the mausoleum, the lavishly embalmed corpse of Vladimir Lenin rests in an armored glass sarcophagus. To this day, the mausoleum is open to visitors on certain days.

Today&#x27;s building made of granite and labradorite, was preceded by two provisional mausoleums made of oak. The first of these was erected in January 1924, a few days after Lenin&#x27;s death, and had a simple cube shape at a height of three meters, a second temporary arrangement was set up in the spring of 1924. The current building was erected between 1929 and 1930. From the outside, it has the shape of a multi-tiered pyramid, which should underline the character of the mausoleum as a monumental burial place based on ancient models. The author of the design was the renowned architect Alexey Shchusev, who also had the two previous mausoleums built.

From the completion of the mausoleum, and until the end of the Soviet Union, the mausoleum was considered a central attraction, and a place of worship in the socialist world. During the military parades and marches on Red Square, heads of state appeared from the central stand on the roof of the mausoleum until the mid-1990s. In 1953, the body of the deceased Lenin&#x27;s successor Joseph Stalin was embalmed and laid out in the mausoleum. Eight years later, however, he was removed from the mausoleum in the course of the so-called de-Stalinization, which began after the 20th Congress of the CPSU, and buried at the Kremlin wall.

Today the mausoleum still attracts numerous tourists, although mostly no longer motivated by the personality cult surrounding the revolutionary leader. Notwithstanding this, the further laying out of Lenin&#x27;s remains in the mausoleum is controversial. Many celebrities, including the last Soviet head of state, Mikhail Gorbachev, spoke out in favor of Lenin&#x27;s burial.

=== Kremlin Wall Necropolis ===

Right behind Lenin&#x27;s Mausoleum, along the walls of the Kremlin, there is a large cemetery of honour. This was created in November 1917, when around 250 soldiers had fallen during the October Revolution in Moscow. They found their final resting place in two collective graves near the Senate tower. The tradition of burying revolutionaries on Red Square, the ultimate symbol of the Bolshevik Revolution, continued immediately: as early as the spring of 1919, Lenin&#x27;s leading comrade Yakov Sverdlov was buried on the Kremlin wall and received with Lenin&#x27;s Mausoleum, which was completed in 1930 the burial place is its central element. Since then, the mausoleum and the surrounding cemetery have been collectively referred to as the Revolutionary Necropolis.

From the 1920s to the 1980s, hundreds of people were buried in Red Square who were considered to be the most deserving sons and daughters of the Soviet Union, that is, revolutionaries, heroes of the Soviet Union, statesmen and military leaders of the highest order. The burial in the Kremlin wall necropolis was in fact considered the highest posthumous honour that was reserved for only a few. A total of twelve statesmen; including Sverdlov, Mikhail Kalinin, Kliment Voroshilov, Leonid Brezhnev and Stalin, who was laid out in the mausoleum until 1961, were buried in individual graves, and a large number of the revolutionaries rest here in a total of 15 collective graves. Most of the burials here, however, are niches in the Kremlin wall, in which over 100 urns with the remains of revolutionaries, heroes or main ideologues are walled. The people whose urns are in the Kremlin wall include, among others, Lenin&#x27;s companion Nadezhda Krupskaya, the first cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the revolutionary writer Maxim Gorky, the nuclear weapon developer Igor Kurchatov, but also foreign politicians Clara Zetkin and Fritz Heckert.

The necropolis on the Kremlin wall has been a memorial since 1974. After the 1985 made funeral of the head of state Konstantin Chernenko, there have been no burials made. The tombs of the necropolis can now be visited at the same time as the mausoleum.

==Sport events==
The Russian Bandy Federation in cooperation with the Moscow Patriarchate annually organise the Patriarch&#x27;s Cup, in which not only normal tournaments are held, but also for bandy in boots.

== See also ==
* Alexander Garden
* Kremlin towers
* Kremlin Wall
* Kremlin Wall Necropolis
* Lubyanka Square
* Saint Basil&#x27;s Cathedral

== Sources ==
* Юрий Федосюк. Москва в кольце Садовых. М., Московский рабочий, 1991. 
* П.В.Сытин. Из истории московских улиц (очерки). М.. Московский рабочий, 1958

== References ==
== External links ==

* Red Square in Moscow, the most important place in the country&#x27;s largest. – Thewotme Travel Blog
* Moscow-Life: A guide to Moscow&#x27;s Red Square
* 3D model of Red Square
* &quot;Red Square&quot;, Moscow.Info – information for visitors to Red Square and the Kremlin
* 360° Virtual Tour of Red Square 
* &quot;4 Surprising Things that Happened on Red Square&quot;, BigTimeMoscow, November 12, 2015</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41116" start="0" end="10" title="Red Square" label="Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="47" end="54" title="town square" label="squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="58" end="64" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="153" end="160" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="239" end="267" title="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q191414" start="269" end="291" title="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum" label="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q549498" start="300" end="320" title="GUM (department store)" label="GUM department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="336" end="342" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="343" end="362" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412002" start="998" end="1009" title="Kitay-gorod" label="Kitay-gorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140429" start="1035" end="1058" title="State Historical Museum" label="State Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200705" start="1067" end="1084" title="Resurrection Gate" label="Resurrection Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="1109" end="1137" title="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644209" start="1139" end="1155" title="Tverskaya Street" label="Tverskaya Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140429" start="1221" end="1244" title="State Historical Museum" label="State Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q175117" start="1319" end="1331" title="Moskva (river)" label="Moskva River"/>
<link wikidata="Q862107" start="1374" end="1397" title="Zamoskvorechye District" label="Zamoskvorechye District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4320845" start="1456" end="1473" title="Nikolskaya Street" label="Nikolskaya Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15757" start="1899" end="1905" title="Suzdal" label="Suzdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102346" start="1907" end="1913" title="Yelets" label="Yelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q178188" start="1919" end="1937" title="Pereslavl-Zalessky" label="Pereslavl-Zalessky"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="2311" end="2337" title="St. Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416732" start="2343" end="2358" title="Spasskaya Tower" label="Spasskaya Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="2366" end="2373" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589656" start="2383" end="2396" title="Lobnoye Mesto" label="Lobnoye Mesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731" start="2426" end="2445" title="Alexei Mikhailovich" label="Alexei Mikhailovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q110228" start="2731" end="2745" title="Vasily Surikov" label="Vasily Surikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343751" start="2747" end="2762" title="Konstantin Yuon" label="Konstantin Yuon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="2928" end="2938" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="2957" end="2961" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q175117" start="3266" end="3272" title="Moskva River" label="Moskva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287599" start="3297" end="3313" title="Neglinnaya River" label="Neglinnaya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q171185" start="3640" end="3654" title="Ivan the Great" label="Ivan the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q435964" start="3836" end="3842" title="sazhen" label="sazhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q608164" start="3902" end="3917" title="Aloisio the New" label="Aloisio the New"/>
<link wikidata="Q175117" start="4012" end="4018" title="Moskva River" label="Moskva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287599" start="4023" end="4033" title="Neglinnaya River" label="Neglinnaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4103" end="4116" title="Alevizov moat" label="Alevizov moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q147881" start="5069" end="5080" title="Tsar Cannon" label="Tsar Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589656" start="5116" end="5129" title="Lobnoye mesto" label="Lobnoye mesto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5997" end="6004" title="Ilyinka Street" label="Ilyinka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6009" end="6017" title="Varvarka Street" label="Varvarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q549498" start="6057" end="6077" title="GUM (department store)" label="GUM department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q4187807" start="6149" end="6157" title="Zaryadye" label="Zaryadye"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="6242" end="6270" title="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589656" start="6624" end="6637" title="Lobnoye Mesto" label="Lobnoye Mesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q42236" start="6765" end="6776" title="Palm Sunday" label="Palm Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134164" start="6789" end="6823" title="parading on donkey" label="&amp;quot;procession on a donkey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="6991" end="7039" title="Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618)" label="expulsion of the Polish army from Moscow in 1612"/>
<link wikidata="Q15756" start="7048" end="7064" title="Dmitry Pozharsky" label="Dmitry Pozharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140402" start="7143" end="7158" title="Kazan Cathedral, Moscow" label="Kazan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7298" end="7313" title="Kremlin towers#Spasskaya" label="Spasskaya tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132727" start="7402" end="7422" title="Christopher Galloway" label="Christopher Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q200705" start="8039" end="8067" title="Iberian Gate and Chapel" label="Voskrerensky (Iberian) gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412002" start="8093" end="8104" title="Kitai-gorod" label="Kitai-gorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q523058" start="8310" end="8316" title="prikaz" label="prikaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140429" start="8407" end="8424" title="State Historical Museum" label="Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="8487" end="8502" title="Peter The Great" label="Peter The Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="8516" end="8540" title="Lomonosov Moscow State University" label="first Russian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253418" start="8675" end="8688" title="Manezhnaya Square, Moscow" label="Manege Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="8872" end="8879" title="Theater (structure)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="9122" end="9141" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="9313" end="9317" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131914" start="9378" end="9392" title="Matvey Kazakov" label="Matvey Kazakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="9761" end="9797" title="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s invasion of Russia" label="Napoleonic invasion and fire in 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q720047" start="9979" end="9990" title="Joseph Bové" label="Joseph Bové"/>
<link wikidata="Q187531" start="10058" end="10089" title="Monument to Minin and Pozharsky" label="Monument to Minin and Pozharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q549498" start="10471" end="10491" title="GUM (department store)" label="GUM department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="10598" end="10614" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10854" end="10860" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191414" start="11078" end="11100" title="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum" label="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140402" start="11254" end="11269" title="Kazan Cathedral, Moscow" label="Kazan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q200705" start="11274" end="11318" title="Resurrection Gate and Iverskaya Chapel" label="Iverskaya Chapel with the Resurrection Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="11534" end="11562" title="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140429" start="11624" end="11647" title="State Historical Museum" label="State Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q215705" start="11668" end="11684" title="Lazar Kaganovich" label="Lazar Kaganovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="11686" end="11692" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507595" start="12169" end="12190" title="1963 Moscow protest" label="protest on Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q76657" start="12395" end="12407" title="Mathias Rust" label="Mathias Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q244479" start="12417" end="12429" title="Cessna 172" label="Cessna F172P"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="12509" end="12534" title="Soviet Air Defense Forces" label="Soviet Air Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="12620" end="12626" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="12634" end="12653" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="12721" end="12732" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="12734" end="12745" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161723" start="12747" end="12755" title="t.A.T.u." label="t.A.T.u."/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="12757" end="12764" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="12766" end="12775" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="12777" end="12791" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="12793" end="12805" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="12807" end="12828" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="13037" end="13048" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="13194" end="13201" title="music album" label="records"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="13429" end="13432" title="KHL" label="KHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413045" start="13587" end="13603" title="military parades" label="military parades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893329" start="13623" end="13653" title="1941 October Revolution Parade" label="1941 October Revolution Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001685" start="13765" end="13787" title="Moscow Victory Parade of 1945" label="Victory Parade in 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="13818" end="13822" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191414" start="13857" end="13879" title="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum" label="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13885" end="13897" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13934" end="13941" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day#Russia" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q270706" start="13956" end="13967" title="Victory Day (9 May)" label="Victory Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158109" start="13973" end="13995" title="October Revolution Day" label="October Revolution Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q163708" start="14149" end="14179" title="Defender of the Fatherland Day" label="Defender of the Fatherland Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158469" start="14204" end="14218" title="Day of Tankmen" label="Day of Tankmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090983" start="14247" end="14277" title="Death and state funeral of Joseph Stalin" label="state funeral of Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947792" start="14423" end="14448" title="Moscow Victory Day Parade" label="Moscow Victory Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14531" end="14543" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q200705" start="14674" end="14686" title="Resurrection Gate and Iverskaya Chapel" label="Iverski Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140429" start="14747" end="14764" title="State Historical Museum" label="Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="14903" end="14907" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q703311" start="15005" end="15021" title="2010 Moscow Victory Day Parade" label="65th anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="15894" end="15917" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523044" start="16130" end="16157" title="Vladimir Osipovich Sherwood" label="Vladimir Osipovich Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q277466" start="16262" end="16273" title="historicism (art)" label="historicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65197983" start="16295" end="16315" title="Russian architecture" label="Russian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370087" start="16676" end="16696" title="Great Kremlin Palace" label="Great Kremlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q270725" start="17195" end="17214" title="Novodevichy Convent" label="Novodevichy Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="18038" end="18052" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="18164" end="18168" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q853354" start="18649" end="18655" title="Iviron" label="Iviron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="18764" end="18775" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137842" start="19124" end="19142" title="Moscow Governorate" label="Moscow Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697" start="19193" end="19206" title="Moscow Oblast" label="Moscow Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="19272" end="19300" title="French Invasion of Russia" label="war against Napoleon in 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q720047" start="19420" end="19431" title="Joseph Bové" label="Joseph Bové"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="19829" end="19833" title="Mint (facility)" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="19902" end="19917" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q427276" start="20224" end="20244" title="Debtors&amp;#x27; prison" label="Debtors&amp;#x27; prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q540173" start="20755" end="20772" title="Our Lady of Kazan" label="Our Lady of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="20823" end="20846" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q469785" start="20974" end="20985" title="Kuzma Minin" label="Kuzma Minin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15756" start="20990" end="21006" title="Dmitri Pozharsky" label="Dmitri Pozharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857766" start="21025" end="21071" title="Military of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Military of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="21575" end="21605" title="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="21707" end="21720" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315" start="22356" end="22371" title="shopping center" label="shopping center"/>
<link wikidata="Q191105" start="22414" end="22426" title="Empire style" label="Empire style"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="23606" end="23611" title="boyar" label="boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="23759" end="23769" title="History of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="24229" end="24260" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q567481" start="24348" end="24364" title="shortage economy" label="shortage economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412002" start="25027" end="25038" title="Kitay-gorod" label="Kitay-gorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q128623" start="25317" end="25334" title="Giacomo Quarenghi" label="Giacomo Quarenghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q720047" start="25464" end="25475" title="Joseph Bové" label="Joseph Bové"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979163" start="25948" end="25959" title="Roman Klein" label="Roman Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872" start="26063" end="26077" title="Pushkin Museum" label="Pushkin Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="26261" end="26281" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26747" end="26762" title="Nowadays Office" label="Nowadays Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="26810" end="26816" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304121" start="26892" end="26907" title="Kremlin Armoury" label="Kremlin Armoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="27325" end="27329" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="27330" end="27347" title="Ivan The Terrible" label="Ivan The Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q170516" start="27635" end="27643" title="Golgotha" label="Golgotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="28151" end="28160" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="28169" end="28192" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193175" start="28360" end="28372" title="Stenka Rasin" label="Stenka Rasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131914" start="28718" end="28732" title="Matvey Kazakov" label="Matvey Kazakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335371" start="29412" end="29423" title="Ivan Martos" label="Ivan Martos"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="29601" end="29628" title="French invasion of Russia" label="stopped the French invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="29636" end="29644" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186537" start="30881" end="30897" title="Khanate of Kazan" label="Khanate of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469788" start="31258" end="31275" title="Basil Fool for Christ" label="Basil the Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q554261" start="31384" end="31394" title="Ivan Barma" label="Ivan Barma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106252" start="31399" end="31415" title="Postnik Yakovlev" label="Postnik Yakovlev"/>
<link wikidata="Q572721" start="32177" end="32193" title="Pyotr Baranovsky" label="Pyotr Baranovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q171185" start="33267" end="33275" title="Ivan III of Russia" label="Ivan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="33338" end="33342" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287599" start="33379" end="33395" title="Neglinnaya River" label="Neglinnaya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427510" start="33507" end="33512" title="posad" label="posad"/>
<link wikidata="Q747658" start="33581" end="33597" title="Nikolskaya Tower" label="Nikolskaya Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="33610" end="33624" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394287" start="33859" end="33880" title="Pietro Antonio Solari" label="Pietro Antonio Solari"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="34091" end="34097" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416732" start="34407" end="34422" title="Spasskaya Tower" label="Spasskaya Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132727" start="35064" end="35084" title="Christopher Galloway" label="Christopher Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="35528" end="35532" title="ruby" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q622964" start="35705" end="35724" title="double-headed eagle" label="double-headed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q747658" start="35836" end="35852" title="Senatskaya Tower" label="Senatskaya Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q131914" start="36065" end="36079" title="Matvei Kazakov" label="Matvei Kazakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q930376" start="36096" end="36110" title="Kremlin Senate" label="Kremlin Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83180" start="36365" end="36369" title="roof" label="roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="36395" end="36399" title="Gilding" label="gilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="36400" end="36412" title="weather vane" label="weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="37043" end="37050" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q430062" start="37055" end="37066" title="labradorite" label="labradorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="37119" end="37122" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q380282" start="37609" end="37624" title="Alexey Shchusev" label="Alexey Shchusev"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="38210" end="38226" title="de-Stalinization" label="de-Stalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="38625" end="38642" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q378118" start="38807" end="38825" title="Ehrengrab" label="cemetery of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="38909" end="38927" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q298384" start="39213" end="39227" title="Yakov Sverdlov" label="Yakov Sverdlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="39679" end="39705" title="heroes of the Soviet Union" label="heroes of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q229828" start="39938" end="39953" title="Mikhail Kalinin" label="Mikhail Kalinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186185" start="39955" end="39973" title="Kliment Voroshilov" label="Kliment Voroshilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="39975" end="39990" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083119" start="40256" end="40259" title="urn" label="urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q215637" start="40428" end="40446" title="Nadezhda Krupskaya" label="Nadezhda Krupskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="40468" end="40480" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="40507" end="40518" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q185110" start="40549" end="40563" title="Igor Kurchatov" label="Igor Kurchatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q75823" start="40594" end="40606" title="Clara Zetkin" label="Clara Zetkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108840" start="40611" end="40624" title="Fritz Heckert" label="Fritz Heckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q127442" start="40743" end="40763" title="Konstantin Chernenko" label="Konstantin Chernenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481914" start="40902" end="40926" title="Russian Bandy Federation" label="Russian Bandy Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472498" start="41109" end="41125" title="Alexander Garden" label="Alexander Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q747658" start="41128" end="41142" title="Kremlin towers" label="Kremlin towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898604" start="41145" end="41157" title="Kremlin Wall" label="Kremlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130019" start="41160" end="41183" title="Kremlin Wall Necropolis" label="Kremlin Wall Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416242" start="41186" end="41201" title="Lubyanka Square" label="Lubyanka Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q129846" start="41204" end="41232" title="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Basil&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66932" wikidata="Q748198" url="?curid=66932" title="Gay village">
<text>A gay village, also known as a gayborhood or gaybourhood, is a geographical area with generally recognized boundaries that is inhabited or frequented by many lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) people. Gay villages often contain a number of gay-oriented establishments, such as gay bars and pubs, nightclubs, bathhouses, restaurants, boutiques, and bookstores.

Such areas may represent an LGBT-friendly oasis in an otherwise hostile city or may simply have a high concentration of gay residents and businesses. Some areas are often associated with being &quot;gay&quot; cities or resorts, due to their image and acceptance of the gay community.

Much as other urbanized groups, some LGBT people have managed to utilize their spaces as a way to reflect their cultural values and serve the special needs of individuals in relation to society at large. Today, these neighborhoods can typically be found in the upper-class areas of a given city, like in Manhattan, chosen for aesthetic or historic value, no longer resulting from the sociopolitical ostracization and the constant threat of physical violence from homophobic individuals that originally motivated these communities to live together for their mutual safety.

These neighborhoods are also often found in working-class parts of the city or in the neglected fringe of a downtown area communities which may have been upscale historically but became economically depressed and socially disorganized. In these cases, the establishment of an LGBT community has turned some of these areas into more expensive neighborhoods, a process known as gentrification a phenomenon in which LGBT people often play a pioneer role. This process does not always work out to the benefit of these communities, as they often see property values rise so high that they can no longer afford them, as high-rise condominiums are built and bars move out, or the only LGBT establishments that remain are those catering to a more upscale clientele. However, today&#x27;s manifestations of &quot;queer ghettos&quot; bear little resemblance to those of the 1970s.

==The &quot;ghetto&quot;==

The term &quot;ghetto&quot; originally referred to those places in European cities where Jews were required to live according to local law. During the 20th century, &quot;ghetto&quot; came to be used to describe the areas inhabited by a variety of groups that mainstream society deemed outside the norm, including not only Jews but poor people, LGBTQ people, ethnic minorities, hobos, prostitutes, and bohemians.

These neighborhoods, which often arise from crowded, highly dense, and often deteriorated inner city districts, are critical sites where members of gender and sexual minorities have traditionally congregated. From one perspective, these spaces are places of marginality created by an often homophobic, biphobic, and transphobic heterosexual community; from another perspective, they are places of refuge where members of gender and sexual minorities can benefit from the concentration of safe, nondiscriminatory resources and services (just as other minorities do).

In some cities, LGBT people congregate in visibly identified neighborhoods, while in others, they are dispersed in neighborhoods, which have less visibility, because a liberal, affirming counterculture is present. For example, LGBT residents of Philadelphia developed the city&#x27;s Gayborhood, LGBT people in San Francisco congregate in the Castro neighborhood, while LGBT people in Seattle concentrate in the city&#x27;s older bohemian stomping grounds of Capitol Hill, and those of Montreal have concentrated in a working-class neighborhood referred to administratively as &quot;Centre-Sud&quot; but largely known as &quot;Le Village&quot;. These areas, however, have higher concentrations of LGBT residents and businesses that cater to them than do surrounding neighborhoods. Some cities, like Austin, Texas, have not developed a defined gay village despite the city of Austin being home to many LGBT people with developed LGBT-friendly businesses and a counterculture present.

==History==
The neighbourhood of Schöneberg in Berlin was the first gay village in the world, developing in the 1920s. Prior to the 1960s and 1970s, specialized LGBT communities did not exist as gay villages in the United States; bars were usually where LGBT social networks developed, and they were located in certain urban areas where police zoning would implicitly allow so-called &quot;deviant entertainment&quot; under close surveillance.

In New York, for example, the congregation of gay men had not been illegal since 1965; however, no openly gay bar had been granted a license to serve alcohol. The police raid of a private gay club called the Stonewall Inn on June 27, 1969, led to a series of minor disturbances in the neighborhood of the bar over the course of the subsequent three days and involving more than 1,000 people. The Stonewall Rebellion managed to change not only the profile of the gay community but the dynamic within the community itself. This, along with several other similar incidents, precipitated the appearance of gay ghettos throughout North America, as spatial organization shifted from bars and street-cruising to specific neighborhoods. This transition &quot;from the bars to the streets, from nightlife to daytime, from &#x27;sexual deviance&#x27; to an alternative lifestyle&quot; was the critical moment in the development of the gay community. On June 24, 2016, the Stonewall National Monument was named the first US National Monument dedicated to the LGBT-rights movement. Montreal&#x27;s Gay Village developed a bilingual French and English identity reflective of the city itself.

Online communities had developed globally by the early 2000s as a resource connecting gay villagers worldwide to provide information for arts, travel, business, gay counseling, and legal services, aiming to provide safe and gay-friendly environments for members of LGBT communities in general.

==Characteristics==
Gay villages can vary widely from city to city and from country to country. Furthermore, some large cities also develop &quot;satellite&quot; gay villages that are essentially &quot;overflow&quot; areas. In such cases, gay men and lesbians have become priced-out of the main gay village and move to other, more affordable areas, thereby creating an entirely new gay village, also thereby furthering the process of gentrification by pricing-out long held tenants of these areas. In New York City, many gays in the 1990s moved to the Chelsea neighborhood from the Greenwich Village neighborhood as a less expensive alternative; subsequent to this movement, house prices in Chelsea have increased dramatically to rival the West Village within Greenwich Village itself. Similarly, gentrification is dramatically changing Philadelphia&#x27;s Gayborhood, and the city&#x27;s LGBT community is expanding across the city. Other examples include, in Boston, gay men moving to the South End and lesbians migrating to Jamaica Plain; while in Chicago, gays have moved to the Andersonville area as an offshoot of the Boystown/Lakeview neighborhood. Some gay villages are not neighborhoods at all, but instead are entirely separate municipalities from the city for which they serve as the primary gay enclave, such as West Hollywood in the Los Angeles area, and Wilton Manors in the Miami/Fort Lauderdale area.

These processes are tied to the spatial nature of the urban renaissance which was occurring at the time. The &quot;first wave&quot; of low-wage gay residences in these urban centers paved the way for other, more affluent gay professionals to move into the neighborhoods; this wealthier group played a significant role in the gentrification of many inner city neighborhoods. The presence of gay men in the real estate industry of San Francisco was a major factor facilitating the urban renaissance of the city in the 1970s.

However, the gentrification of gay villages may also serve to reinforce stereotypes of gays, by pushing out gay people who do not conform to the prevailing &quot;gay, white, affluent, professional&quot; image. Such people (including gay people of color, low-income/working-class gays, and &quot;undesirable&quot; groups such as gay prostitutes and leathermen) are usually forced out of the &quot;village&quot; due to rising rents or constant harassment at the hands of an increased policing presence. Especially in San Francisco&#x27;s Polk Gulch neighborhood (the first &quot;gay village&quot; in that city), gentrification seems to have had this result.

Gay men and women have a reputation for driving the revitalization of previously run-down enclaves. Making these neighborhoods more desirable places to live, businesses and other classes of people move to the area and, accordingly, property values tend to go up. The urban studies theorist Richard Florida claims that their mere presence lures investors and jobs, particularly of the high-technology kind. They are, he says, &quot;the canaries of the creative economy&quot;. Cities that have gay villages and are more tolerant towards gays, generally tend to have stronger, more robust, and creative economies, as compared to cities that are less tolerant towards gays. Florida says that cities as such have a stronger creative class, which is integral in bringing in new ideas that stimulate economies.

===Consumerization===

The gentrification of once rundown inner-city areas, coupled with the staging of pride parades in these areas, has resulted in the increased visibility of gay communities. Parades such as Sydney&#x27;s Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras and Manchester&#x27;s Pride events attract significant investment and create tourist revenue, and cities have acknowledged that the acceptance of lesbian and gay culture has become a sign of urban &quot;sophistication&quot; and that gay-oriented events, such as pride parades and the Gay Games, are potentially lucrative events, attracting thousands of gay tourists and their dollars. The growing recognition of the economic value of the gay community is not only associated with their wealth but also with the role that lesbians and gay men have played (and continue to play) in urban revitalization.

==List of gay villages==
=== North America ===
====United States====
Provincetown, Massachusetts, was ranked by the US Census Bureau as &quot;the gayest city in America&quot;. Provincetown, or Ptown, was also voted &quot;Best Resort Town in 2011&quot; by Gaycities.com. The town had far more gay marriages than straight marriages performed since 2003 when Massachusetts legalized same-sex marriage. The town&#x27;s various businesses sponsor Gay Men&#x27;s Week, Women&#x27;s Week, Bear Week, Family Week (for same-sex families), and their version of a gay pride parade, Carnival. Famous gay residents currently include journalist Andrew Sullivan, filmmaker John Waters, and comedian Kate Clinton.

Some cities have a very well-defined gay village in the heart of a larger area that also has a significant gay population. One example of this phenomenon is Davie Village in the heart of Vancouver&#x27;s gay community. It sits within the greater West End area, which, though decently populated by gay people, is not necessarily considered a gay village.

Boystown in Chicago is also a very well-defined gay village situated within the larger Lakeview neighborhood. Lakeview is an affluent neighborhood with a reputation for being a stronghold of liberal and progressive political views. Outside of Boystown, Lakeview is a mixture of both gay and straight citizens and families, but Boystown is the main gay village. Boystown began with a cluster of bars on North Halsted Street and blossomed into an entire district dedicated to LGBT life and culture in the 1980s. According to the founders of Sidetrack, one of these pioneering bars, Boystown was only to grow as much as it did because its residents were politically engaged and actively resisted city efforts to drive them underground. Gay bars in boystown also served as a hub of AIDS related activism.

Andersonville is another of Chicago&#x27;s gay villages. It became known as &quot;Girlstown&quot; in the 1980s and 1990s following an influx of lesbian couples to the area. Residents attribute this initial migration to a well-loved feminist bookstore called Women and Children First moving to Andersonville after being priced out of Boystown. In the mid-2000s, more families and older people started moving into Boystown, and many gay men also made the move to Girlstown. In the last decade, the number of married gay men in Andersonville actually surpassed the number of married lesbians and many of the neighborhood&#x27;s lesbian-centric business have closed. Still, Andersonville retains its historical significance for the lesbian community and its identity as a haven for LGBT people.

Despite its large gay population and higher concentration of gay venues, the South Beach area in Miami Beach, Florida, was never exclusively gay, because of its popularity among straight people alike. Philadelphia&#x27;s traditional gay village comprises several downtown blocks and is called &quot;the Gayborhood&quot;. The LGBT culture in Philadelphia has an established presence that includes clubs, bars, and restaurants as well as health facilities for the LGBT community. Philadelphia&#x27;s &quot;Gayborhood&quot; contains 68 rainbow street sign signs throughout the community. Washington, D.C.&#x27;s Dupont Circle and Logan Circle area are known for its many gay oriented bars, restaurants, and shops. Dupont Circle is also known for its annual High Heel Drag Queen Race. The Short North in downtown Columbus, Ohio, is primarily known as an art district, but has a strong gay community and a high concentration of gay-oriented clubs and bars. In Boston, the trendy and upscale South End neighborhood has a large population of gay men, and the Jamaica Plain and Roslindale neighborhoods are home to scores of lesbians, also with vibrant but less trendy downtown areas. Montreal&#x27;s Gay Village (&quot;Le Village&quot;, in French) is considered one of North America&#x27;s largest in population, concentration, and scope.

San Diego has its own gay village called Hillcrest, which sits around Balboa Park. Hillcrest is very close to the downtown area but is able to maintain a small town eclectic feel. While it is considered by most as the gay area of San Diego with its gay bars and dance clubs, the overall population of the area has only gotten more and more diverse with the rise in condominium projects. Having been priced out of owning or renting in the Hillcrest area, the San Diego LGBT community has spread outward for miles into North Park, University Heights and dozens more neighborhoods. These diverse, welcoming areas have slowly continued the gentrifying process.

In Minneapolis, Minnesota, areas surrounding Loring Park, site of the local LGBT pride festival, are regarded as a &quot;gay&quot; neighborhood, though many gay and lesbian people have migrated to more residential neighborhoods such as Bryn Mawr and Whittier.

In Tampa, Florida, the gay community was traditionally spread out among several neighborhoods. In the early 21st century, the Ybor City National Historic Landmark District has seen the creation of the GaYbor District, which is now the center of gay and lesbian life in the Tampa Bay area and home to the majority of gay bars and dance clubs, restaurants, and service organizations. Across Tampa Bay in St. Petersburg, the LGBT community is centered around the Grand Central neighborhood near downtown. In Orlando, Florida, the gay community is centered around the neighborhoods of Thornton Park and Eola Heights.

Asbury Park, New Jersey, and the adjacent town of Ocean Grove, New Jersey, house large gay communities. Many vacationers who visit Asbury Park are gay, and the city houses New Jersey&#x27;s only gay hotel, The Empress Hotel. Collingswood, New Jersey, a suburb of Philadelphia, also houses a prominent year-round gay community. Ogunquit, Maine, has a gay population of year-round residents and second homeowners.

====Canada====
Church and Wellesley is an LGBT-oriented community located in Toronto, Canada. It is roughly bounded by Gould Street to the south, Yonge Street to the west, Charles Street to the north, and Jarvis Street to the east, with the intersection of Church and Wellesley Streets at the centre of this area. Though some gay- and lesbian-oriented establishments can be found outside of this area, the general boundaries of this village have been defined by the Gay Toronto Tourism Guild. 

Ottawa established an LGBT-friendly village along Bank Street in Centretown on November 4, 2011, when the City of Ottawa installed six street signs at the intersections of Bank/Nepean, Bank/Somerset and Bank/James. This is the cap to an historic year and six years of lobbying, where the village installed two public art projects in addition to tripling the number of rainbow flags in the village area. The village in Ottawa features a diverse mix of businesses and organizations, many of which cater to or of specific interest to the LGBT community, and has a high concentration of LGBT persons living and working in the area.

=== Europe ===

The neighbourhood of Le Marais in Paris has experienced a growing gay presence since the 1980s, as evidenced by the existence of a large gay community and of many gay cafés, nightclubs, cabarets and shops, such as one of the largest gay clubs in Europe, Le Depot. These establishments are mainly concentrated in the southwestern portion of the Marais, many on or near the streets Sainte-Croix de la Bretonnerie and Vieille du Temple.

A well-known gay village of Sitges is one of the richest residential areas within the area of greater Barcelona. The town hosts several gay events throughout the year, such as Gay Pride and Bears Week. The first monument for the gay community, an inverse triangle, was built in Passeig Maritim street in 2006. Many gay tourists use the gay-friendly accommodation in Sitges during Circuit Festival of Barcelona.

Not all major cities have gay villages, especially those with more progressive histories with LGBT rights. Sweden, for example, legalized same sexual activity in 1944, a full 67 years before &quot;Lawrence v. Texas&quot; decriminalized homosexuality in the US. As a result, there was not the same need for secret gathering places in Swedish cities that shaped many gay villages elsewhere. However, there are areas which were historically known as meeting places for gays, such as Södermalm in Stockholm, Punavuori and Kallio in Helsinki, which remain as somewhat trendy areas for gay people to live in, though they do not have a predominantly gay population.

There are a number of gay villages in England such as in Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester and London.

===Australasia===
====Australia====

In Sydney, New South Wales, Potts Point (also known as &quot;Poofs Point&quot;) and nearby Elizabeth Bay (also known as &quot;Betty Bay&quot;) are renowned for having the largest gay population in the city, with many gay run business. The area is known for having the highest density of population in Australia with many Art Deco apartment blocks. Newtown also has a sizable gay population but it has a more gritty bohemian feel. Darlinghurst is also a historically gay area. Oxford Street in particular is known as the Golden Mile due to its long stretch of LGBT bars and clubs.

In Melbourne, Victoria, city fringe suburbs such as Collingwood and South Yarra have sizeable gay communities. Big 7 Travel ranked Melbourne as the fourth most LGBT friendly city in the world.

==== New Zealand ====

Hamilton East, a suburb of Hamilton, a town situated in the North Island of New Zealand is one of the newest gay villages worldwide. There is a small gay population with some gay owned businesses, cafes and is across the river from the Hamilton CBD. The local LGBT pride month is in April each year and celebrates local diversity.

=== Asia ===
====Thailand====
In Pattaya, Thailand, Boyztown is a hub of gay nightlife and entertainment that is especially popular with European and Chinese tourists. Since its peak in the 1990s and early 2000s, rising prices and COVID policies have caused Boyztown to lose some of its business. At the peak of its popularity, Boyztown drew in funding for AIDS-related charity organizations through grand events like the Pattaya Gay Festival.

====Japan====

Shinjuku Ni-chōme, Tokyo&#x27;s gay village, boasts the world&#x27;s highest density of gay and lesbian bars, many of which are very small and highly curated to a particular scene. Some are intended for foreign tourists, while others give priority to regulars and court a certain subset of the local LGBT community, such as butch lesbians or the BDSM community. Ni-chōme is also home to Japan&#x27;s first LGBT center, Pride House Tokyo Legacy. Like Pattaya&#x27;s Boyztown, Nichō&#x27;s business suffered during the pandemic, but it is slowly developing its former popularity.

=== South America ===
Bogota, Colombia has a prominent gay village called the Chapinero. The locus of the Chapinero&#x27;s LGBT culture is one of the most famous gay nightclubs in the world, Theatron, which opened in the 1990s. Before Theatron, the Chapinero had a vibrant drag ball scene that drew crowds from neighboring South American countries.

==LGBT populations==
===Top LGBT populations in Brazilian cities===

In 2009, a survey conducted by the University of São Paulo in 10 Brazilian state capitals estimated that 7.8% of Brazil&#x27;s male population was gay and 2.6% was bisexual (a total of 10.4%), while 4.9% of the female population was estimated to be lesbian and 1.4% bisexual (a total of 6.3%).

In the city of Rio de Janeiro, 19.3% of the male population was estimated to be gay or bisexual. Among the female population in the city of Manaus, 10.2% were estimated to be lesbian or bisexual.

===Top LGBT populations in the US===
An estimated 33 to 50 percent of Palm Springs, California, are gay male or other parts of the LGBTQ community; this statistic makes them the largest percentage community in the US.

The following charts show a list of the top US cities, states, and metro areas with:

# the highest population of gay residents, and
# the highest percentage of gay residents within city limits. (LGBT population as a percentage of total residents). The numbers given are estimates based on American Community Survey. The US Census does not ask for sexual orientation or gender identity.



Population


==See also==

* Ethnic enclave
* Homosocialization
* Lesbian bar
* LGBT tourism
* Gay villages in the UK
==Notes==
==References==
* Castells, Manuel 1983. &quot;The City and the Grassroots: A Cross-Cultural Theory of Urban Social Movements.&quot; Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press.
* D&#x27;Emilio, John 1992. &quot;Making Trouble: Essays on Gay History, Politics, and the University.&quot; New York, London: Routledge.
* Escoffier, Jeffrey 1998. &quot;American Homo: Community and Perversity.&quot; Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.
* Florida, Richard 2002. &quot;The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It&#x27;s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community and Everyday Life.&quot; New York: Perseus Books Group.
* Kenney, Moira Rachel 1998. &quot;Remember, Stonewall was a Riot: Understanding Gay and Lesbian Experience in the City&quot; Chapter 5, pp. 120–132 in: Leoni Sandercock (ed) &quot;Making the Invisible Visible.&quot; Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.
* Levine, Martin P. 1979. &quot;Gay Ghetto&quot; pp. 182–204 in: Martin Levine (ed) &quot;Gay Men: The Sociology of Male Homosexuality.&quot; New York, Hagerstown, San Francisco, London: Harper &amp; Row.
* Ray, Brian and Damaris Rose 2000. &quot;Cities of the Everyday: Socio-Spatial Perspectives on Gender, Difference, and Diversity&quot; pp. 507–512 in: Trudi Bunting and Pierre Filion (eds). &quot;Canadian Cities in Transition: The Twenty-First Century.&quot; 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

==External links==

* Memoir and history of gay Upper West Side in Manhattan, NYC 
* Counting Gay New York (Gotham Gazette, July 2001)
* NYC LGBT Historical Sites Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748198" start="2" end="13" title="Gay village" label="gay village"/>
<link wikidata="Q748198" start="31" end="41" title="Gay village" label="gayborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q748198" start="45" end="56" title="Gay village" label="gaybourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="158" end="165" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="167" end="170" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="172" end="180" title="bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="182" end="193" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="199" end="204" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="206" end="211" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="297" end="305" title="gay bars" label="gay bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="316" end="326" title="gay nightclub" label="nightclubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531507" start="328" end="337" title="Gay bathhouse" label="bathhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="340" end="350" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068824" start="353" end="361" title="boutique" label="boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q998426" start="368" end="377" title="bookstore" label="bookstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q661717" start="409" end="422" title="gay friendly" label="LGBT-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="1129" end="1139" title="homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="1615" end="1629" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="1784" end="1799" title="real estate" label="property values"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="1853" end="1862" title="high-rise building" label="high-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="1890" end="1893" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="2049" end="2055" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="2154" end="2160" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2228" end="2232" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="2484" end="2489" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q843281" start="2517" end="2521" title="hobo" label="hobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="2524" end="2534" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="2541" end="2549" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="2643" end="2653" title="inner city" label="inner city"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="2843" end="2853" title="homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747592" start="2855" end="2863" title="biphobia" label="biphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="2869" end="2880" title="transphobia" label="transphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="3307" end="3321" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972222" start="3404" end="3414" title="Gayborhood, Philadelphia" label="Gayborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q956169" start="3459" end="3469" title="the Castro" label="the Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041704" start="3579" end="3591" title="Capitol Hill, Seattle, WA" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3606" end="3614" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944766" start="3703" end="3713" title="Centre-Sud" label="Centre-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558992" start="3741" end="3763" title="Gay Village, Montreal" label="&amp;quot;Le Village&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="3919" end="3932" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q313189" start="4137" end="4147" title="Schöneberg" label="Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="4151" end="4157" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="4363" end="4377" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="4655" end="4662" title="gay bar" label="gay bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261362" start="4757" end="4770" title="Stonewall Inn" label="Stonewall Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="4945" end="4964" title="Stonewall Rebellion" label="Stonewall Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24799699" start="5511" end="5538" title="Stonewall National Monument" label="Stonewall National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670549" start="5559" end="5579" title="List of national monuments of the United States" label="US National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558992" start="5635" end="5646" title="Gay Village, Montreal" label="Gay Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="6458" end="6472" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148561" start="6525" end="6538" title="LGBT culture in New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069129" start="6576" end="6583" title="Chelsea, Manhattan" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q512599" start="6699" end="6710" title="house price" label="house price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191048" start="6764" end="6776" title="West Village, Manhattan" label="West Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972222" start="6861" end="6891" title="Philadelphia&amp;#x27;s Gayborhood" label="Philadelphia&amp;#x27;s Gayborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6985" end="6991" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7015" end="7024" title="South End, Boston#Diversity" label="South End"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7051" end="7064" title="Jamaica Plain#Urban renewal" label="Jamaica Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7075" end="7082" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047557" start="7107" end="7120" title="Andersonville, Chicago" label="Andersonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216469" start="7157" end="7165" title="Lakeview, Chicago" label="Lakeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="7262" end="7276" title="municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="7348" end="7362" title="West Hollywood" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7370" end="7381" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q940061" start="7392" end="7405" title="Wilton Manors" label="Wilton Manors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="7413" end="7418" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="7419" end="7434" title="Fort Lauderdale" label="Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900157" start="7496" end="7513" title="urban renaissance" label="urban renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470206" start="8314" end="8324" title="leather subculture" label="leathermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q375612" start="8913" end="8928" title="Richard Florida" label="Richard Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="8967" end="8975" title="investor" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="9214" end="9232" title="creative economies" label="creative economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786991" start="9342" end="9356" title="creative class" label="creative class"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="9532" end="9544" title="pride parade" label="pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="9639" end="9645" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809145" start="9653" end="9679" title="Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras" label="Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747484" start="9684" end="9707" title="Manchester Pride" label="Manchester&amp;#x27;s Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130199" start="9964" end="9973" title="Gay Games" label="Gay Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q49154" start="10352" end="10379" title="Provincetown, Massachusetts" label="Provincetown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="10399" end="10415" title="US Census Bureau" label="US Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q507809" start="10914" end="10929" title="Andrew Sullivan" label="Andrew Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="10941" end="10952" title="John Waters (filmmaker)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735680" start="10967" end="10979" title="Kate Clinton" label="Kate Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241713" start="11139" end="11152" title="Davie Village" label="Davie Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="11169" end="11178" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076122" start="11228" end="11236" title="West End, Vancouver" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q186106" start="13008" end="13019" title="South Beach" label="South Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="13028" end="13048" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13132" end="13175" title="Washington Square West, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania#The Gayborhoood" label="Philadelphia&amp;#x27;s traditional gay village"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183621" start="13256" end="13284" title="LGBT culture in Philadelphia" label="LGBT culture in Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13516" end="13532" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7763979" start="13712" end="13727" title="The Short North" label="The Short North"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="13740" end="13754" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q985993" start="13983" end="13996" title="Jamaica Plain, Boston" label="Jamaica Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167514" start="14001" end="14011" title="Roslindale, Boston" label="Roslindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558992" start="14124" end="14135" title="Gay Village, Montreal" label="Gay Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="14164" end="14170" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135663" start="14305" end="14314" title="Hillcrest, San Diego, California" label="Hillcrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q804697" start="14334" end="14345" title="Balboa Park, San Diego" label="Balboa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="14925" end="14947" title="Minneapolis, Minnesota" label="Minneapolis, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681270" start="14967" end="14978" title="Loring Park, Minneapolis" label="Loring Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="15186" end="15200" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572050" start="15309" end="15318" title="Ybor City" label="Ybor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515194" start="15384" end="15390" title="GaYbor" label="GaYbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059534" start="15572" end="15581" title="Tampa Bay" label="Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="15585" end="15599" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594394" start="15643" end="15656" title="Grand Central, St. Petersburg, Florida" label="Grand Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="15688" end="15704" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="15797" end="15820" title="Asbury Park, New Jersey" label="Asbury Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q536154" start="15847" end="15870" title="Ocean Grove, New Jersey" label="Ocean Grove, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="15928" end="15939" title="Asbury Park" label="Asbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="15969" end="15979" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731964" start="16003" end="16020" title="The Empress Hotel (New Jersey)" label="The Empress Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083141" start="16022" end="16046" title="Collingswood, New Jersey" label="Collingswood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="16060" end="16072" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016282" start="16124" end="16139" title="Ogunquit, Maine" label="Ogunquit, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089761" start="16225" end="16245" title="Church and Wellesley" label="Church and Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="16287" end="16302" title="Toronto, Canada" label="Toronto, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="16705" end="16711" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q749573" start="17371" end="17380" title="Le Marais" label="Le Marais"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="17384" end="17389" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="17596" end="17602" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551" start="17813" end="17819" title="Sitges" label="Sitges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="17887" end="17896" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157002" start="18394" end="18411" title="Lawrence v. Texas" label="Lawrence v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q740149" start="18677" end="18686" title="Södermalm" label="Södermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037874" start="18701" end="18710" title="Punavuori" label="Punavuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011613" start="18715" end="18721" title="Kallio" label="Kallio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026149" start="18879" end="18902" title="gay villages in England" label="gay villages in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916700" start="18914" end="18924" title="Birmingham Gay Village" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721041" start="18926" end="18931" title="The Calls" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935957" start="18933" end="18943" title="Canal Street (Manchester)" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018322" start="18948" end="18954" title="Old Compton Street" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="18997" end="19003" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918803" start="19022" end="19033" title="Potts Point" label="Potts Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918794" start="19085" end="19098" title="Elizabeth Bay, New South Wales" label="Elizabeth Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="19315" end="19323" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851145" start="19342" end="19349" title="Newtown, New South Wales" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="19578" end="19587" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109698" start="19627" end="19638" title="Collingwood, Victoria" label="Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304617" start="19643" end="19654" title="South Yarra" label="South Yarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644915" start="19792" end="19805" title="Hamilton East, New Zealand" label="Hamilton East"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="19819" end="19827" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="19852" end="19864" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19868" end="19879" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952765" start="20176" end="20184" title="Boyztown" label="Boyztown"/>
<link wikidata="Q835960" start="21617" end="21640" title="University of São Paulo" label="University of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q463409" start="21647" end="21671" title="List of capitals in Brazil" label="Brazilian state capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="21746" end="21754" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="21892" end="21906" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40236" start="22017" end="22023" title="Manaus" label="Manaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="22144" end="22168" title="Palm Springs, California" label="Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="22205" end="22210" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="22614" end="22623" title="US Census" label="US Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="22641" end="22659" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="22663" end="22678" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610510" start="22712" end="22726" title="Ethnic enclave" label="Ethnic enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960951" start="22729" end="22746" title="Homosocialization" label="Homosocialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324198" start="22749" end="22760" title="Lesbian bar" label="Lesbian bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264991" start="22763" end="22775" title="LGBT tourism" label="LGBT tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026149" start="22778" end="22800" title="Gay villages in the UK" label="Gay villages in the UK"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66934" wikidata="Q1277039" url="?curid=66934" title="Slim Pickens">
<text>Louis Burton Lindley Jr. (June 29, 1919 – December 8, 1983), better known by his stage name Slim Pickens, was an American actor and rodeo performer. Starting off in the rodeo, Pickens took up acting, and appeared in dozens of movies and TV shows. For much of his career, Pickens played cowboy roles. He played comic roles in &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, &quot;Blazing Saddles&quot;, &quot;1941&quot;, and his villainous turn in &quot;One-Eyed Jacks&quot; with Marlon Brando.

== Early life and rodeo work ==
Louis Burton Lindley Jr., was born in Kingsburg, California, the son of Sally Mosher (née Turk) and Louis Bert Lindley Sr., a Texas-born dairy farmer. Young Lindley was an excellent horse rider from an early age. Known as &quot;Burt&quot; to his family and friends, he grew bored with dairy farming and began to make a few dollars by riding broncos and roping steers in his early teens. His father found out and forbade this activity, but Lindley took no notice, went to compete in a rodeo, and was told by the doubtful rodeo manager that there would be &quot;&quot; (i.e. little chance of any prize money) for him. To prevent his father from discovering that he had competed, he entered his name as Slim Pickens, and won $400 that afternoon.

Lindley graduated from Hanford High School (in Hanford) and was a member of the Future Farmers of America. He joined the rodeo, billed as Slim Pickens, and eventually became a well-known rodeo clown. During World War II, he enlisted in the U.S. Army Air Forces. Reportedly when the recruiter asked him his profession, Lindley responded &quot;rodeo&quot;; misread on a form as &quot;radio&quot;, he spent his entire enlistment at a radio station in the Midwest.

==Film career==
After nearly 20 years&#x27; rodeo work, Pickens&#x27;s wide eyes, moon face, strong physical presence, and distinctive country drawl gained him a role in the Western &quot;Rocky Mountain&quot; (1950), which starred Errol Flynn. He appeared in many more Westerns, playing both villains and comic sidekicks to actors such as Rex Allen.

Hollywood made good use of Pickens&#x27;s rodeo background. He did not need a stand-in for horseback scenes, and he was able to gallop his own Appaloosa horses across the desert, or drive a stagecoach pulled by a six-horse team.

Pickens appeared in dozens more films, including &quot;Old Oklahoma Plains&quot; (1952), &quot;Down Laredo Way&quot; (1953), &quot;Tonka&quot; (1959), &quot;One-Eyed Jacks&quot; (1961, with Marlon Brando), &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot; (1964), &quot;Major Dundee&quot; (1965, with Charlton Heston), the remake of &quot;Stagecoach&quot; (1966; Pickens played the driver, portrayed in the 1939 film by Andy Devine), &quot;An Eye for an Eye&quot; (1966), &quot;Never a Dull Moment&quot; (1968), &quot;The Cowboys&quot; (1972, with John Wayne), &quot;The Getaway&quot; (1972, with Steve McQueen), &quot;Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid&quot; (1973), &quot;Ginger in the Morning&quot; (1974, with Fred Ward), &quot;Blazing Saddles&quot; (1974), &quot;Poor Pretty Eddie&quot;, &quot;Rancho Deluxe&quot; (both 1975), &quot;Beyond the Poseidon Adventure&quot; (1979, with Michael Caine and Karl Malden), and &quot;Tom Horn&quot; (1980, also with McQueen). He had a small but memorable role in Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;1941&quot; (1979) in scenes with Toshiro Mifune and Christopher Lee; during one scene, he enumerates the objects on his person, similarly to the way he does in the &quot;Survival Kit Contents Check&quot; scene in &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;. In 1978, Pickens lent his voice to theme park Silver Dollar City as a character named Rube Dugan, for a ride called &quot;Rube Dugan&#x27;s Diving Bell&quot;. The diving bell was a simulation ride that took passengers on a journey to the bottom of Lake Silver and back. The ride was in operation from 1978 to 1984. He also played werewolf sheriff Sam Newfield in &quot;The Howling&quot; (1981).

In 1975, Pickens was in another Western, playing the evil, limping bank robber in Walt Disney&#x27;s &quot;The Apple Dumpling Gang&quot;; that same year, the exploitation cult classic &quot;Poor Pretty Eddie&quot; was released, with Pickens portraying twisted Sheriff Orville. He provided the voice of B.O.B. in the 1979 Disney science-fiction thriller &quot;The Black Hole&quot;. His last film was his least notable, &quot;Pink Motel&quot; (1982, with Phyllis Diller).

===&quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;===
Pickens played B-52 pilot Major T. J. &quot;King&quot; Kong in 1964&#x27;s &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;. Stanley Kubrick cast Pickens after Peter Sellers, who played three other roles in the film, sprained his ankle and was unable to perform in the role due to having to work in the cramped cockpit set. Pickens was chosen because his accent and comic sense were perfect for the role of Kong, a cartoonishly patriotic and gung-ho B-52 commander. He was not given the script for the entire film, but only those portions in which he played a part. Three memorable scenes featuring Pickens were:

* Giving a monologue meant to steel his crew for their duty after he receives the definitive order to bomb a strategic target in the USSR.
* Reading aloud to his crew the contents of their survival kits: after listing the contents usable for barter with Russian women (including prophylactics - in possibly the first mention of condoms in a Hollywood film - nylons, lipstick, and a M1911 pistol with ammunition), Major Kong says &quot;Shoot, a fella could have a pretty good time in Big D [Dallas] with all this stuff&quot;: this line had to be re-dubbed, with the reference to Dallas being changed to &quot;weekend in Vegas&quot;, after the scheduled November 22, 1963 screening for critics was cancelled due to President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s assassination.
* Best known of all - and an enduring historical film image of the American-Soviet Cold War era - Major Kong riding a dropped H-bomb to a certain death while whooping and waving his cowboy hat like a rodeo performer riding a bronco or a bull, not knowing that its detonation will trigger a Soviet doomsday device.

Pickens credited &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot; as a turning point in his career. Previously, he had been &quot;Hey you&quot; on sets, and afterwards he was addressed as &quot;Mr. Pickens&quot;. He once said, &quot;After &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, the roles, the dressing rooms, and the checks all started gettin&#x27; bigger.&quot; Pickens said he was amazed at the difference one movie could make. He also said, though, that working with Stanley Kubrick proved too difficult due to Kubrick&#x27;s perfectionist style of directing with multiple takes for nearly every shot, especially with the climactic H-bomb riding scene, which was done in just over 100 takes. In the late 1970s, Pickens was offered the part of Dick Hallorann in Kubrick&#x27;s adaptation of Stephen King&#x27;s &quot;The Shining&quot;, but Pickens stipulated that he would appear in the film only if Kubrick was required to shoot Pickens&#x27;s scenes in fewer than 100 takes. Instead, Pickens&#x27;s agent showed the script to Don Schwartz, the agent of Scatman Crothers, and Crothers accepted the role.

==Voice work and recordings==
Pickens lent his voice to the 1975 studio recording of Bobby Bridger&#x27;s collection of Western ballads &quot;A Ballad of the West&quot;, in which he narrated part 1, &quot;Seekers of the Fleece&quot;, the story of Jim Bridger and the mountain man fur-trade era. In 1977, he released the self-titled country album, &quot;Slim Pickens&quot;, on Blue Canyon Records. The LP contained 12 selections (including Kinky Friedman&#x27;s &quot;Carryin&#x27; the Torch&quot;, which was issued as a single) and two songs written by Pickens. The record jacket featured a photograph of the actor in his signature role in &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, sitting in the cockpit. Pickens also recorded a one-off single, &quot;Christmas in November&quot; (a song about a child who would not live to celebrate Christmas on time), on the Midsong label in 1980.

==Television==
Pickens appeared in numerous television guest shots, including a 1954 &quot;Stories of the Century&quot; episode in which he played the Sundance Kid to Joe Sawyer&#x27;s Butch Cassidy, as well as four episodes of the syndicated Western series &quot;Annie Oakley&quot; (1956, with Gail Davis and Brad Johnson), a 1956 episode of &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot;, and three episodes of NBC&#x27;s &quot;Wide Country&quot; (1962), a rodeo series starring Earl Holliman and Andrew Prine. He appeared in the 1959-1960 Walt Disney Studios miniseries &quot;The Swamp Fox&quot; In 1961, he had a recurring role as Johnson in the 17-episode NBC series &quot;The Americans&quot;, the story of how the American Civil War divided families. Thereafter, he was cast in a first-season episode of NBC&#x27;s espionage series &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot;.

He appeared in episodes of &quot;Mannix&quot;, &quot;Cheyenne&quot;, &quot;Sugarfoot&quot;, &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot;, &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot;, &quot;Frontier Doctor&quot;, &quot;Gunsmoke&quot;, &quot;Route 66&quot;, &quot;The Tall Man&quot;, &quot;Maverick&quot; (in several episodes playing different characters), &quot;The Westerner&quot;, &quot;Riverboat&quot;, &quot;The Fugitive&quot;, &quot;The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters&quot;, &quot;The Legend of Jesse James&quot;, &quot;Alias Smith and Jones&quot;, &quot;Daniel Boone&quot;, &quot;The Virginian&quot;, &quot;Night Gallery&quot;, &quot;That Girl&quot;, &quot;Baretta&quot;, &quot;Vega$&quot;, &quot;How the West Was Won&quot;, &quot;Cimarron Strip&quot;, and &quot;Kung Fu&quot;.

Pickens was cast in recurring roles in &quot;Custer&quot;, &quot;Bonanza&quot;, &quot;Hee Haw&quot; (where he was a semiregular from 1981 until his death), &quot;B. J. and the Bear&quot; with Greg Evigan, and &quot;Filthy Rich&quot;. He played Wild Jack Monroe, the owner of station WJM, in CBS&#x27;s &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;, and also guest-starred as Zeke in the 1963 episode &quot;Higgins and the Hillbilly&quot; of the ABC sitcom &quot;Our Man Higgins&quot;, which starred Stanley Holloway as a British butler for a suburban American family. Pickens portrayed Grandpa Shoenfield in a two-part 1980 episode of ABC&#x27;s &quot;The Love Boat&quot;. In an episode of CBS&#x27;s &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot;, he portrayed the patriarch of a family of serial killers. Pickens emceed NBC&#x27;s short-lived country music variety series &quot;The Nashville Palace&quot; in 1981.

==Awards==
In 1982, Pickens was inducted into the Hall of Great Western Performers at the National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City. In 1986, Pickens was honored by the Rodeo Historical Society during his posthumous induction into the Rodeo Hall of Fame at the National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum.

In 2005, Pickens was posthumously inducted into the ProRodeo Hall of Fame in Colorado Springs for his work as a rodeo clown. In 2006, Pickens was inducted into the Pendleton Round-Up and Happy Canyon Hall of Fame. In 2020, Pickens was inducted into the Ellensburg Rodeo Hall of Fame in Washington.

==Final years and death==
In his last years, Pickens lived with his wife in Columbia, California. He died in a hospital in Modesto on December 8, 1983, after surgery for a brain tumor. He was survived by his wife and children, Thomas Michael Lindley and Margaret Louise Wittman (née Lindley), as well as his stepdaughter he chose to raise as his own, Daryle Ann Giardino (née Lindley). His funeral was held at Presbyterian Church of the Forty Niners in Columbia, California, where he was a member. His ashes were scattered over his favorite trail areas. His wife died in 2011.

==Personal life==
His brother Samuel (1921–2001) was also an actor with the stage name Easy Pickens. Slim was a longtime supporter of the National Rifle Association of America (NRA), appearing in promotional shots. He was an avid outdoorsman, appearing in several episodes of &quot;The American Sportsman&quot;.

==Cultural references==
The album &quot;Days Go By&quot; (2012) by The Offspring features the song &quot;Slim Pickens Does the Right Thing and Rides the Bomb to Hell&quot; (Track 12, 2:36) which harkens back to his final scene from &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;.

==Filmography==

* &quot;Smoky&quot; (1946) as Rodeo Cowboy, uncredited
* &quot;Rocky Mountain&quot; (1950) as Plank (CSA)
* &quot;Colorado Sundown&quot; (1952) as Joshua Slim Pickens / Ma Pickens
* &quot;The Last Musketeer&quot; (1952) as Slim Pickens
* &quot;Border Saddlemates&quot; (1952) as Slim Pickens
* &quot;The Story of Will Rogers&quot; (1952) as Dusty Donovan
* &quot;Old Oklahoma Plains&quot; (1952) as Slim
* &quot;South Pacific Trail&quot; (1952) as Slim Pickens
* &quot;Thunderbirds&quot; (1952) as Private Wes Shelby
* &quot;Old Overland Trail&quot; (1953) as Slim Pickens
* &quot;The Sun Shines Bright&quot; (1953) as Sterling, Lanky Backwoodsman
* &quot;Iron Mountain Trail&quot; (1953) as Slim Pickens
* &quot;Down Laredo Way&quot; (1953) as Slim
* &quot;Shadows of Tombstone&quot; (1953) as Slim
* &quot;Red River Shore&quot; (1953) as Deputy Slim Pickens
* &quot;Phantom Stallion&quot; (1954) as Slim
* &quot;The Boy from Oklahoma&quot; (1954) as Shorty
* &quot;The Outcast&quot; (1954) as Boone Polsen
* &quot;Santa Fe Passage&quot; (1955) as Sam Beekman
* &quot;The Last Command&quot; (1955) as Abe
* &quot;When Gangland Strikes&quot; (1956) as Slim Pickett
* &quot;Stranger at My Door&quot; (1956) as Ben Silas
* &quot;The Great Locomotive Chase&quot; (1956) as Pete Bracken
* &quot;Gun Brothers&quot; (1956) as Moose MacLain
* &quot;Gunsight Ridge&quot; (1957) as Hank Moss
* &quot;The Sheepman&quot; (1958) as Marshal
* &quot;Escort West&quot; (1958) as Corporal Wheeler
* &quot;Tonka&quot; (1958) as Ace
* &quot;Stump Run&quot; (1959) as Babe Gaskin
* &quot;Chartroose Caboose&quot; (1960) as Pete Harmon
* &quot;One-Eyed Jacks&quot; (1961) as Deputy Lon Dedrick
* &quot;A Thunder of Drums&quot; (1961) as Trooper Erschick
* &quot;Savage Sam&quot; (1963) as Willy Crup
* &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot; (1964) as Major &#x27;King&#x27; Kong
* &quot;Major Dundee&quot; (1965) as Wiley
* &quot;In Harm&#x27;s Way&quot; (1965) as C.P.O Culpepper
* &quot;Up from the Beach&quot; (1965) as Artillery Colonel
* &quot;The Glory Guys&quot; (1965) as Sergeant James Gregory
* &quot;Stagecoach&quot; (1966) as Buck
* &quot;An Eye for an Eye&quot; (1966) as Ike Slant
* &quot;The Young Riders&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Un tipo dificil de matar&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Rough Night in Jericho&quot; (1967) as Yarbrough
* &quot;The Flim-Flam Man&quot; (1967) as Jarvis Bates
* &quot;Will Penny&quot; (1967) as Ike Walterstein
* &quot;Never a Dull Moment&quot; (1968) as Cowboy Schaeffer
* &quot;The Legend of Custer&quot; (1968) as California Joe Milner
* &quot;Skidoo&quot; (1968) as Switchboard Operator
* &quot;80 Steps to Jonah&quot; (1969) as Scott
* &quot;Rosolino Paternò, soldato...&quot; (1970) as General Maxwell
* &quot;The Ballad of Cable Hogue&quot; (1970) as Ben Fairchild
* &quot;The Deserter&quot; (1971) as Tattinger, American Scout
* &quot;Temporada salvaje&quot; (1971) as Lucky
* &quot;The Cowboys&quot; (1972) as Anse
* &quot;J.C.&quot; (1972) as Grady Caldwell
* &quot;The Honkers&quot; (1972) as Clete
* &quot;The Getaway&quot; (1972) as Cowboy
* &quot;Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid&quot; (1973) as Sheriff Baker
* &quot;Blazing Saddles&quot; (1974) as Taggart
* &quot;Runaway on the Rogue River&quot; (1974) as Bucky Steele
* &quot;The Gun and the Pulpit&quot; (1974) as Billy One-Eye
* &quot;Bootleggers&quot; (1974) as Grandpa Pruitt
* &quot;Ginger in the Morning&quot; (1974) as Sheriff
* &quot;The Legend of Earl Durand&quot; (1974) as Phil Chumley
* &quot;Rancho Deluxe&quot; (1975) as Henry Beige
* &quot;Poor Pretty Eddie&quot; (1975) as Sheriff Orville
* &quot;The Apple Dumpling Gang&quot; (1975) as Frank Stillwell
* &quot;White Line Fever&quot; (1975) as Duane Haller
* &quot;Banjo Hackett: Roamin&#x27; Free&quot; (1976, TV movie) as Lijah Tuttle
* &quot;Hawmps!&quot; (1976) as Naman Tucker
* &quot;Pony Express Rider&quot; (1976) as Bob Jay
* &quot;Mr. Billion&quot; (1977) as Duane Hawkins
* &quot;The White Buffalo&quot; (1977) as Abel Pickney
* &quot;The Shadow of Chikara&quot; (1977) as Virgil Cane
* &quot;The Swarm&quot; (1978) as Jud Hawkins
* &quot;Smokey and the Good Time Outlaws&quot; (1978) as Sheriff Ledy
* &quot;The Sweet Creek County War&quot; (1979) as Jitters Pippen
* &quot;Beyond the Poseidon Adventure&quot; (1979) as Dewey &#x27;Tex&#x27; Hopkins
* &quot;The Sacketts&quot; (1979) as Jack Bigelow
* &quot;1941&quot; (1979) as Hollis P. Wood
* &quot;Spirit of the Wind&quot; (1979) as Obie
* &quot;The Black Hole&quot; (1979) as B.O.B. (voice, uncredited)
* &quot;Tom Horn&quot; (1980) as Sheriff Sam Creedmore
* &quot;Honeysuckle Rose&quot; (1980) as Garland Ramsey
* &quot;Christmas Mountain&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Howling&quot; (1981) as Sam Newfield
* &quot;This House Possessed&quot; (1981, TV movie) as Arthur Keene
* &quot;Pink Motel&quot; (1982) as Roy
===Television===

* &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; (1956) (Season 5 Episode 2: &quot;The Sheriff of Smoke Tree&quot;) — Joe Boley
* &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; (1956) (Season 5 Episode 10: &quot;The Letter Bride&quot;) — Ed Jones
* &quot;Sugarfoot&quot; (1957) (Season 1 Episode 1: &quot;Brannigan&#x27;s Boots&quot;) — Shorty
* &quot;Cheyenne&quot; (1957) (Season 2 Episode 14: &quot;Big Ghost Basin&quot;) — Gary Owen
* &quot;Lassie&quot; (1957) (Season 3 Episode 22: &quot;The Chimp&quot;) — Eddie
* &quot;Death Valley Days&quot; (1957 (Season 6 Episode 4: &quot;Arsenic Springs&quot;) — Barfly (uncredited)
* &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Wonderful World of Color&quot; (1957–1974) (19 episodes) — various roles
* &quot;Sugarfoot&quot; (1958) (Season 1 Episode 18: &quot;Short Range&quot;) — Harry
* &quot;Death Valley Days&quot; (1958) (Season 6 Episode 21: &quot;The Telescope Eye&quot;) — Wall Kennedy
* &quot;Wagon Train&quot; (1958) (Season 2 Episode 10: &quot;The Tent City Story&quot;) — Rafe Jeffers
* &quot;Maverick&quot; (1958) (Season 2 Episode 14: &quot;The Spanish Dancer&quot;) — Jed
* &quot;Frontier Doctor&quot; (1959) (Season 1 Episode 19: &quot;Bittercreek Gang&quot;) — Slim
* &quot;Sugarfoot&quot; (1960) (Season 4 Episode 1: &quot;The Shadow Catcher&quot;) — Mark
* &quot;Bronco&quot; (1961) (Season 4 Episode 3: &quot;One Came Back&quot;) — 1st Stage Driver (uncredited)
* &quot;The Americans&quot; (1961) (Season 1 Episode 8: &quot;The Escape&quot;) — Johnson
* &quot;The Americans&quot; (1961) (Season 1 Episode 15: &quot;The War Between the States&quot;) — Johnson
* &quot;Maverick&quot; (1961) (Season 4 Episode 16: &quot;A State of Siege&quot;) — Stagecoach Driver
* &quot;Maverick&quot; (1961) (Season 4 Episode 30: &quot;Benefit of a Doubt&quot;) — Roscoe
* &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot; (1961) (Season 6 Episode 36: &quot;Final Arrangements&quot;) — Bradshaw
* &quot;Wagon Train&quot; (1962) (Season 6 Episode 12: &quot;The Eve Newhope Story&quot;) — Grubstake Malloy
* &quot;Route 66&quot; (1962) (Season 2 Episode 15: &quot;A Long Piece of Mischief&quot;) — Jud
* &quot;Bonanza&quot; (1963) (Season 4 Episode 18: &quot;Half a Rogue&quot;) — Big Jim Leyton
* &quot;The Virginian&quot; (1963) (Season 2 Episode 9: &quot;Run Quiet&quot;) — Slim
* &quot;The Alfred Hitchcock Hour&quot; (1964) (Season 2 Episode 17: &quot;The Jar&quot;) — Clem Carter
* &quot;Bonanza&quot; (1964) (Season 5 Episode 21: &quot;King of the Mountain&quot;) — Big Jim Leyton
* &quot;Rawhide&quot; (1964) (Season 7 Episode 9: &quot;The Backshooter&quot;) — Sheriff McKay
* &quot;The Fugitive&quot; (1964) (Season 2 Episode 5: &quot;Nemesis&quot;) — Corbin
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (1964) (Season 9 Episode 18: &quot;Once a Haggen&quot;) — Bucko Taos
* &quot;The Virginian&quot; (1964) (Season 3 Episode 7: &quot;Big Image... Little Man&quot;) — Hogy
* &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot; (1964) (Season 1 Episode 2: &quot;The Iowa-Scuba Affair&quot;) — Clint Spinner
* &quot;Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)&quot; (1966) (Season 2 Episode 18: &quot;The Deserter&quot;) — Simon Harman 
* &quot;Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)&quot; (1966) (Season 3 Episode 1: &quot;Dan&#x27;l Boone Shot a B&#x27;ar&quot;) — Cletus Mott
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (1966) (Season 11 Episode 17: &quot;Sweet Billy, Singer of Songs&quot;) — Pony Beal
* &quot;The Legend of Jesse James&quot; (1966) (Season 1 Episode 33: &quot;Wanted: Dead and Only&quot;) — Sheriff Homer Brinks
* &quot;Cimarron Strip&quot; (1968) (Season 1 Episode 16: &quot;Fool&#x27;s Gold&quot;) — Malachi Grimes
* &quot;Gentle Ben&quot; (1968) (Season 1 Episode 28: &quot;Ol&#x27; Joe&#x27;s Gotta Go&quot;) — Lloyd Larkin
* &quot;Bonanza&quot; (1968) (Season 10 Episode 7: &quot;Catch as Catch Can&quot;) — Sheriff Gant
* &quot;That Girl&quot; (1969) (Season 4 Episode 4: &quot;Nobody Here But Us Chickens&quot;) — Major Culpepper
* &quot;Mannix&quot; (1969) (Season 2 Episode 15: &quot;Only Giants Can Play&quot;) — Mike Ray
* &quot;Ironside&quot; (1969) (Season 3 Episode 2: &quot;Goodbye to Yesterday&quot;) — Sheriff Metcalf
* &quot;Bonanza&quot; (1970) (Season 11 Episode 27: &quot;What Are Pardners For?&quot;) — Sheriff
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (1970) (Season 16 Episode 10: &quot;The Scavengers&quot;) — Colley
* &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; (1971) (Season 1 Episode 24: &quot;The 45-Year-Old Man&quot;) — Wild Jack Monroe
* &quot;The Virginian&quot; (1971) (Season 9 Episode 18: &quot;The Angus Killer&quot;) — Sheriff
* &quot;Alias Smith and Jones&quot; (1971) (Season 1 Episode 3: &quot;Exit from Wickenburg&quot;) — Mike
* &quot;Alias Smith and Jones&quot; (1971) (Season 1 Episode 10: &quot;The Man Who Murdered Himself&quot;) — Sheriff Benton
* &quot;Alias Smith and Jones&quot; (1971) (Season 2 Episode 1: &quot;The Day They Hanged Kid Curry&quot;) — Sheriff Whittaker
* &quot;The Partridge Family&quot; (1972) (Season 3 Episode 12: &quot;Nag, Nag, Nag&quot;) — Will Fowler
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (1972) (Season 18 Episode 1: &quot;The River: Part 1&quot;) — Charlie Utter
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; (1972) (Season 18 Episode 2: &quot;The River: Part 2&quot;) — Charlie Utter
* &quot;Alias Smith and Jones&quot; (1972) (Season 3 Episode 9: &quot;The Strange Fate of Conrad Meyer Zulick&quot;) — Sheriff Sam
* &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot; (1973) (Season 6 Episode 4: &quot;One Big Happy Family&quot;) — Sam
* &quot;Night Gallery&quot; (1973) (Season 3 Episode 16: &quot;Die Now, Pay Later&quot;) — Sheriff Ned Harlow
* &quot;Kung Fu&quot; (1974) (Season 2 Episode 13: &quot;Empty Pages of a Dead Book&quot;) — Bart Fisher
* &quot;McMillan &amp; Wife&quot; (1976) (Season 5 Episode 6: &quot;Greed&quot;) — William Halstead
* &quot;The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams&quot; (1977) (Season 1 Episode 10: &quot;The Unholy Beast&quot;) — Fine Hope
* &quot;How the West Was Won&quot; (1978) (5 Episodes) — Tap Henry
**(Season 2 Episode 6: &quot;Cattle Drive&quot;) 
**(Season 2 Episode 7: &quot;Robber&#x27;s Roost&quot;)
**(Season 2 Episode 8: &quot;Deek&quot;)
**(Season 2 Episode 9: &quot;The Judge&quot;) (credit only)
**(Season 2 Episode 10: &quot;Gold&quot;)
* &quot;Vega$&quot; (1978) (Season 1 Episode 5: &quot;Yes, My Darling Daughter&quot;) — Ben Handler
* &quot;The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo&quot; (1979) (Season 1 Episode 5: &quot;Run for the Money: Part 2&quot; — Sergeant Wiley
* &quot;The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo&quot; (1979) (Season 1 Episode 5: &quot;Run for the Money: Part 2&quot; — Sergeant Wiley
* &quot;B.J. and the Bear&quot; (1979–1981) (5 episodes) — Sergeant Beauregard Wiley
**(Season 2 Episode 1: &quot;Snow White and the Seven Lady Truckers: Part 1&quot;)
**(Season 2 Episode 2: &quot;Snow White and the Seven Lady Truckers: Part 2&quot;)
**(Season 2 Episode 6: &quot;Run for the Money&quot;)
**(Season 2 Episode 8: &quot;Mary Ellen&quot;)
**(Season 3 Episode 2: &quot;B.J. and the Seven Lady Truckers: Part 2&quot;)
* &quot;Jake&#x27;s Way&quot;&quot; (1980 unsold pilot) (TV movie) - Sam Hargis
==See also==

* List of people with brain tumors

==References==
==External links==
* 
* The Colt Revolver in the American West – Slim Pickens&#x27; Single Action Army
* Slim Pickens arrives at an airport 1970s from Texas Archive of the Moving Image</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1277039" start="0" end="24" title="Slim Pickens" label="Louis Burton Lindley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="81" end="91" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277039" start="92" end="104" title="Slim Pickens" label="Slim Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="132" end="137" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="331" end="346" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q957323" start="360" end="375" title="Blazing Saddles" label="Blazing Saddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207482" start="389" end="393" title="1941 (film)" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q174513" start="434" end="448" title="One-Eyed Jacks" label="One-Eyed Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="460" end="473" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q779614" start="546" end="567" title="Kingsburg, California" label="Kingsburg, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740406" start="849" end="856" title="Bucking horse" label="broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605948" start="861" end="874" title="Steer roping" label="roping steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647796" start="1275" end="1294" title="Hanford Joint Union High School District" label="Hanford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q375185" start="1299" end="1306" title="Hanford, California" label="Hanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="1332" end="1357" title="National FFA Organization" label="Future Farmers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356565" start="1439" end="1450" title="rodeo clown" label="rodeo clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1459" end="1471" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="1492" end="1512" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="1704" end="1711" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="1888" end="1895" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969879" start="1902" end="1916" title="Rocky Mountain (film)" label="Rocky Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="1945" end="1956" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q281525" start="2025" end="2033" title="sidekick" label="sidekick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374215" start="2053" end="2062" title="Rex Allen" label="Rex Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513186" start="2143" end="2151" title="stand-in" label="stand-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q620656" start="2208" end="2217" title="Appaloosa" label="Appaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629665" start="2350" end="2369" title="Old Oklahoma Plains" label="Old Oklahoma Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632508" start="2390" end="2405" title="Down Laredo Way" label="Down Laredo Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531605" start="2426" end="2431" title="Tonka (film)" label="Tonka"/>
<link wikidata="Q174513" start="2452" end="2466" title="One-Eyed Jacks" label="One-Eyed Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="2485" end="2498" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="2507" end="2522" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811900" start="2543" end="2555" title="Major Dundee" label="Major Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="2574" end="2589" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q31235" start="2596" end="2602" title="remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208286" start="2612" end="2622" title="Stagecoach (1966 film)" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q50714" start="2680" end="2689" title="Stagecoach (1939 film)" label="1939 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q386105" start="2693" end="2704" title="Andy Devine" label="Andy Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750001" start="2713" end="2730" title="An Eye for an Eye (1966 film)" label="An Eye for an Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131675" start="2751" end="2770" title="Never a Dull Moment (1968 film)" label="Never a Dull Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211921" start="2791" end="2802" title="The Cowboys" label="The Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="2821" end="2831" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q471864" start="2840" end="2851" title="The Getaway (1972 film)" label="The Getaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q159347" start="2870" end="2883" title="Steve McQueen" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169098" start="2892" end="2921" title="Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid" label="Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563078" start="2942" end="2963" title="Ginger in the Morning" label="Ginger in the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q350714" start="2982" end="2991" title="Fred Ward" label="Fred Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q957323" start="3000" end="3015" title="Blazing Saddles" label="Blazing Saddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228815" start="3036" end="3053" title="Poor Pretty Eddie" label="Poor Pretty Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418783" start="3067" end="3080" title="Rancho Deluxe" label="Rancho Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450305" start="3106" end="3135" title="Beyond the Poseidon Adventure" label="Beyond the Poseidon Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="3154" end="3167" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q94992" start="3172" end="3183" title="Karl Malden" label="Karl Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656187" start="3196" end="3204" title="Tom Horn (film)" label="Tom Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="3275" end="3291" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207482" start="3305" end="3309" title="1941 (film)" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001" start="3338" end="3352" title="Toshiro Mifune" label="Toshiro Mifune"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="3357" end="3372" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483991" start="3593" end="3611" title="Silver Dollar City" label="Silver Dollar City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="3877" end="3885" title="werewolf" label="werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170554" start="3916" end="3927" title="The Howling (film)" label="The Howling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="4025" end="4036" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081291" start="4050" end="4073" title="The Apple Dumpling Gang (film)" label="The Apple Dumpling Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228815" start="4133" end="4150" title="Poor Pretty Eddie" label="Poor Pretty Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q304029" start="4302" end="4316" title="The Black Hole (1979 film)" label="The Black Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363756" start="4367" end="4377" title="Pink Motel" label="Pink Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q230512" start="4396" end="4410" title="Phyllis Diller" label="Phyllis Diller"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="4463" end="4467" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="B-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="4552" end="4567" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="4587" end="4600" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q871690" start="4869" end="4876" title="Gung ho" label="gung-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5174" end="5178" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="5369" end="5375" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201419" start="5423" end="5435" title="M1911 pistol" label="M1911 pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="5764" end="5779" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="5928" end="5934" title="Thermonuclear weapon" label="H-bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138175" start="5984" end="5994" title="cowboy hat" label="cowboy hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="6002" end="6007" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124733" start="6774" end="6778" title="take" label="take"/>
<link wikidata="Q21403410" start="6832" end="6846" title="Dick Hallorann" label="Dick Hallorann"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="6879" end="6891" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q186341" start="6905" end="6916" title="The Shining (film)" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q501996" start="7143" end="7159" title="Scatman Crothers" label="Scatman Crothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655332" start="7336" end="7356" title="A Ballad of the West" label="A Ballad of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q713423" start="7441" end="7452" title="Jim Bridger" label="Jim Bridger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308103" start="7461" end="7473" title="mountain man" label="mountain man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281738" start="7633" end="7647" title="Kinky Friedman" label="Kinky Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620053" start="8157" end="8179" title="Stories of the Century" label="Stories of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q460918" start="8217" end="8229" title="Sundance Kid" label="Sundance Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q460968" start="8233" end="8243" title="Joe Sawyer" label="Joe Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313574" start="8251" end="8264" title="Butch Cassidy" label="Butch Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="8298" end="8308" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769396" start="8330" end="8342" title="Annie Oakley (TV series)" label="Annie Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357688" start="8361" end="8371" title="Gail Davis" label="Gail Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954039" start="8376" end="8388" title="Brad Johnson (actor, born 1924)" label="Brad Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q954212" start="8415" end="8430" title="The Lone Ranger (TV series)" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990016" start="8477" end="8489" title="Wide Country (TV series)" label="Wide Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277085" start="8528" end="8541" title="Earl Holliman" label="Earl Holliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q263095" start="8546" end="8558" title="Andrew Prine" label="Andrew Prine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="8589" end="8608" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226319" start="8626" end="8639" title="The Swamp Fox (TV series)" label="The Swamp Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985645" start="8725" end="8738" title="The Americans (1961 TV series)" label="The Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8767" end="8785" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="8891" end="8914" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1247529" start="8956" end="8962" title="Mannix" label="Mannix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071394" start="8976" end="8984" title="Cheyenne (TV series)" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357973" start="8998" end="9007" title="Sugarfoot" label="Sugarfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="9021" end="9046" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588097" start="9060" end="9075" title="The Lone Ranger" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505983" start="9089" end="9104" title="Frontier Doctor" label="Frontier Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="9118" end="9126" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248499" start="9140" end="9148" title="Route 66 (TV series)" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768049" start="9162" end="9174" title="The Tall Man (TV series)" label="The Tall Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q166845" start="9188" end="9196" title="Maverick (TV series)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774323" start="9261" end="9274" title="The Westerner (TV series)" label="The Westerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631246" start="9288" end="9297" title="Riverboat (TV series)" label="Riverboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q137034" start="9311" end="9323" title="The Fugitive (1963 TV series)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q977904" start="9337" end="9369" title="The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters (TV series)" label="The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822783" start="9383" end="9408" title="The Legend of Jesse James (TV series)" label="The Legend of Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095958" start="9422" end="9443" title="Alias Smith and Jones" label="Alias Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160120" start="9457" end="9469" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="9483" end="9496" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="9510" end="9523" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q276690" start="9537" end="9546" title="That Girl" label="That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q167494" start="9560" end="9567" title="Baretta" label="Baretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q932929" start="9581" end="9586" title="Vegas (1978 TV series)" label="Vega$"/>
<link wikidata="Q527569" start="9600" end="9620" title="How the West Was Won (TV series)" label="How the West Was Won"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633803" start="9634" end="9648" title="Cimarron Strip" label="Cimarron Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247186" start="9666" end="9673" title="Kung Fu (1972 TV series)" label="Kung Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699743" start="9727" end="9733" title="Custer (TV series)" label="Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="9747" end="9754" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736003" start="9768" end="9775" title="Hee Haw" label="Hee Haw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987517" start="9844" end="9862" title="B. J. and the Bear" label="B. J. and the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320797" start="9874" end="9885" title="Greg Evigan" label="Greg Evigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449267" start="9897" end="9908" title="Filthy Rich (1982 TV series)" label="Filthy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="9973" end="9976" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="9990" end="10015" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111084" start="10136" end="10151" title="Our Man Higgins" label="Our Man Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q549287" start="10173" end="10189" title="Stanley Holloway" label="Stanley Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10195" end="10202" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="10326" end="10339" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="10381" end="10394" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="10468" end="10474" title="Master of ceremonies" label="emceed"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="10498" end="10511" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126036" start="10620" end="10652" title="Hall of Great Western Performers" label="Hall of Great Western Performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971981" start="10660" end="10705" title="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum" label="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="10709" end="10722" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10760" end="10784" title="Rodeo Historical Society" label="Rodeo Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797661" start="10826" end="10844" title="Rodeo Hall of Fame" label="Rodeo Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246684" start="10952" end="10973" title="ProRodeo Hall of Fame" label="ProRodeo Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162484" start="11064" end="11112" title="Pendleton Round-Up and Happy Canyon Hall of Fame" label="Pendleton Round-Up and Happy Canyon Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112365" start="11275" end="11295" title="Columbia, California" label="Columbia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q204561" start="11322" end="11329" title="Modesto, California" label="Modesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="11371" end="11382" title="brain tumor" label="brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="11701" end="11706" title="Cremation" label="ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="11915" end="11952" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713568" start="12059" end="12081" title="The American Sportsman" label="The American Sportsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179145" start="12130" end="12140" title="Days Go By (The Offspring album)" label="Days Go By"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="12157" end="12170" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546130" start="12377" end="12382" title="Smoky (1946 film)" label="Smoky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969879" start="12432" end="12446" title="Rocky Mountain (film)" label="Rocky Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148965" start="12483" end="12499" title="Colorado Sundown" label="Colorado Sundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16614372" start="12557" end="12575" title="The Last Musketeer" label="The Last Musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629248" start="12613" end="12631" title="Border Saddlemates" label="Border Saddlemates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989498" start="12669" end="12693" title="The Story of Will Rogers" label="The Story of Will Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629665" start="12732" end="12751" title="Old Oklahoma Plains" label="Old Oklahoma Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628967" start="12781" end="12800" title="South Pacific Trail" label="South Pacific Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799105" start="12838" end="12850" title="Thunderbirds (1952 film)" label="Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631742" start="12894" end="12912" title="Old Overland Trail" label="Old Overland Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009192" start="12950" end="12971" title="The Sun Shines Bright" label="The Sun Shines Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631261" start="13025" end="13044" title="Iron Mountain Trail" label="Iron Mountain Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632508" start="13082" end="13097" title="Down Laredo Way" label="Down Laredo Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632301" start="13127" end="13147" title="Shadows of Tombstone" label="Shadows of Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631818" start="13177" end="13192" title="Red River Shore" label="Red River Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633895" start="13237" end="13253" title="Phantom Stallion" label="Phantom Stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520080" start="13283" end="13304" title="The Boy from Oklahoma" label="The Boy from Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755629" start="13336" end="13347" title="The Outcast (1954 film)" label="The Outcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419544" start="13385" end="13401" title="Santa Fe Passage" label="Santa Fe Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607677" start="13438" end="13454" title="The Last Command (1955 film)" label="The Last Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q21647301" start="13483" end="13504" title="When Gangland Strikes" label="When Gangland Strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15650958" start="13542" end="13561" title="Stranger at My Door (1956 film)" label="Stranger at My Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065792" start="13596" end="13622" title="The Great Locomotive Chase" label="The Great Locomotive Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581140" start="13660" end="13672" title="Gun Brothers" label="Gun Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15653636" start="13711" end="13725" title="Gunsight Ridge" label="Gunsight Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372212" start="13760" end="13772" title="The Sheepman" label="The Sheepman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954957" start="13805" end="13816" title="Escort West" label="Escort West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531605" start="13858" end="13863" title="Tonka (film)" label="Tonka"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869229" start="13938" end="13956" title="Chartroose Caboose" label="Chartroose Caboose"/>
<link wikidata="Q174513" start="13993" end="14007" title="One-Eyed Jacks" label="One-Eyed Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326600" start="14051" end="14069" title="A Thunder of Drums" label="A Thunder of Drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762249" start="14111" end="14121" title="Savage Sam (film)" label="Savage Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="14157" end="14172" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811900" start="14225" end="14237" title="Major Dundee" label="Major Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362240" start="14268" end="14286" title="In Harm&amp;#x27;s Way" label="In Harm&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223655" start="14327" end="14344" title="Up from the Beach" label="Up from the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218403" start="14387" end="14401" title="The Glory Guys" label="The Glory Guys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208286" start="14449" end="14459" title="Stagecoach (1966 film)" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750001" start="14489" end="14506" title="An Eye for an Eye (1966 film)" label="An Eye for an Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118405" start="14541" end="14557" title="The Young Riders" label="The Young Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187" start="14625" end="14647" title="Rough Night in Jericho (film)" label="Rough Night in Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284028" start="14682" end="14699" title="The Flim-Flam Man" label="The Flim-Flam Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q847841" start="14737" end="14747" title="Will Penny" label="Will Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131675" start="14788" end="14807" title="Never a Dull Moment (1968 film)" label="Never a Dull Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q303456" start="14916" end="14922" title="Skidoo (film)" label="Skidoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20000967" start="14968" end="14985" title="80 Steps to Jonah" label="80 Steps to Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904612" start="15016" end="15044" title="Rosolino Paternò, soldato..." label="Rosolino Paternò, soldato..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1856846" start="15085" end="15110" title="The Ballad of Cable Hogue" label="The Ballad of Cable Hogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213596" start="15149" end="15161" title="The Deserter (1970 film)" label="The Deserter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211921" start="15260" end="15271" title="The Cowboys" label="The Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304573" start="15301" end="15305" title="J.C. (film)" label="J.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7227313" start="15345" end="15356" title="The Honkers" label="The Honkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q471864" start="15387" end="15398" title="The Getaway (1972 film)" label="The Getaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169098" start="15430" end="15459" title="Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid" label="Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q957323" start="15498" end="15513" title="Blazing Saddles" label="Blazing Saddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860307" start="15610" end="15632" title="The Gun and the Pulpit" label="The Gun and the Pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649383" start="15671" end="15682" title="Bootleggers (1974 film)" label="Bootleggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563078" start="15722" end="15743" title="Ginger in the Morning" label="Ginger in the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418783" start="15839" end="15852" title="Rancho Deluxe" label="Rancho Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228815" start="15889" end="15906" title="Poor Pretty Eddie" label="Poor Pretty Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081291" start="15947" end="15970" title="The Apple Dumpling Gang (film)" label="The Apple Dumpling Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277693" start="16011" end="16027" title="White Line Fever (film)" label="White Line Fever"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16065" end="16097" title="Banjo Hackett: Roamin&amp;#x27; Free" label="Banjo Hackett: Roamin&amp;#x27; Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685379" start="16145" end="16152" title="Hawmps!" label="Hawmps!"/>
<link wikidata="Q84366586" start="16190" end="16208" title="Pony Express Rider" label="Pony Express Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q250628" start="16241" end="16252" title="Mr. Billion" label="Mr. Billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q651126" start="16291" end="16308" title="The White Buffalo" label="The White Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483025" start="16346" end="16367" title="The Shadow of Chikara" label="The Shadow of Chikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199715" start="16404" end="16413" title="The Swarm (1978 film)" label="The Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450305" start="16586" end="16615" title="Beyond the Poseidon Adventure" label="Beyond the Poseidon Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761956" start="16670" end="16682" title="The Sacketts" label="The Sacketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207482" start="16720" end="16724" title="1941 (film)" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578048" start="16764" end="16782" title="Spirit of the Wind" label="Spirit of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q304029" start="16812" end="16826" title="The Black Hole (1979 film)" label="The Black Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656187" start="16878" end="16886" title="Tom Horn (film)" label="Tom Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319060" start="16933" end="16949" title="Honeysuckle Rose (film)" label="Honeysuckle Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q646486" start="16989" end="17007" title="Christmas Mountain" label="Christmas Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170554" start="17029" end="17040" title="The Howling (film)" label="The Howling"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528155" start="17078" end="17098" title="This House Possessed" label="This House Possessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363756" start="17146" end="17156" title="Pink Motel" label="Pink Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q954212" start="17203" end="17218" title="The Lone Ranger (TV series)" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q954212" start="17312" end="17327" title="The Lone Ranger (TV series)" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357973" start="17412" end="17421" title="Sugarfoot" label="Sugarfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071394" start="17509" end="17517" title="Cheyenne (TV series)" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q289537" start="17602" end="17608" title="Lassie (1954 TV series)" label="Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="17683" end="17700" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17793" end="17836" title="Disney anthology television series#Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Wonderful World of Color (1961–1969)" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Wonderful World of Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357973" start="17893" end="17902" title="Sugarfoot" label="Sugarfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="17979" end="17996" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q772909" start="18086" end="18097" title="Wagon Train" label="Wagon Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q166845" start="18189" end="18197" title="Maverick (TV series)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505983" start="18279" end="18294" title="Frontier Doctor" label="Frontier Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357973" start="18375" end="18384" title="Sugarfoot" label="Sugarfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187441" start="18466" end="18472" title="Bronco (TV series)" label="Bronco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985645" start="18574" end="18587" title="The Americans (1961 TV series)" label="The Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985645" start="18664" end="18677" title="The Americans (1961 TV series)" label="The Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166845" start="18771" end="18779" title="Maverick (TV series)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q166845" start="18873" end="18881" title="Maverick (TV series)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="18966" end="18991" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q772909" start="19078" end="19089" title="Wagon Train" label="Wagon Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248499" start="19187" end="19195" title="Route 66 (TV series)" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="19283" end="19290" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="19377" end="19390" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="19463" end="19488" title="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour" label="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="19567" end="19574" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247542" start="19669" end="19676" title="Rawhide (TV series)" label="Rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q137034" start="19764" end="19776" title="The Fugitive (1963 TV series)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="19849" end="19857" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="19941" end="19954" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="20041" end="20064" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1160120" start="20158" end="20187" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)" label="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160120" start="20273" end="20302" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)" label="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="20406" end="20414" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822783" start="20513" end="20538" title="The Legend of Jesse James (TV series)" label="The Legend of Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633803" start="20640" end="20654" title="Cimarron Strip" label="Cimarron Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428441" start="20745" end="20755" title="Gentle Ben" label="Gentle Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="20856" end="20863" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q276690" start="20954" end="20963" title="That Girl" label="That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247529" start="21065" end="21071" title="Mannix" label="Mannix"/>
<link wikidata="Q892438" start="21160" end="21168" title="Ironside (1967 TV series)" label="Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="21263" end="21270" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="21361" end="21369" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="21451" end="21476" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="21572" end="21585" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095958" start="21669" end="21690" title="Alias Smith and Jones" label="Alias Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095958" start="21774" end="21795" title="Alias Smith and Jones" label="Alias Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095958" start="21898" end="21919" title="Alias Smith and Jones" label="Alias Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q654652" start="22025" end="22045" title="The Partridge Family" label="The Partridge Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="22130" end="22138" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="22229" end="22237" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095958" start="22328" end="22349" title="Alias Smith and Jones" label="Alias Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="22459" end="22472" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="22555" end="22568" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247186" start="22665" end="22672" title="Kung Fu (1972 TV series)" label="Kung Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247499" start="22770" end="22789" title="McMillan &amp;amp; Wife" label="McMillan &amp;amp; Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q950608" start="22870" end="22905" title="The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams" label="The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q527569" start="22991" end="23011" title="How the West Was Won (TV series)" label="How the West Was Won"/>
<link wikidata="Q932929" start="23307" end="23312" title="Vegas (1978 TV series)" label="Vega$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631663" start="23407" end="23440" title="The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo" label="The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631663" start="23538" end="23571" title="The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo" label="The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987517" start="23669" end="23686" title="B. J. and the Bear" label="B.J. and the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24098" end="24113" title="Jake&amp;#x27;s Way" label="Jake&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608132" start="24186" end="24218" title="List of people with brain tumors" label="List of people with brain tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768586" start="24386" end="24419" title="Texas Archive of the Moving Image" label="Texas Archive of the Moving Image"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66935" wikidata="Q51415" url="?curid=66935" title="Queer">
<text>Queer is an umbrella term for people who are non-heterosexual or non-cisgender. Originally meaning or , &quot;queer&quot; came to be used pejoratively against LGBT people in the late 19th century. From the late 1980s, queer activists began to reclaim the word as a neutral or positive self-description.

In the 21st century, &quot;queer&quot; became increasingly used to describe a broad spectrum of non-heteronormative sexual or gender identities and politics. Academic disciplines such as queer theory and queer studies share a general opposition to binarism, normativity, and a perceived lack of intersectionality, some of them only tangentially connected to the LGBT movement. Queer arts, queer cultural groups, and queer political groups are examples of modern expressions of queer identities.

Critics of the term include members of the LGBT community who associate it more with its colloquial, derogatory usage; those who wish to dissociate themselves from queer radicalism; and those who see it as too amorphous or trendy. &quot;Queer&quot; is sometimes expanded to include any non-normative sexuality, including cisgender queer heterosexuality, although some LGBT people view this use of the term as appropriation.

== Origins and early use ==
Entering the English language in the  century, &quot;queer&quot; originally meant , , , or . It might refer to something suspicious or &quot;not quite right&quot;, or to a person with mild derangement or who exhibits socially inappropriate behaviour. The Northern English expression &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;there is nothing as strange as people&quot;, employs this meaning. Related meanings of &quot;queer&quot; include a feeling of unwellness or something that is questionable or suspicious. In the 1922 comic monologue &quot;My Word, You Do Look Queer&quot;, the word is taken to mean &quot;unwell&quot;. The expression &quot;in Queer street&quot; is used in the United Kingdom for someone in financial trouble. Over time, &quot;queer&quot; acquired a number of meanings related to sexuality and gender, from narrowly meaning &quot;gay or lesbian&quot; to referring to those who are &quot;not heterosexual&quot; to referring to those who are either not heterosexual or not cisgender (those who are LGBT+). The term is still widely used in Hiberno-English with its original meaning as well as to provide adverbial emphasis (very, extremely).

=== Early pejorative use ===
By the late 19th century, &quot;queer&quot; was beginning to gain a connotation of sexual deviance, used to refer to feminine men or men who were thought to have engaged in same-sex relationships. An early recorded usage of the word in this sense was in an 1894 letter by John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry, as read aloud at the trial of Oscar Wilde.

&quot;Queer&quot; was used in mainstream society by the early 20th century, along with &quot;fairy&quot; and &quot;faggot&quot;, as a pejorative term to refer to men who were perceived as flamboyant. This was, as historian George Chauncey notes, &quot;the predominant image of &quot;all&quot; queers within the straight mind&quot;.

Starting in the underground gay bar scene in the 1950s, then moving more into the open in the 1960s and 1970s, the homophile identity was gradually displaced by a more radicalized &quot;gay&quot; identity. At that time &quot;gay&quot; was generally an umbrella term including lesbians, as well as gay-identified bisexuals and transsexuals; gender nonconformity, which had always been an indicator of gayness, also became more open during this time. During the endonymic shifts from &quot;invert&quot; to &quot;homophile&quot; to &quot;gay&quot;, &quot;queer&quot; was usually pejoratively applied to men who were believed to engage in receptive or passive anal or oral sex with other men as well as those who exhibited non-normative gender expressions.

=== Early 20th-century queer identity ===

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, &quot;queer&quot;, &quot;fairy&quot;, &quot;trade&quot;, and &quot;gay&quot; signified distinct social categories within the gay male subculture. In his book &quot;Gay New York&quot;, Chauncey noted that &quot;queer&quot; was used as a within-community identity term by men who were stereotypically masculine. Many queer-identified men at the time were, according to Chauncey, &quot;repelled by the style of the &quot;fairy&quot; and his loss of manly status, and almost all were careful to distinguish themselves from such men&quot;, especially because the dominant straight culture did not acknowledge such distinctions. &quot;Trade&quot; referred to straight men who would engage in same-sex activity; Chauncey describes trade as &quot;the &#x27;normal men&#x27; [queers] claimed to be.&quot;

In contrast to the terms used within the subculture, medical practitioners and police officers tended to use medicalized or pathological terms like &quot;invert&quot;, &quot;pervert&quot;, &quot;degenerate&quot;, and &quot;homosexual&quot;.

None of the terms, whether inside or outside of the subculture, equated to the general concept of a homosexual identity, which only emerged with the ascension of a binary (heterosexual/homosexual) understanding of sexual orientation in the 1930s and 1940s. As this binary became embedded into the social fabric, &quot;queer&quot; began to decline as an acceptable identity in the subculture.

Similar to the earlier use of &quot;queer&quot;, &quot;gay&quot; was adopted by many U.S. assimilationist men in the mid-20th century as a means of asserting their normative status and rejecting any associations with effeminacy. The idea that &quot;queer&quot; was a pejorative term became more prevalent among younger gay men following World War II. As the gay identity became more widely adopted in the community, some men who preferred to identify as &quot;gay&quot; began chastising older men who still referred to themselves as &quot;queer&quot; by the late 1940s:

In calling themselves gay, a new generation of men insisted on the right to name themselves, to claim their status as men, and to reject the &quot;effeminate&quot; styles of the older generation. [...] Younger men found it easier to forget the origins of gay in the campy banter of the very queens whom they wished to reject.In other parts of the world, particularly England, &quot;queer&quot; continued to be the dominant term used by the community well into the mid-twentieth century, as noted by historical sociologist Jeffrey Weeks:By the 1950s and 1960s to say &quot;I am queer&quot; was to tell of who and what you were, and how you positioned yourself in relation to the dominant, &quot;normal&quot; society. … It signaled the general perception of same-sex desire as something eccentric, strange, abnormal, and perverse.

== Reclamation ==
===General===

Beginning in the 1980s, the label &quot;queer&quot; began to be reclaimed from its pejorative use as a neutral or positive self-identifier by LGBT people. An early example of this usage was by an LGBT organisation called Queer Nation, which was formed in March 1990 and circulated an anonymous flier at the New York Gay Pride Parade in June 1990 titled &quot;Queers Read This&quot;. The flier included a passage explaining their adoption of the label queer:

Queer people, particularly queer Black and Brown people, also began to reclaim &quot;queer&quot; in response to a perceived shift in the gay community toward liberal conservatism, catalyzed by Andrew Sullivan&#x27;s 1989 piece in &quot;The New Republic&quot;, titled &quot;Here Comes the Groom: The Conservative Case for Gay Marriage&quot;. By identifying themselves as &quot;queer&quot; rather than &quot;gay,&quot; LGBT activists sought to reject causes they viewed as assimilationist, such as marriage, military inclusion and adoption. This radical stance, including the rejection of U.S. imperialism, continued the tradition of earlier lesbian and gay anti-war activism, and solidarity with a variety of leftist movements, as seen in the positions taken at the first two National Marches on Washington in 1979 and 1987, the radical direct action of groups like ACT UP, and the historical importance of events like the Stonewall riots. The radical queer groups following in this tradition of LGBT activism contrasted firmly with &quot;the holy trinity of marriage, military service and adoption [which had] become the central preoccupation of a gay movement centered more on obtaining straight privilege than challenging power.&quot; Commentators such as Mattilda Bernstein Sycamore have argued that it was exactly these &quot;revolting queers&quot; (who were now being pushed aside) who had made it safe for the assimilationists to now have the option of assimilation.

===Other usage===
The term may be capitalized when referring to an identity or community, in a construction similar to the capitalized use of Deaf. The &#x27;Q&#x27; in extended versions of the LGBT acronym, such as &quot;LGBTQIA+&quot;, is most often considered an abbreviation of queer. It can also stand for questioning.

===Reactions===
Reclamation and use of the term &quot;queer&quot; is controversial; several people and organizations, both LGBT and non-LGBT, object to some or all uses of the word for various reasons. Some LGBT people dislike the use of &quot;queer&quot; as an umbrella term because they associate it with political and social radicalism; they say that deliberate use of the epithet &quot;queer&quot; by political radicals has, in their view, played a role in dividing the LGBT community by political opinion, class, gender, age, and other factors. Sociologist Joshua Gamson argues that the controversy about the word also marks a social and political divide in the LGBT community between those (including civil-rights activists) who perceive themselves as &quot;normal&quot; and who wish to be seen as ordinary members of society and those who see themselves as separate, confrontational and/or not part of the ordinary social order. Other LGBT people disapprove of reclaiming or using &quot;queer&quot; because they consider it offensive, in part due to its continued use as a pejorative. Some LGBT people avoid &quot;queer&quot; because they perceive it as faddish slang, or alternatively as academic jargon.

==Scope==

===Intersex and queer identities===

Scholars and activists have proposed different ways in which queer identities apply or do not apply to intersex people. Sociologist Morgan Holmes and bioethicists Morgan Carpenter and Katrina Karkazis have documenting a heteronormativity in medical rationales for the surgical normalization of infants and children born with atypical sex development, and Holmes and Carpenter have described intersex bodies as &quot;queer bodies&quot;. In &quot;What Can Queer Theory Do for Intersex?&quot; Iain Morland contrasts queer &quot;hedonic activism&quot; with an experience of insensate post-surgical intersex bodies to claim that &quot;queerness is characterized by the sensory interrelation of pleasure and shame&quot;.

Emi Koyama describes a move away from a queer identity model within the intersex movement:

Such tactic [of reclaiming labels] was obviously influenced by queer identity politics of the 1980s and 90s that were embodied by such groups as Queer Nation and Lesbian Avengers. But unfortunately, intersex activists quickly discovered that the intersex movement could not succeed under this model. For one thing, there were far fewer intersex people compared to the large and visible presence of LGBT people in most urban centers. For another, activists soon realized that most intersex individuals were not interested in building intersex communities or culture; what they sought were professional psychological support to live ordinary lives as ordinary men and women and not the adoption of new, misleading identity. ... To make it worse, the word &quot;intersex&quot; began to attract individuals who are not necessarily intersex, but feel that they might be, because they are queer or trans. ... Fortunately, the intersex movement did not rely solely on queer identity model for its strategies. 

===Queer heterosexuality===
&quot;Queer&quot; is sometimes expanded to include any non-normative sexuality, including (cisgender) &quot;queer heterosexuality&quot;. This has been criticized by some LGBTQ people, who argue that &quot;queer&quot; can only be reclaimed by those it has been used to oppress: &quot;A straight person identifying as queer can feel like choosing to appropriate the good bits, the cultural and political cachet, the clothes and the sound of gay culture, without ... the internalized homophobia of lived gay experience.&quot; Many queer people believe that &quot;you don&#x27;t have to identify as queer if you&#x27;re on the LGBTQIA+ spectrum, but you do have to be on the LGBTQIA+ spectrum to identify as queer.&quot;

==Academia==

In academia, the term &quot;queer&quot; (and the related verb &quot;queering&quot;) broadly indicate the study of literature, discourse, academic fields, and other social and cultural areas from a non-heterosexual and/or non-cisgender viewpoint. Though the fields of queer studies and queer theory are broad, such studies often focus on LGBT+ lives, and may involve challenging the assumption that being heterosexual and cisgender are the default or &quot;normal&quot;. Queer theory, in particular, may embrace ambiguities and fluidity in traditionally &quot;stable&quot; categories such as &quot;gay&quot; or &quot;straight.&quot;

Queer studies is the study of issues relating to sexual orientation and gender identity, usually focusing on LGBT people and cultures. Originally centered on LGBT history and literary theory, the field has expanded to include the academic study of issues raised in biology, sociology, anthropology, history of science, philosophy, psychology, sexology, political science, ethics, and other fields by an examination of the identity, lives, history, and perception of queer people. Organizations such as the Irish Queer Archive attempt to collect and preserve history related to queer studies.

Queer theory is a field of post-structuralist critical theory that emerged in the early 1990s out of the fields of queer studies and women&#x27;s studies. Applications of queer theory include queer theology and queer pedagogy. Philosopher Judith Butler has described queer theory as a site of &quot;collective contestation&quot;, referring to its commitment to challenging easy categories and definitions. Critics of queer theory argue that this refusal of straightforward categories can make the discipline overly abstract or detached from reality.

Queer theorists such as Rod Ferguson, Jasbir Puar, Lisa Duggan, and Chong-suk Han have critiqued the mainstream gay political movement as allied with neoliberal and imperialistic agendas, including gay tourism, gay and trans military inclusion, and state- and church-sanctioned marriages for monogamous gay couples. Puar, a queer theorist of color, specifically coined the term &quot;homonationalism&quot; to refer to the perceived rise of American exceptionalism, nationalism, white supremacy, and patriarchy within the gay community, catalyzed in response to the September 11 attacks.

In their research on the queer movements of Indonesia and Malaysia, scholars Jón Ingvar Kjaran and Mohammad Naeimi have said that the &quot;localization of modern queer identity&quot;, rooted in local interpretations of queer theory and &quot;Muslim modernism&quot;, has helped queer Indonesians and Malaysians to &quot;promote their self-construction and organize a collective mobilization for their rights&quot;. They contrast this with the rhetoric of those conservative Muslim homophobes who portray &quot;gay&quot; or &quot;LGBT&quot; identities as a form of Western imperialism, as well as the &quot;Eurocentric discourse&quot;, homonationalism and homonormativity of &quot;LGBT politics&quot; in the global north.

==Culture and politics==
Several LGBT social movements around the world use the identifier &quot;queer&quot;, such as the Queer Cyprus Association in Cyprus and the Queer Youth Network in the UK. In India, pride parades include Queer Azaadi Mumbai and the Delhi Queer Pride Parade. The use of &quot;queer&quot; and &quot;Q&quot; is also widespread in Australia, including national counselling and support service Qlife and &quot;QNews&quot;.

Other social movements exist as offshoots of queer culture or combinations of queer identity with other views. Adherents of queer nationalism support the notion that the LGBT community forms a distinct people due to their unique culture and customs. Queercore (originally &quot;homocore&quot;) is a cultural and social movement that began in the mid-1980s as an offshoot of punk expressed in a do-it-yourself style through zines, music, writing, art and film.

The term queer migration is used to describe the movement of LGBTQ people around the world often to escape discrimination or ill treatment due to their orientation or gender expression. Organizations such as the Iranian Railroad for Queer Refugees and Rainbow Railroad attempt to assist individuals in such relocations.

===Flag===

A pride flag for the queer community was created in 2015, though it is not widely known. Its colors include blue and pink for attraction to the same gender, orange and green for non-binary people, and black and white for agender, asexual, and aromantic people.

==Art==
The label &quot;queer&quot; is often applied to art movements, particularly cinema. New queer cinema was a movement in queer-themed independent filmmaking in the early 1990s. Modern queer film festivals include the Melbourne Queer Film Festival and Mardi Gras Film Festival (run by Queer Screen) in Australia, the Mumbai Queer Film Festival in India, the Asian Queer Film Festival in Japan, and Queersicht in Switzerland. Chinese film director Cui Zi&#x27;en titled his 2008 documentary about homosexuality in China &quot;Queer China&quot;, which premiered at the 2009 Beijing Queer Film Festival after previous attempts to hold a queer film festival were shut down by the government.

Multidisciplinary queer arts festivals include the Outburst Queer Arts Festival in Northern Ireland, the Queer Arts Festival in Canada, and the National Queer Arts Festival in the US.

Television shows that use &quot;queer&quot; in their titles include the UK series &quot;Queer as Folk&quot; and its American-Canadian remake of the same name, &quot;Queer Eye&quot;, and the cartoon &quot;Queer Duck&quot;.

== See also ==
* Gay Shame
* Heterosexism
* Homophobia
* &quot;Queers&quot; (TV series)
* Sexual minority
* Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures
* Queerplatonic relationship

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== General bibliography ===
* 
* 


==External links==

* The Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="12" end="25" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q339014" start="45" end="61" title="non-heterosexual" label="non-heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093205" start="69" end="78" title="cisgender" label="cisgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="138" end="148" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="159" end="170" title="LGBTQ community" label="LGBT people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="243" end="250" title="reappropriation" label="reclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="404" end="419" title="heteronormative" label="heteronormative"/>
<link wikidata="Q658022" start="491" end="503" title="queer theory" label="queer theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q98929208" start="508" end="521" title="queer studies" label="queer studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530970" start="552" end="560" title="Gender binary" label="binarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q288156" start="562" end="573" title="normativity" label="normativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="599" end="616" title="intersectionality" label="intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706237" start="964" end="980" title="queer radicalism" label="queer radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353191" start="1131" end="1152" title="queer heterosexuality" label="queer heterosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1209" end="1222" title="Cultural appropriation#Gender and sexuality" label="appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1290" end="1298" title=" century" label=" century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321639" start="1508" end="1524" title="English language in Northern England" label="Northern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="1768" end="1777" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q105200391" start="1784" end="1810" title="My Word, You Do Look Queer" label="My Word, You Do Look Queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271164" start="1888" end="1900" title="Queer street" label="Queer street"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="2257" end="2262" title="LGBT+" label="LGBT+"/>
<link wikidata="Q665624" start="2298" end="2313" title="Hiberno-English" label="Hiberno-English"/>
<link wikidata="Q335896" start="2702" end="2743" title="John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry" label="John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2775" end="2786" title="Oscar Wilde#Trials" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507106" start="3012" end="3027" title="George Chauncey" label="George Chauncey"/>
<link wikidata="Q853495" start="3237" end="3246" title="homophile" label="homophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="3308" end="3311" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="3398" end="3405" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="3434" end="3443" title="bisexuality" label="bisexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="3448" end="3459" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135211" start="3462" end="3482" title="gender nonconformity" label="gender nonconformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="3582" end="3589" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="3778" end="3782" title="Anal sex" label="anal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122" start="3786" end="3794" title="oral sex" label="oral sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537421" start="3987" end="3992" title="fairy (gay slang)" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831920" start="4006" end="4011" title="Trade (gay slang)" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="5484" end="5499" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q473652" start="5611" end="5621" title="effeminacy" label="effeminacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5731" end="5743" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="6892" end="6901" title="reappropriation" label="reclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687582" start="7049" end="7061" title="Queer Nation" label="Queer Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457810" start="7135" end="7160" title="Gay Pride Parade (New York City)" label="New York Gay Pride Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980333" start="7187" end="7203" title="Queers Read This" label="Queers Read This"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="7445" end="7465" title="liberal conservatism" label="liberal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q507809" start="7480" end="7495" title="Andrew Sullivan" label="Andrew Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="7523" end="7539" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="7758" end="7773" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="7783" end="7791" title="same-sex marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673498" start="7793" end="7811" title="LGBTQ people and military service" label="military inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974232" start="8062" end="8100" title="National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights" label="National Marches on Washington in 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443435" start="8105" end="8109" title="Second National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q343047" start="8152" end="8158" title="ACT UP" label="ACT UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="8209" end="8224" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="8828" end="8836" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498636" start="8903" end="8907" title="Deaf culture" label="Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404005" start="9072" end="9083" title="Questioning (sexuality and gender)" label="questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730454" start="9648" end="9661" title="Joshua Gamson" label="Joshua Gamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="10451" end="10459" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201670" start="10480" end="10493" title="Morgan Holmes" label="Morgan Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615390" start="10511" end="10527" title="Morgan Carpenter" label="Morgan Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730593" start="10532" end="10548" title="Katrina Karkazis" label="Katrina Karkazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19832440" start="10838" end="10850" title="Iain Morland" label="Iain Morland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107480995" start="11064" end="11074" title="Emi Koyama" label="Emi Koyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353191" start="12296" end="12317" title="queer heterosexuality" label="queer heterosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193258" start="12536" end="12547" title="cultural appropriation" label="appropriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154281" start="12988" end="12996" title="queering" label="queering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="13121" end="13133" title="Heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093205" start="13145" end="13154" title="cisgender" label="cisgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q98929208" start="13553" end="13566" title="Queer studies" label="Queer studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17897" start="13711" end="13723" title="LGBT history" label="LGBT history"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="13728" end="13743" title="literary theory" label="literary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="13818" end="13825" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="13827" end="13836" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="13838" end="13850" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="13852" end="13870" title="history of science" label="history of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="13872" end="13882" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="13884" end="13894" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="13896" end="13904" title="sexology" label="sexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="13906" end="13923" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="13925" end="13931" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071135" start="14059" end="14078" title="Irish Queer Archive" label="Irish Queer Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q658022" start="14146" end="14158" title="Queer theory" label="Queer theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="14173" end="14191" title="post-structuralist" label="post-structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="14192" end="14207" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35069" start="14279" end="14299" title="women&amp;#x27;s studies" label="women&amp;#x27;s studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563086" start="14338" end="14352" title="queer theology" label="queer theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271162" start="14357" end="14371" title="queer pedagogy" label="queer pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219368" start="14385" end="14398" title="Judith Butler" label="Judith Butler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14721" end="14733" title="Rod Ferguson" label="Rod Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949231" start="14735" end="14746" title="Jasbir Puar" label="Jasbir Puar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29131447" start="14748" end="14759" title="Lisa Duggan" label="Lisa Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14765" end="14778" title="Chong-suk Han" label="Chong-suk Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="14847" end="14857" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="14862" end="14875" title="imperialistic" label="imperialistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22809895" start="15081" end="15096" title="homonationalism" label="homonationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="15137" end="15160" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="15162" end="15173" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="15175" end="15190" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="15196" end="15206" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="15262" end="15282" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="15329" end="15338" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="15343" end="15351" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770369" start="15940" end="15955" title="homonormativity" label="homonormativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="15992" end="16004" title="Global North and Global South" label="global north"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="16040" end="16061" title="LGBT social movements" label="LGBT social movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271147" start="16129" end="16153" title="Queer Cyprus Association" label="Queer Cyprus Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271158" start="16172" end="16191" title="Queer Youth Network" label="Queer Youth Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="16213" end="16225" title="pride parade" label="pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271140" start="16235" end="16254" title="Queer Azaadi Mumbai" label="Queer Azaadi Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253806" start="16263" end="16287" title="Delhi Queer Pride Parade" label="Delhi Queer Pride Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265643" start="16436" end="16441" title="QNews" label="QNews"/>
<link wikidata="Q978812" start="16574" end="16591" title="queer nationalism" label="queer nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q930995" start="16700" end="16709" title="Queercore" label="Queercore"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="16824" end="16828" title="Punk subculture" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010007" start="16920" end="16935" title="queer migration" label="queer migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067327" start="17123" end="17158" title="Iranian Railroad for Queer Refugees" label="Iranian Railroad for Queer Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047152" start="17163" end="17179" title="Rainbow Railroad" label="Rainbow Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242811" start="17246" end="17256" title="pride flag" label="pride flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="17370" end="17399" title="gay" label="attraction to the same gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="17422" end="17432" title="non-binary gender" label="non-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="17465" end="17472" title="agender" label="agender"/>
<link wikidata="Q724351" start="17474" end="17481" title="asexuality" label="asexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="17487" end="17496" title="aromantic" label="aromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724311" start="17598" end="17614" title="New queer cinema" label="New queer cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811856" start="17729" end="17758" title="Melbourne Queer Film Festival" label="Melbourne Queer Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758653" start="17763" end="17787" title="Mardi Gras Film Festival" label="Mardi Gras Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935315" start="17828" end="17854" title="Mumbai Queer Film Festival" label="Mumbai Queer Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806729" start="17869" end="17894" title="Asian Queer Film Festival" label="Asian Queer Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493595" start="17909" end="17919" title="Queersicht" label="Queersicht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192728" start="17958" end="17972" title="Cui Zi&amp;#x27;en" label="Cui Zi&amp;#x27;en"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271142" start="18036" end="18047" title="Queer China, &amp;#x27;Comrade&amp;#x27; China" label="Queer China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111889" start="18251" end="18279" title="Outburst Queer Arts Festival" label="Outburst Queer Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271141" start="18305" end="18324" title="Queer Arts Festival" label="Queer Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975146" start="18344" end="18372" title="National Queer Arts Festival" label="National Queer Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23623" start="18473" end="18486" title="Queer as Folk (British TV series)" label="Queer as Folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23619" start="18519" end="18542" title="Queer as Folk (American TV series)" label="remake of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418248" start="18550" end="18559" title="Queer Eye (2003 TV series)" label="Queer Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321723" start="18589" end="18599" title="Queer Duck" label="Queer Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528642" start="18625" end="18634" title="Gay Shame" label="Gay Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q49809" start="18637" end="18649" title="Heterosexism" label="Heterosexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="18652" end="18662" title="Homophobia" label="Homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50807424" start="18665" end="18695" title="Queers (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Queers&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q589656" start="18698" end="18713" title="Sexual minority" label="Sexual minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640852" start="18716" end="18760" title="Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures" label="Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q55104469" start="18763" end="18789" title="Queerplatonic relationship" label="Queerplatonic relationship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66936" wikidata="Q17884" url="?curid=66936" title="LGBTQ">
<text>(also commonly seen as LGBT, LGBT+, LGBTQ+, LGBTQIA, and LGBTQIA+) is an initialism for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer or questioning. It is an umbrella term, originating in the United States, broadly referring to all sexualities, romantic orientations, sex characteristics, and gender identities that are not heterosexual, heteroromantic, cisgender, or endosex.

In the 1990s, gay, lesbian, and bisexual activists adopted the initialism &quot;LGB&quot;. Terminology eventually shifted to &quot;LGBT&quot;, as transgender people gained recognition. Around that time, some activists began to reclaim the term &quot;queer&quot;, seeing it as a more radical and inclusive umbrella term, though others reject it, due to its history as a pejorative. In recognition of this, the 2010s saw the adoption of &quot;LGBTQ&quot;, and other more inclusive variants.

Some versions of the term, such as &quot;LGBT+&quot; and &quot;LGBTQ+&quot; add a plus sign, to represent additional identities not captured within the initialism. Many further variants exist which add additional identities, such as &quot;LGBTQIA+&quot; (for intersex, asexual, aromantic, and agender) and 2SLGBTQ+ (for two-spirit), LGBTQQ (for queer and questioning), or which order the letters differently, as in GLBT and GLBTQ.
LGBTQ people collectively form the LGBTQ community, though not all LGBTQ people participate in or consider themselves part of a broader community. These labels are not universally agreed upon by everyone that they are intended to include. For example, some intersex people prefer to be included in this grouping, while others do not. Various alternative umbrella terms exist across various cultures, including &quot;queer&quot;; same gender loving (SGL); and Gender, Sexual and Romantic Minorities (GSRM).

== History of the term ==

The first widely used term, &quot;homosexual&quot;, now a term used primarily in scientific contexts, has at times carried negative connotations in the United States. &quot;Gay&quot; became a popular term in the 1970s.

As lesbians forged more public identities, the phrase &quot;gay and lesbian&quot; became more common. A dispute as to whether the primary focus of their political aims should be feminism or gay rights led to the dissolution of some lesbian organizations, including Daughters of Bilitis, which was founded by Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon, but disbanded in 1970 following disputes over which goal should take precedence. As equality was a priority for lesbian feminists, disparity of roles between men and women or butch and femme were viewed as patriarchal. Lesbian feminists eschewed gender role play that had been pervasive in bars as well as the perceived chauvinism of gay men; many lesbian feminists refused to work with gay men or take up their causes.

Lesbians who held the essentialist view that they had been born homosexual and used the descriptor &quot;lesbian&quot; to define sexual attraction often considered the separatist opinions of lesbian-feminists to be detrimental to the cause of gay rights. Bisexual and transgender people also sought recognition as legitimate categories within the larger minority community.

In the late 1970s and the early 1980s, after the elation of change following group action in the 1969 Stonewall riots in New York City, some gays and lesbians became less accepting of bisexual or transgender people. Critics said that transgender people were acting out stereotypes, and bisexuals were simply gay men or lesbian women who were afraid to come out and be honest about their identity. Each community has struggled to develop its own identity including whether, and how, to align with other gender and sexuality-based communities, at times excluding other subgroups; these conflicts continue to this day. LGBTQ activists and artists have created posters to raise consciousness about the issue since the movement began.
From about 1988, activists began to use the initialism &quot;LGBT&quot; in the United States. Not until the 1990s within the movement did gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people gain equal respect. This spurred some organizations to adopt new names, as the GLBT Historical Society did in 1999. Although the LGBT community has seen much controversy regarding universal acceptance of different member groups (bisexual and transgender individuals, in particular, have sometimes been marginalized by the larger LGBT community), the term &quot;LGBT&quot; has been a positive symbol of inclusion.

Beginning in the 1990s, the term &quot;queer&quot; was beginning to be adopted by the community to support gay-pride and reclaim the term from its earlier pejorative use as scholars have shown. The field of study of the LGBTQ community is called queer studies, in recognition of this reclamation and used as an umbrella term for the wider community as the academic response to the Stonewall riots. The initialism LGBT eventually evolved to LGBTQ in recognition of the community&#x27;s reclamation of the term.

In 2016, GLAAD&#x27;s Media Reference Guide states that &quot;LGBTQ&quot; is the preferred initialism, being more inclusive of younger members of the communities who embrace &quot;queer&quot; as a self-descriptor. Some people consider &quot;queer&quot; to be a derogatory term originating in hate speech and reject it, especially among older members of the community.

== Variants ==

Many variants of the term &quot;LGBT&quot; exist, such as the more inclusive , and variations that change the order of the letters or include additional letters. At least some of the components of sexuality (regarding hetero, bi, straight), and also gender are stated to be on different spectrums of sexuality. Other common variants also exist, such as LGBTQIA, with the &quot;I&quot; standing for intersex and the &quot;A&quot; standing for asexual, aromantic, or agender, and LGBTQIA+, where &quot;the &#x27;+&#x27; represents those who are part of the community, but for whom LGBTQ does not accurately capture or reflect their identity&quot;. Longer initialisms have been criticized as confusing or unwieldy, sometimes being referred to as &quot;alphabet soup&quot;, and mocked with labels such as , , and . The implication that the initialism refers to a single community is also controversial.

Although identical in meaning, &quot;LGBT&quot; may have a more feminist connotation than &#x27; as it places the &quot;L&quot; (for &quot;lesbian&quot;) first. &quot;LGBT&quot; may also include additional Qs for &quot;queer&quot; or &quot;questioning&quot; (sometimes abbreviated with a question mark and sometimes used to mean anybody not literally L, G, B or T) producing the variants &quot;LGBTQ&quot; and &#x27;. The order of the letters has not been standardized; in addition to the variations between the positions of the initial &quot;L&quot; or &quot;G&quot;, the mentioned, less common letters, if used, may appear in almost any order. In Hebrew and Peninsular Spanish, &quot;LGTB&quot; () is used, that is, reversing the letters &quot;B&quot; and &quot;T&quot;.
Variant terms do not typically represent political differences within the community, but arise simply from the preferences of individuals and groups.

The terms &quot;pansexual&quot;, &quot;omnisexual&quot;, &quot;fluid&quot; and &quot;queer-identified&quot; are regarded as falling under the umbrella term &quot;bisexual&quot; (and therefore are considered a part of the bisexual community). Some use &quot;LGBT+&quot; to mean &quot;LGBT and related communities&quot;. Other variants may have a &quot;U&quot; for &quot;unsure&quot;; a &quot;C&quot; for &quot;curious&quot;; another &quot;T&quot; for &quot;transvestite&quot;; a &quot;TS&quot;, &quot;2S&quot;, or &quot;2&quot; for &quot;two-spirit&quot; persons; or an &quot;SA&quot; for &quot;straight allies&quot;. The inclusion of straight allies in the LGBT initialism has proven controversial, as many straight allies have been accused of using LGBT advocacy to gain popularity and status in recent years, and various LGBT activists have criticised the heteronormative worldview of certain straight allies. Some may also add a &quot;P&quot; for &quot;polyamorous&quot; or &quot;pangender&quot;, an &quot;H&quot; for &quot;HIV-affected&quot;, or an &quot;O&quot; for &quot;other&quot;. The initialism &quot;&quot; has seen use in India to encompass the hijra third gender identity and the related subculture.

Adding the term &quot;allies&quot; to the initialism has sparked controversy, with some seeing the inclusion of ally in place of asexual/aromantic/agender as a form of LGBT erasure. There is also the acronym &#x27; (queer and questioning, unsure, intersex, lesbian, transgender and two-spirit, bisexual, asexual and aromantic, and gay and genderqueer). Similarly &#x27; stands for &quot;lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex, queer/questioning, asexual and many other terms (such as non-binary and pansexual)&quot;.

In Canada, the community is sometimes identified as &quot;LGBTQ2&quot; (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and two spirit). Depending on which organization is using the abbreviation, the choice of initialism changes. Businesses and the CBC often simply employ &quot;LGBT&quot; as a proxy for any longer abbreviation, private activist groups often employ &quot;LGBTQ+&quot;, whereas public health providers favour the more inclusive &quot;LGBT2Q+&quot; to accommodate twin spirited indigenous peoples. For a time, the Pride Toronto organization used the much lengthier initialism &quot;&quot;, but appears to have dropped this in favour of simpler wording. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was also criticized for using the &quot;2SLGBTQQIA+&quot; initialism. As of July 2023, the Government of Canada&#x27;s official term is &quot;2SLGBTQI+&quot;. Trudeau&#x27;s new initialism was criticized by some social media users.

=== Transgender inclusion ===

The term &quot;trans*&quot; has been adopted by some groups as a more inclusive alternative to &quot;transgender&quot;, where &quot;trans&quot; (without the asterisk) has been used to describe trans men and trans women, while &quot;trans*&quot; covers all non-cisgender (genderqueer) identities, including transgender, transsexual, transvestite, genderqueer, genderfluid, non-binary, genderfuck, genderless, agender, non-gendered, third gender, two-spirit, bigender, and trans man and trans woman. Likewise, the term &quot;transsexual&quot; commonly falls under the umbrella term &quot;transgender&quot;, but some transsexual people object to this.

=== Intersex inclusion ===

Those who add intersex people to LGBT groups or organizations may use the extended initialism , or .

The relationship of intersex to lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans, and queer communities is complex, but intersex people are often added to the LGBT category to create an LGBTI community. Some intersex people prefer the initialism &quot;LGBTI&quot;, while others would rather that they not be included as part of the term. Emi Koyama describes how inclusion of intersex in &quot;LGBTI&quot; can fail to address intersex-specific human rights issues, including creating false impressions &quot;that intersex people&#x27;s rights are protected&quot; by laws protecting LGBT people, and failing to acknowledge that many intersex people are not LGBT. Organisation Intersex International Australia states that some intersex individuals are same-sex attracted, and some are heterosexual, but &quot;LGBTI activism has fought for the rights of people who fall outside of expected binary sex and gender norms&quot;. Julius Kaggwa of SIPD Uganda has written that, while the gay community &quot;offers us a place of relative safety, it is also oblivious to our specific needs&quot;.

Numerous studies have shown higher rates of same-sex attraction in intersex people, with a recent Australian study of people born with atypical sex characteristics finding that 52% of respondents were non-heterosexual; thus, research on intersex subjects has been used to explore means of preventing homosexuality. As an experience of being born with sex characteristics that do not fit social norms, intersex can be distinguished from transgender, while some intersex people are both intersex and transgender.

=== Asexual, aromantic and agender inclusion ===
In the early 2010s, asexuality and aromanticism started gaining wider recognition. Around 2015, they were included in the expanded initialism LGBTQIA, with the A standing for &quot;asexual&quot;, &quot;aromantic&quot;, commonly grouped together as &quot;&quot; along with &quot;agender&quot;.

Asexual individuals experience minimal to no sexual attraction to others; asexuality may be considered a sexual orientation or a lack of a sexual orientation. Aromantic individuals lack romantic attraction to others, yet they can still forge profound emotional connections and strong bonds with people without the romantic component. Agender individuals either have no gender identity or possess a neutral or genderless gender identity.

Some people have mistakenly claimed the A stands for ally, but allies are not a marginalized group and mentions of A for ally have regularly sparked controversy as a form of LGBT erasure.

== Criticism of the term ==
The initialisms &quot;LGBT&quot; or &quot;GLBT&quot; are not agreed to by everyone that they encompass. For example, some argue that transgender and transsexual causes are not the same as that of lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) people. This argument centers on the idea that being transgender or transsexual has to do more with gender identity, or a person&#x27;s understanding of being or not being a man or a woman irrespective of their sexual orientation. LGB issues can be seen as a matter of sexual orientation or attraction. These distinctions have been made in the context of political action in which LGB goals, such as same-sex marriage legislation and human rights work (which may not include transgender and intersex people), may be perceived to differ from transgender and transsexual goals.

A belief in &quot;lesbian and gay separatism&quot; (not to be confused with the related &quot;lesbian separatism&quot;) holds that lesbians and gay men form (or should form) a community distinct and separate from other groups normally included in the LGBTQ sphere.&lt;ref name=&quot;Gays/Justice&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; While not always appearing in sufficient numbers or organization to be called a movement, separatists are a significant, vocal, and active element within many parts of the LGBT community. In some cases separatists will deny the existence or right to equality of bisexual orientations and of transsexuality, sometimes leading to public biphobia and transphobia. In contrasts to separatists, Peter Tatchell of the LGBT human rights group OutRage! argues that to separate the transgender movement from the LGB would be &quot;political madness&quot;, stating that:

Queers are, like transgender people, gender deviant. We don&#x27;t conform to traditional heterosexist assumptions of male and female behaviour, in that we have sexual and emotional relationships with the same sex. We should celebrate our discordance with mainstream straight norms.

The portrayal of an all-encompassing &quot;LGBT community&quot; or &quot;LGB community&quot; is also disliked by some lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people. Some do not subscribe to or approve of the political and social solidarity, and visibility and human rights campaigning that normally goes with it, including LGBT pride marches and events. Some of them believe that grouping together people with non-heterosexual orientations perpetuates the myth that being gay/lesbian/bi/asexual/pansexual/etc. makes a person deficiently different from other people. These people are often less visible compared to more mainstream gay or LGBT activists. Since this faction is difficult to distinguish from the heterosexual majority, it is common for people to assume all LGBT people support LGBT liberation and the visibility of LGBT people in society, including the right to live one&#x27;s life differently from the majority. In the 1996 book &quot;Anti-Gay&quot;, a collection of essays edited by Mark Simpson, the concept of a &#x27;one-size-fits-all&#x27; identity based on LGBT stereotypes is criticized for suppressing the individuality of LGBT people.

Writing in the BBC News Magazine in 2014, Julie Bindel questions whether the various gender groupings now, &quot;bracketed together[,] ... share the same issues, values and goals?&quot; Bindel refers to a number of possible new initialisms for differing combinations and concludes that it may be time for the alliances to either be reformed or go their &quot;separate ways&quot;. In 2015, the slogan &quot;Drop the T&quot; was coined to encourage LGBT organizations to stop support of transgender people as they say that sexual orientation, LGB, does not share similarity with gender identity, the T. The campaign has been condemned by many LGBT groups as transphobic.

== Alternative terms ==
=== Queer ===
Many have expressed desire for an umbrella term to replace existing initialisms. &quot;Queer&quot; gained popularity as an umbrella-term for sexual and gender minorities in the 21st century. The term remains controversial, particularly among older LGBT people, who perceive it as offensive due to its historical usage as a slur, as well as those who wish to dissociate themselves from queer radicalism, and those who see it as amorphous and trendy. Some younger people feel &quot;queer&quot; is a more politically charged, more powerful term than &quot;LGBT&quot;. In a 2018 U.S. study, about 1 in 5 LGBTQ people identified as &quot;queer&quot;.

=== SGM/GSM/GSRM ===

SGM, or GSM, an abbreviation for sexual and gender minorities, has gained particular currency in government, academia, and medicine. GSRM is also used to include romantic minorities such as aromanticism.

In New Zealand, New Zealand Human Rights Commission uses &quot;Rights of Sexual and Gender Minorities&quot; to discuss LGBT rights.

In India, the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court of India, when decriminalizing homosexuality in the case of &quot;Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India&quot; &quot;(2018)&quot;&quot;,&quot; said:

In the US, the term &quot;Sexual and Gender Minority&quot; has been adopted by the National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services and the UCLA Williams Institute, which studies SGM law and policy. Duke University and the University of California San Francisco both have prominent sexual and gender minority health programs. An NIH paper recommends the term &quot;SGM&quot; because it is inclusive of &quot;those who may not self-identify as LGBT ... or those who have a specific medical condition affecting reproductive development&quot;. A publication from the White House Office of Management and Budget states, &quot;We believe that SGM is more inclusive, because it includes persons not specifically referenced by the identities listed in LGBT.&quot;

A UK government paper favors SGM because initials like LGBTIQ+ stand for terms that, especially outside the Global North, are &quot;not necessarily inclusive of local understandings and terms used to describe sexual and gender minorities&quot;. An example of usage outside the Global North is the Constitution of Nepal, which identifies &quot;gender and sexual minorities&quot; as a protected class.

=== Further umbrella terms ===

In Canada especially, the term &quot;&quot; is seen, with the first two characters standing for two-spirit; the whole term stands for two-spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, queer and questioning, and is intended as a term encompassing all sexual- and gender-minorities. For some indigenous people, &quot;two-spirit&quot; invokes a combination of identities, including sexual, gender, cultural, and spiritual.

Some people advocate the term &quot;minority sexual and gender identities&quot; (MSGI, coined in 2000) for the purpose of explicitly including all people who are not cisgender and heterosexual or &quot;gender, sexual, and romantic minorities&quot; (GSRM), which is more explicitly inclusive of minority romantic orientations, but those have not been widely adopted either. Other rare umbrella terms are Gender and Sexual Diversities (GSD), MOGII (Marginalized Orientations, Gender Identities, and Intersex) and MOGAI (Marginalized Orientations, Gender Alignments and Intersex).

&quot;SGL&quot; (same gender loving) is sometimes favored among gay male African Americans as a way of distinguishing themselves from what they regard as white-dominated LGBT communities.

=== Clinical ===

In public health settings, &quot;MSM&quot; (&quot;men who have sex with men&quot;) is clinically used to describe men who have sex with other men without referring to their sexual orientation, with &quot;WSW&quot; (&quot;women who have sex with women&quot;) also used as an analogous term.

=== MVPFAFF ===

MVPFAFF is an abbreviation for , Vakasalewa, , Fa&#x27;afafine, , Fakaleitī (Leiti), and Fakafifine. This term was developed by Phylesha Brown-Acton in 2010 at the Asia Pacific Games Human Rights Conference. This refers to those in the rainbow Pacific Islander community, who may or may not identify with the LGBT initialism.

== See also ==

* LGBTQ music
* Androphilia and gynephilia
* Gender and sexual diversity
* LGBTQ symbols
* – the Māori language equivalent of LGBT

== References ==
== External links ==

* Archives of glbtq.com, the GLBTQ encyclopedia
* Directory of U.S. and international LGBT Community Centers (archived 10 October 2008)
* American Psychological Association&#x27;s Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Concerns Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="73" end="83" title="Acronym" label="initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="88" end="95" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="97" end="100" title="Gay men" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="102" end="110" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="112" end="123" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="128" end="133" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404005" start="137" end="148" title="Questioning (sexuality and gender)" label="questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="159" end="172" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="193" end="206" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="233" end="244" title="Sexual orientation" label="sexualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688879" start="246" end="266" title="romantic orientation" label="romantic orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517875" start="269" end="288" title="sex characteristics" label="sex characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="294" end="311" title="gender identities" label="gender identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q339014" start="321" end="337" title="Non-heterosexual" label="not heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688879" start="339" end="353" title="heteroromantic" label="heteroromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093205" start="355" end="364" title="cisgender" label="cisgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610856" start="369" end="376" title="endosex" label="endosex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="606" end="613" title="Reappropriation" label="reclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="629" end="634" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="748" end="758" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q747083" start="951" end="960" title="plus sign" label="plus sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="1128" end="1136" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q724351" start="1138" end="1145" title="Asexuality" label="asexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="1147" end="1156" title="Aromanticism" label="aromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="1162" end="1169" title="agender" label="agender"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="1189" end="1199" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="1202" end="1208" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="1335" end="1350" title="LGBTQ community" label="LGBTQ community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="1557" end="1565" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409219" start="1729" end="1747" title="same gender loving" label="same gender loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="1759" end="1797" title="Gender, Sexual and Romantic Minorities" label="Gender, Sexual and Romantic Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="1868" end="1878" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="2007" end="2010" title="Gay" label="Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="2232" end="2240" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="2244" end="2254" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145872" start="2319" end="2339" title="Daughters of Bilitis" label="Daughters of Bilitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056017" start="2362" end="2389" title="Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon" label="Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18299" start="2503" end="2520" title="lesbian feminism" label="lesbian feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q852338" start="2566" end="2581" title="butch and femme" label="butch and femme"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="2597" end="2608" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="2637" end="2648" title="gender role" label="gender role"/>
<link wikidata="Q226418" start="2711" end="2721" title="chauvinism" label="chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="2725" end="2732" title="gay men" label="gay men"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="2834" end="2846" title="essentialism" label="essentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q600591" start="2980" end="2990" title="Feminist separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="3289" end="3304" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3308" end="3321" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="3371" end="3379" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="3383" end="3394" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="3456" end="3467" title="stereotypes" label="stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="3539" end="3547" title="coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="3689" end="3695" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513611" start="4181" end="4204" title="GLBT Historical Society" label="GLBT Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="4404" end="4416" title="Social exclusion" label="marginalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="4504" end="4513" title="Social inclusion" label="inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="4555" end="4560" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="4637" end="4644" title="Reappropriation" label="reclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q98929208" start="4762" end="4775" title="queer studies" label="queer studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="5036" end="5041" title="GLAAD" label="GLAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="5193" end="5200" title="Reappropriation" label="embrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="5207" end="5212" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="5319" end="5330" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="5662" end="5668" title="gender identity" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="5699" end="5721" title="human sexuality spectrum" label="spectrums of sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="5810" end="5818" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q724351" start="5854" end="5861" title="Asexuality" label="asexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="5863" end="5872" title="aromantic" label="aromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="5877" end="5884" title="agender" label="agender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491825" start="6161" end="6174" title="alphabet soup (linguistics)" label="alphabet soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="6376" end="6384" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="6531" end="6536" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404005" start="6552" end="6563" title="questioning (sexuality and gender)" label="questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="6961" end="6967" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162990" start="6972" end="6990" title="Peninsular Spanish" label="Peninsular Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q271534" start="7252" end="7261" title="pansexual" label="pansexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810527" start="7299" end="7304" title="sexual fluidity" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q351403" start="7457" end="7475" title="bisexual community" label="bisexual community"/>
<link wikidata="Q486680" start="7692" end="7704" title="transvestism" label="transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="7773" end="7783" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q432050" start="7830" end="7845" title="straight ally" label="straight allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q272026" start="8192" end="8203" title="polyamorous" label="polyamorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="8219" end="8228" title="pangender" label="pangender"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="8263" end="8275" title="HIV" label="HIV-affected"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8370" end="8375" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q660882" start="8393" end="8398" title="Hijra (South Asia)" label="hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48279" start="8399" end="8411" title="third gender" label="third gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q56282687" start="8618" end="8630" title="LGBT erasure" label="LGBT erasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="8650" end="8657" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8978" end="8984" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="9219" end="9222" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="9464" end="9482" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478318" start="9500" end="9513" title="Pride Toronto" label="Pride Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="9654" end="9668" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449503" start="10126" end="10135" title="trans men" label="trans men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="10140" end="10151" title="trans women" label="trans women"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="10204" end="10215" title="genderqueer" label="genderqueer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18116794" start="10292" end="10303" title="genderfluid" label="genderfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="10305" end="10315" title="Non-binary gender" label="non-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261572" start="10317" end="10327" title="genderfuck" label="genderfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="10390" end="10398" title="bigender" label="bigender"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="10456" end="10467" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="10625" end="10633" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="10733" end="10741" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="10905" end="10913" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q107480995" start="11035" end="11045" title="Emi Koyama" label="Emi Koyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="11329" end="11337" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960748" start="11359" end="11404" title="Organisation Intersex International Australia" label="Organisation Intersex International Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684295" start="11619" end="11632" title="Julius Kaggwa" label="Julius Kaggwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="11641" end="11647" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517875" start="11929" end="11948" title="Sexual characteristics" label="sex characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q724351" start="12366" end="12376" title="asexuality" label="asexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="12381" end="12393" title="aromanticism" label="aromanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="12624" end="12631" title="agender" label="agender"/>
<link wikidata="Q56282687" start="13252" end="13264" title="LGBT erasure" label="LGBT erasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="13428" end="13439" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="13444" end="13455" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="13793" end="13811" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="13924" end="13941" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="13958" end="13970" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q600591" start="14195" end="14213" title="lesbian separatism" label="lesbian separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="14499" end="14507" title="social movement" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q747592" start="14754" end="14762" title="biphobia" label="biphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="14767" end="14778" title="transphobia" label="transphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343213" start="14809" end="14823" title="Peter Tatchell" label="Peter Tatchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q649780" start="14855" end="14863" title="OutRage!" label="OutRage!"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="15474" end="15550" title="LGBT rights" label="political and social solidarity, and visibility and human rights campaigning"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="15589" end="15599" title="LGBT pride" label="LGBT pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349206" start="16265" end="16277" title="Mark Simpson (journalist)" label="Mark Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q51424" start="16344" end="16360" title="LGBT stereotypes" label="LGBT stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="16441" end="16458" title="BBC News Magazine" label="BBC News Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308046" start="16468" end="16480" title="Julie Bindel" label="Julie Bindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458277" start="16873" end="16891" title="LGBT rights organization" label="LGBT organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="16911" end="16922" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810566" start="17067" end="17078" title="List of LGBT-related organizations and conferences" label="LGBT groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="17082" end="17093" title="transphobia" label="transphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="17168" end="17181" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="17221" end="17226" title="Queer" label="Queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="17457" end="17461" title="Pejorative" label="slur"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706237" start="17519" end="17535" title="queer radicalism" label="queer radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q589656" start="17836" end="17842" title="Sexual minority" label="sexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="17847" end="17864" title="gender minority" label="gender minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688879" start="17965" end="17984" title="romantic minorities" label="romantic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="17993" end="18005" title="aromanticism" label="aromanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937427" start="18024" end="18059" title="Human Rights Commission (New Zealand)" label="New Zealand Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951114" start="18155" end="18175" title="Constitution bench (India)" label="Constitutional Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="18183" end="18205" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276800" start="18257" end="18324" title="Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India" label="&amp;quot;Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India&amp;quot; &amp;quot;(2018)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="18428" end="18457" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="18463" end="18507" title="Centers for Medicare &amp;amp; Medicaid Services" label="Centers for Medicare &amp;amp; Medicaid Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q20440764" start="18521" end="18539" title="Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy" label="Williams Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="18575" end="18590" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061104" start="18599" end="18637" title="University of California, San Francisco" label="University of California San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="18940" end="18983" title="White House Office of Management and Budget" label="White House Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="19242" end="19254" title="Global North" label="Global North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="19431" end="19452" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="19663" end="19673" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="19850" end="19867" title="First Nations in Canada" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093205" start="20147" end="20156" title="cisgender" label="cisgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="20161" end="20173" title="heterosexual" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688879" start="20275" end="20305" title="Romantic orientation" label="minority romantic orientations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110203" start="20384" end="20413" title="Gender and Sexual Diversity" label="Gender and Sexual Diversities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409219" start="20577" end="20595" title="same gender loving" label="same gender loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="20633" end="20649" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="20714" end="20719" title="white people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q853451" start="20817" end="20842" title="men who have sex with men" label="men who have sex with men"/>
<link wikidata="Q210604" start="20988" end="21017" title="women who have sex with women" label="women who have sex with women"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266757" start="21108" end="21118" title="Vakasalewalewa" label="Vakasalewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399232" start="21122" end="21137" title="Fa&amp;#x27;afafine" label="Fa&amp;#x27;afafine"/>
<link wikidata="Q350374" start="21141" end="21150" title="Fakaleitī" label="Fakaleitī"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427210" start="21164" end="21174" title="Fakafifine" label="Fakafifine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107302788" start="21203" end="21223" title="Phylesha Brown-Acton" label="Phylesha Brown-Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="21319" end="21335" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457912" start="21420" end="21431" title="LGBTQ music" label="LGBTQ music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069444" start="21434" end="21460" title="Androphilia and gynephilia" label="Androphilia and gynephilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110203" start="21463" end="21490" title="Gender and sexual diversity" label="Gender and sexual diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51399" start="21493" end="21506" title="LGBTQ symbols" label="LGBTQ symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="21515" end="21529" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063203" start="21603" end="21612" title="glbtq.com" label="glbtq.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66937" wikidata="Q1093205" url="?curid=66937" title="Cisgender">
<text>The word cisgender (often shortened to cis; sometimes cissexual) describes a person whose gender identity corresponds to their sex assigned at birth, i.e., someone who is not &quot;transgender&quot;. The prefix &quot;&quot; is Latin and means &quot;on this side of&quot;. The term &quot;cisgender&quot; was coined in 1994 as an antonym to &quot;transgender&quot;, and entered into dictionaries starting in 2015 as a result of changes in social discourse about gender. 

Related concepts are cisnormativity (the presumption that cisgender identity is preferred or normal) and cissexism (bias or prejudice favoring cisgender people).

== Etymology ==

The term &quot;cisgender&quot; has its origin in the Latin-derived prefix &quot;&quot;, meaning &#x27;on this side of&#x27;, which is the opposite of &quot;&quot;, meaning &#x27;across from&#x27; or &#x27;on the other side of&#x27;. This usage can be seen in the &quot;cis&quot;–&quot;trans&quot; distinction in chemistry, the cis and trans sides of the Golgi apparatus in cellular biology, the ancient Roman term &quot;Cisalpine Gaul&quot; (i.e. &#x27;Gaul on this side of the Alps&#x27;), and Cisjordan (as distinguished from Transjordan). In &quot;cisgender&quot;, &quot;cis-&quot; describes the alignment of gender identity with assigned sex.

== History and usage of the term ==

=== Coinage ===

==== German ====
Marquis Bey states that &quot;proto-cisgender discourse&quot; arose in German in 1914, when Ernst Burchard introduced the cis/trans distinction to sexology by contrasting &quot;&quot;cisvestitismus&quot;, or a type of inclination to wear gender-conforming clothing, [...] with &quot;transvestitismus&quot;, or cross-dressing.&quot; German sexologist Volkmar Sigusch used the term &quot;cissexual&quot; ( in German) in his two-part 1991 article &quot;&quot; (&quot;Transsexuals and our nosomorphic view&quot;); in 1998, he said he had coined the term there.

==== English ====
The term &quot;cisgender&quot; was coined in English in 1994 in a Usenet newsgroup about transgender topics as Dana Defosse, then a graduate student, sought a way to refer to non-transgender people that avoided marginalizing transgender people or implying that transgender people were an other. John Hollister used it that same year. In 1995, Carl Buijs used it, apparently coining it independently.

=== Academic use ===

Medical academics use the term and have recognized its importance in transgender studies since the 1990s. After the terms &quot;cisgender&quot; and &quot;cissexual&quot; were used in a 2006 article in the &quot;Journal of Lesbian Studies&quot; and Serano&#x27;s 2007 book &quot;Whipping Girl&quot;, the former gained further popularity among English-speaking activists and scholars. &quot;Cisgender&quot; was added to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; in 2015, defined as &quot;designating a person whose sense of personal identity corresponds to the sex and gender assigned to him or her at birth (in contrast with transgender)&quot;. &quot;Perspectives on History&quot; states that since this inclusion, the term has increasingly become common usage.

=== Social media ===

In February 2014, Facebook began offering &quot;custom&quot; gender options, allowing users to identify with one or more gender-related terms from a selected list, including &quot;cis&quot;, &quot;cisgender&quot;, and others.

== Definitions ==

Sociologists Kristen Schilt and Laurel Westbrook define &quot;cisgender&quot; as a label for &quot;individuals who have a match between the gender they were assigned at birth, their bodies, and their personal identity&quot;. A number of derivatives of the terms &quot;cisgender&quot; and &quot;cissexual&quot; include &quot;cis male&quot; for &quot;male assigned male at birth&quot;, &quot;cis female&quot; for &quot;female assigned female at birth&quot;, analogously &quot;cis man&quot; and &quot;cis woman&quot;, and &quot;cissexism&quot; and &quot;cissexual assumption&quot; or &quot;cisnormativity&quot; (akin to &quot;heteronormativity&quot;). EliR. Green wrote in 2006, &quot;cisgendered is used [instead of the more popular gender normative] to refer to people who do not identify with a gender diverse experience, without enforcing existence of a normative gender expression&quot;.

Others have similarly argued that using terms such as &quot;man&quot; or &quot;woman&quot; to mean &quot;cis man&quot; or &quot;cis woman&quot; reinforced cisnormativity, and that instead using the prefix &quot;cis&quot; similarly to &quot;trans&quot; would counteract the cisnormative connotations within language.

Julia Serano has defined &quot;cissexual&quot; as &quot;people who are not transsexual and who have only ever experienced their mental and physical sexes as being aligned&quot;, while &quot;cisgender&quot; is a slightly narrower term for those who do not identify as transgender (a larger cultural category than the more clinical &quot;transsexual&quot;). For Jessica Cadwallader, &quot;cissexual&quot; is &quot;a way of drawing attention to the unmarked norm, against which trans is identified, in which a person feels that their gender identity matches their body/sex&quot;. 

Serano also uses the related term &quot;cissexism&quot;, &quot;which is the belief that transsexuals&#x27; identified genders are inferior to, or less authentic than, those of cissexuals&quot;. In 2010, the term &quot;cisgender privilege&quot; appeared in academic literature, defined as the &quot;set of unearned advantages that individuals who identify as the gender they were assigned at birth accrue solely due to having a cisgender identity&quot;.

== Critiques ==

While intended to be a positive descriptor to distinguish between trans and non-trans identity, the term has been met with criticisms in more recent years. 

===From feminism and gender studies ===
Krista Scott-Dixon wrote in 2009 that she preferred &quot;the term &quot;non-trans&quot; to other options such as &quot;cissexual&quot;/&quot;cisgendered&quot;&quot;, saying &quot;non-trans&quot; is clearer to average people.

Women&#x27;s and gender studies scholar Mimi Marinucci writes that some consider the &#x27;cisgender–transgender&#x27; binary distinction to be as dangerous or self-defeating as the masculine–feminine gender binary because it lumps people who identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) together (over-simplistically, in her view) with a heteronormative class of people in an opposition with transgender people; she says that characterizing LGB individuals together with heterosexual, non-trans people may problematically suggest that LGB individuals, unlike transgender individuals, &quot;experience no mismatch between their own gender identity and gender expression and cultural expectations regarding gender identity and expression&quot;.

Gender studies professor Chris Freeman criticizes the term, describing it as &quot;clunky, unhelpful and maybe even regressive&quot; and saying it &quot;createsor re-createsa gender binary&quot;.

=== From intersex organizations ===
Intersex people are born with atypical physical sex characteristics that can complicate initial sex assignment and lead to involuntary or coercive medical treatment. The term cisgender &quot;can get confusing&quot; in relation to people with intersex conditions, although some intersex people use the term according to the Interact Advocates for Intersex Youth Inter/Act project. Hida Viloria of Intersex Campaign for Equality notes that, as a person born with an intersex body who has a non-binary sense of gender identity that &quot;matches&quot; their body, they are both cisgender and gender non-conforming, presumably opposites according to &quot;cisgender&quot; definition, and that this evidences the term&#x27;s basis on a binary sex model that does not account for intersex people&#x27;s existence. Viloria also critiques the fact that the term &quot;sex assigned at birth&quot; is used in one of &quot;cisgender&quot; definitions without noting that babies are assigned male or female regardless of intersex status in most of the world, stating that doing so obfuscates the birth of intersex babies and frames gender identity within a binary male/female sex model that fails to account for both the existence of natally congruent gender non-conforming gender identities, and gender-based discrimination against intersex people based on natal sex characteristics rather than on gender identity or expression, such as &quot;normalizing&quot; infant genital surgeries.

=== From Elon Musk ===

In June 2023, Elon Musk, owner of social network Twitter (now X), stated that use of the words &quot;cis&quot; and &quot;cisgender&quot; on the platform as &quot;targeted harassment&quot; would constitute violations of its hateful content policy, as he considered them to be slurs. The changes came following an interaction between Musk and a gender-critical commentator, who alleged that pro-trans advocates were using forms of the word (such as &quot;cissy&quot;, a variant of the pejorative &quot;sissy&quot;) to insult him following a post in which he rejected the term. Musk has since described cisgender as being &quot;heterophobic&quot; and a &quot;heterosexual slur&quot;. The change came amid the loosening of other rules protecting LGBT users under his ownership, including removing rules prohibiting deadnaming.

=== Responses to critiques ===

After the Oxford Dictionary added &quot;cisgender&quot; as a word in 2015, &quot;The Advocate&quot; wrote that &quot;even among LGBT people, the word is hotly debated&quot;; transgender veteran Brynn Tannehill argued that it was &quot;often used in a negative way&quot; by trans people to express &quot;a certain level of contempt&quot; for people they think should not partake in discussions on trans issues. Transgender scholar K.J. Rawson, by contrast, stated that &quot;cis&quot; was &quot;not meant to be dismissive, but rather descriptive&quot;, and was no different than using the word &quot;straight&quot; to describe people that are heterosexual. Rawson explained that people who are straight &quot;don&#x27;t typically experience their heterosexuality as an identity, many don&#x27;t identify as heterosexual—they don&#x27;t need to, because culture has already done that for them&quot;, and that &quot;similarly, cisgender people don&#x27;t generally identify as cisgender because societal expectations already presume that they are.&quot;

In a 2023 essay, Defosse said she did not intend the word as an insult. She says she does not believe the word &quot;cisgender&quot; caused problems, and that &quot;it only revealed them.&quot;

== See also ==
* Endosex
* Feminist views on transgender topics
* Gender taxonomy
* List of transgender-related topics
* Womyn-born womyn

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Gorton R., Buth J., and Spade D. &quot;Medical Therapy and Health Maintenance for Transgender Men: A Guide for Health Care Providers &quot;. Lyon-Martin Women&#x27;s Health Services. San Francisco, CA. 2005. 

== External links ==
* Gender and Sexuality Center FAQ, University of Texas at Austin Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
* The Queer Community Has to Stop Being Transphobic: Realizing My Cisgender Privilege, Todd Clayton, &quot;The Huffington Post&quot;, February 27, 2013
* Researching Early Uses of “Cisgender”, Avery Dame, American Historical Association Today, May 22, 2017</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="90" end="105" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458483" start="127" end="148" title="sex assigned at birth" label="sex assigned at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="181" end="192" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q131779" start="328" end="335" title="antonym" label="antonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="460" end="466" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q123689471" start="491" end="505" title="cisnormativity" label="cisnormativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="563" end="569" title="Social norm" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233437" start="575" end="584" title="cissexism" label="cissexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="703" end="708" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q283611" start="913" end="958" title="cis–trans isomerism" label="&amp;quot;cis&amp;quot;–&amp;quot;trans&amp;quot; distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="1004" end="1019" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="1070" end="1084" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="1103" end="1107" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="1128" end="1132" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="1145" end="1154" title="Cisjordan" label="Cisjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="1178" end="1189" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833928" start="1461" end="1475" title="Ernst Burchard" label="Ernst Burchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="1516" end="1524" title="sexology" label="sexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="1708" end="1718" title="sexology" label="sexologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q109032" start="1719" end="1734" title="Volkmar Sigusch" label="Volkmar Sigusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="2011" end="2017" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="2233" end="2238" title="Other (philosophy)" label="other"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993732" start="2646" end="2659" title="Whipping Girl" label="Whipping Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2796" end="2821" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q464915" start="3018" end="3041" title="Perspectives on History" label="Perspectives on History"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="3170" end="3178" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233437" start="3923" end="3932" title="cissexism" label="cissexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123689471" start="3949" end="3969" title="cissexual assumption" label="cissexual assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="4021" end="4038" title="heteronormativity" label="heteronormativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q123689471" start="4444" end="4458" title="cisnormativity" label="cisnormativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765045" start="4606" end="4618" title="Julia Serano" label="Julia Serano"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="4681" end="4692" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897166" start="5052" end="5060" title="unmarked" label="unmarked"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="5081" end="5086" title="transgender" label="trans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="5137" end="5152" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246302" start="5413" end="5422" title="social privilege" label="privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530970" start="6263" end="6295" title="gender binary" label="masculine–feminine gender binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="6419" end="6434" title="heteronormative" label="heteronormative"/>
<link wikidata="Q15404978" start="6732" end="6749" title="gender expression" label="gender expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="7058" end="7066" title="Intersex" label="Intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686894" start="7381" end="7418" title="Interact Advocates for Intersex Youth" label="Interact Advocates for Intersex Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201693" start="7438" end="7450" title="Hida Viloria" label="Hida Viloria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008801" start="7454" end="7484" title="Intersex Campaign for Equality" label="Intersex Campaign for Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004012" start="8508" end="8532" title="Intersex medical interventions" label="infant genital surgeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="8573" end="8582" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="8608" end="8615" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="8834" end="8839" title="Pejorative" label="slurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15951126" start="9059" end="9064" title="sissy" label="sissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="9184" end="9196" title="heterophobic" label="heterophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116007306" start="9312" end="9331" title="Twitter under Elon Musk" label="under his ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q97107245" start="9370" end="9380" title="deadnaming" label="deadnaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="9496" end="9508" title="The Advocate (magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="10057" end="10069" title="Heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610856" start="10679" end="10686" title="Endosex" label="Endosex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442896" start="10689" end="10725" title="Feminist views on transgender topics" label="Feminist views on transgender topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531020" start="10728" end="10743" title="Gender taxonomy" label="Gender taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444692" start="10746" end="10780" title="List of transgender-related topics" label="List of transgender-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031651" start="10783" end="10799" title="Womyn-born womyn" label="Womyn-born womyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="11109" end="11138" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="11293" end="11312" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q464915" start="11391" end="11422" title="American Historical Association" label="American Historical Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66938" wikidata="Q1413270" url="?curid=66938" title="Liseberg">
<text>Liseberg is an amusement park located in Gothenburg, Sweden, that opened in 1923. It is one of the largest in number of visitors with about three million visitors annually. Among the noteworthy attractions is the wooden roller coaster Balder, twice (2003 and 2005) voted as the &quot;Best Wooden Tracked Roller Coaster&quot; in the world in a major international poll. The park itself has also been chosen as one of the top ten amusement parks in the world (2005) by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine and second best in Europe (2022) by &quot;IAAPA&quot;.

In addition to the summer season, the park is also open during October to December, albeit with fewer rides operating, hosting a Halloween season with various houses of horrors and a Christmas market, with traditional Swedish cuisine such as mulled wine and specialties such as döner kebab made from reindeer meat.

The official colors of Liseberg are pink and green as can be seen on the entrance and the older houses in the park; the colors were also adopted for the logo, which was introduced in the 1980s, but changed in 2013 to the current logo.

== History ==
In 1752, the landowner Johan Anders Lamberg named his property &quot;Lisas berg&quot; (&quot;Lisa&#x27;s Mountain&quot;) after his wife Elisabeth Söderberg. The area eventually became known as Liseberg.

In 1908, Gothenburg City bought the property, including the on-site buildings, for 225,000 Swedish kronor.

In 1923, Gothenburg celebrated its 300-year anniversary with the Gothenburg Exhibition, which included a Leisure Park and the Congress Park; the area was opened on 8 May and included fun slides and the long wooden Kanneworffska Funicular, designed by the Danish amusement builder Waldemar Lebech (originally there were five trains with three cars each that accommodated 10 people in each car, the ride lasted 2 minutes 30 seconds; it was demolished in 1987 after having served over 41 million visitors). The fun park was originally intended as a temporary attraction for the exhibition, but it became such a success with over 800,000 visitors in just over a month, that it was kept open. With an area of , the park had cost 2.6 million kronors to build.
On 24 November 1924, the Gothenburg City Council decided to purchase the Liseberg amusement park for 1 million kronor. In 1925, the amusement park was taken over by the municipal company Liseberg AB. The park&#x27;s first director and one of its initiators was the legendary &quot;carpenter from Skåne&quot; Herman Lindholm, who managed it 1923–42.

On 13 August 1935, the functional-inspired Liseberg Bath was inaugurated, created by engineer KI Schön Anderson. The pool was wide and long and sported underwater lights and artificial waves. The pool was able to receive 800 people at a time and the entrance fee with a cabin was 50 öre. The Swedish Olympic hopeful champion from 1920, Arvid Wallman, inaugurated the facilities. The pool was closed in 1956 and the building was demolished in 1962 for the forthcoming 40th anniversary in 1963.
Rotundan was one of the largest dancehalls when it opened on 10 January 1940. Its architect was Axel Jonson, and the construction lasted for one year at a cost of approximately 500,000 SEK. The dance floor held 1,200 people and on the second floor a bar with the name Uggleklubben was opened. In 1956, the facility was renovated and its name changed to the Rondo. The architect Gunnar Aspe was behind the work, which cost 1 million dollars.
In 1947, Liseberg AB opened hotel facilities; Hotell Liseberg Heden. Right from the start one of the objectives of Liseberg was that it would be an opportunity for Gothenburg dwellers to experience recreation and the scenery, and in 1959 it opened the Princess Birgitta, a flower exhibition. During the opening ceremony, 15,000 roses were strewn over the park by helicopter. In 1977, Honor Place was founded, a collection of many of the world&#x27;s largest celebrity hand impressions. At the time, there were 50 imprints; today, there are more than can fit the area, so an annual selection is made as to who should get the honor to appear.

In 1991, the Liseberg Guest AB was formed to oversee the running of Gothenburg campsites and harbor. In the 1990s, the park was expanded by and a host of new attractions were inaugurated. In 2015, Liseberg&#x27;s different companies consolidated into one: Liseberg AB.

== The park ==
In addition to the park&#x27;s more than 30 different rides, Liseberg has many venues (stages, dance hall, restaurants and arcade halls). The park has two entrances / exits (one at Örgrytevägen, the other at Getebergsled). Much of the park is forested.

In 1983, the green-pink bunny, Liseberg Rabbit, became the park&#x27;s symbol and mascot.

In 1998, that year&#x27;s Sveriges Television&#x27;s Christmas calendar &quot;När karusellerna sover&quot; was filmed there.

The park is noted for its Liseberg&#x27;s Lustgarten (botanical garden) that is landscaped and has many waterfalls, artworks and a variety of plants.

Liseberg Main Stage (Stora Scenen) was built in 1923 and was originally designed as a big music pavilion for the Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra and other large-scale concerts (over the years the design of the venue has been modified). Bands such as Abba and the Rolling Stones have performed here. Right next to the Stora Scenen is the smaller Kvarnteatern which plays host to various smaller events, in particular children&#x27;s theater.

Polka (Polketten) is the dance hall that was built in 1925 but has since been moved to its current location. The Taube Scene was inaugurated in 2008 and is named after Evert Taube; this venue is used for different types of music such as jazz, and the Liseberg Orchestra plays here as well.

Adjacent to Liseberg Park are more venues: Lisebergshallen is an entertainment and sports arena, home to the local floorball team and team handball team. Rondo is the name of a show venue and Liseberg Theater is a local theater.

Multifarious Swedish performers have performed at Liseberg since its opening. Among them include, Zarah Leander, Maurice Chevalier, Marlene Dietrich, Evert Taube, ABBA, Lasse Dahlquist, Birgit Nilsson, Pernilla Wahlgren and Carola Häggkvist. Sten-Åke Cederhök played in 25 years&#x27; own perceptions of the &quot;Week Revy&quot;. Other artists such as Sonya Hedenbratt, Hagge Geigert and Laila Westersund have appeared countless times at Liseberg. Olof Palme gave a speech on the main stage during his last election in 1985.

International acts who have performed at Liseberg include Bob Marley, Led Zeppelin, The Rolling Stones, Cliff Richard, Nightwish, Delta Rhythm Boys, The Jimi Hendrix Experience, Cat Stevens, The Beach Boys, The Kinks, The Who, PJ Proby, Frank Zappa with The Mothers of Invention, Bill Haley &amp; His Comets, Procol Harum, and Toto, among others.

Since 2004 a sing-along show called &quot;Lotta på Liseberg&quot; (&quot;Lotta at Liseberg&quot;), hosted by Lotta Engberg, is held every summer at &quot;Stora scenen&quot; in Liseberg, which airs over TV4 since 2009.

== Rides and attractions ==

=== Roller coasters ===
=== Water rides ===
*FlumeRide – a long log flume ride that has two drops, the higher of which is (opened in 1973). Arrow Development.
*Kållerado – a rapids ride on a 9-passenger boat that navigates a course through waterfalls and foliage (opened in 1997). Intamin.
*Skepp o&#x27; skoj

=== Other rides ===
* AeroSpin – a SkyRoller. Opened in 2016 Gerstlauer.
* AtmosFear – originally an observation tower that was built in 1990, but was converted into a drop tower in 2011; height limit . Intamin. The longest free fall in Europe.
* Bushållplatsen
* Children&#x27;s Paradise
* Cyklonen
* FarFar&#x27;s Bil
* Fishing Boats
* Flygis
* Gasten Ghost Hotel
* Hanghai – Mega Disco, opened in 2009; height limit . Zamperla.
* Hissningen
* Hoppalång
* Högspänningen
* JukeBox – a polyp spinner that opened in 2012 and replaced an older model designed by Anton Schwarzkopf; height limit . Gerstlauer. This attraction is from Canada’s Wonderland which was originally named The Fury.
* Kaffekoppen
* Kaninlandsbanan
* Kristallsalongen – walkthrough mirror maze that opened back in 1961.
* Lilla Lots
* Lisebergshjulet – a tall Ferris wheel that was opened in 2012. Bussnik / Maurer Söhne.
* Loke – a tall Gyro Swing. Opened in 2017. Intamin.
* Mechanica – a custom Star Shape. Opened in 2015. Zierer.
* Rabbit Land
* Rabbit River
* Radiobilarna – opened in 1988, but new cars were installed in 2010.
* Slänggungan – wave swinger that opened in 1989. Zierer.
* Tempus – Nebulaz ride that opened in 2023; height limit or if accompanied by an adult. Manufacturer: Zamperla.
* Turbo – Sidecar XL ride that opened in 2023; height limit or if accompanied by an adult. Manufacturer: Technical Park
* Tuta &amp; Kör
* Uppswinget – Screamin&#x27; Swing ride that opened in 2007; height limit . S&amp;S Worldwide.
* Venetian Carousel

=== Children&#x27;s rides ===
* Bushållplatsen– a playground situated in Kaninlandet that opened 2013.
* Cyklonen – on track cycle ride that opened in 2013. Zamperla.
* Fisketuren – a fast boat circular that opened in 1988. Mack Rides.
* Flygis – flying barrels that go round and round. Zamperla.
* Hissningen – a children&#x27;s drop tower, opened in 2013. Zierer.
* Hoppalång – bouncing and spinning circular that opened in 2013. Zamperla.
* Högspänningen – a flying wheels that opened in 2013. Metallbau Emmeln.
* Kaninlandsbanan – a panorama pedal around Rabbit land that opened in 2013. ETF Ride Systems.
* Lilla Lots – rocking tug that opened in 2006. Zamperla.
* Farfars Bil – Vintage cars that opened in 2013. Replaced the 1979 Ihle Fahrzugbau Vintage cars (1979–2012). Metallbau Emmeln.
* Kaninresan – Slow boat ride that opened in 2001. Mack Rides.
* Skepp o&#x27; skoj – water boat ride that opened in 2012. ABC Engineering.
* Teacups – spinning tea cups that opened in 1985. Mack Rides.
* Tempus – Nebulaz ride that opened in 2023; height limit or if accompanied by an adult. Manufacturer: Zamperla.
* Turbo – Sidecar XL ride that opened in 2023; height limit or if accompanied by an adult. Manufacturer: Technical Park
* Tuta &amp; Kör – children&#x27;s bumper cars that opened in 2013. Preston &amp; Barbieri.
* Venetian Carousel – merry-go-round with ponies that opened in 2010. Bertazzon.

=== Other attractions ===
* Arcade Games – the park has many different arcade games, test-your-skill games and more. Extra charge.
* Gasten Ghost Hotel – a horror maze with actors that opened in 1998; height limit .
* Liseberg Lustgarden – a walkthrough botanical and sculpture garden.
* Spelhuset – a two-storey arcade hall full of various arcade games.
* Shows – Liseberg hosts numerous shows, concerts and performances of every kind throughout the year, some of which are included in the admission price, with others costing extra.

=== Former attractions ===
== Oceana Waterpark ==
In 2020, Liseberg started construction on Scandinavia&#x27;s largest water park called &quot;Oceana&quot;. The water park&#x27;s total area measures and it has 14 various attractions and space for up to 1,750 visitors.

On 12 February 2024 a massive fire broke out at the water park, which was still under construction and had been scheduled to open in the spring. The fire left one person missing, injured 22 others, produced three explosions and caused the evacuation of a nearby hotel and office facilities. According to initial reports, Oceana was totally destroyed by the fire and nothing was salvageable. The fire reignited again, the day after it was extinguished. A body was found during clearing operations. The deceased man was later identified as a worker at the park. A subsequent investigation found that the fire was caused by sparks from a welding operation on a water slide.

On 17 July 2024, during a board meeting, a decision was made that they are going to rebuild the water park and attempt to have it finished by 2026. Clearing operations of the site are currently ongoing.

== Visitors ==

&quot;* Includes guests to Lisebergsteatern, Rondo, Lisebergshallen and events inside the park&quot;

== See also ==
* Gröna Lund, another amusement park in Sweden, Located in Stockholm
* Kolmården Wildlife Park, a zoo and amusement park in Sweden, overlooking the Bråviken bay, 
* Incidents at European amusement parks

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1413270" start="0" end="8" title="Liseberg" label="Liseberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="15" end="29" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="41" end="51" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q449158" start="235" end="241" title="Balder (roller coaster)" label="Balder"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="473" end="479" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q326395" start="537" end="542" title="International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions" label="IAAPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q57607" start="734" end="750" title="Christmas market" label="Christmas market"/>
<link wikidata="Q35623" start="769" end="784" title="Swedish cuisine" label="Swedish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584" start="793" end="804" title="mulled wine" label="mulled wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20734" start="829" end="840" title="Doner kebab" label="döner kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="851" end="859" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1140" end="1160" title="Johan Anders Lamberg" label="Johan Anders Lamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="1330" end="1345" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="1412" end="1426" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish kronor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10541041" start="1494" end="1515" title="Gothenburg Exhibition (1923)" label="Gothenburg Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q597856" start="2869" end="2882" title="Arvid Wallman" label="Arvid Wallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188223" start="3058" end="3068" title="dancehalls" label="dancehalls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3476" end="3487" title="Liseberg AB" label="Liseberg AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q464980" start="3747" end="3757" title="exhibition" label="exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189895" start="4765" end="4810" title="Sveriges Television&amp;#x27;s Christmas calendar" label="Sveriges Television&amp;#x27;s Christmas calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10605121" start="4817" end="4839" title="När karusellerna sover" label="När karusellerna sover"/>
<link wikidata="Q455625" start="5624" end="5635" title="Evert Taube" label="Evert Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="5693" end="5697" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="5716" end="5725" title="Orchestra" label="Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="5812" end="5825" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46479" start="6075" end="6088" title="Zarah Leander" label="Zarah Leander"/>
<link wikidata="Q106001" start="6090" end="6107" title="Maurice Chevalier" label="Maurice Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="6109" end="6125" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q455625" start="6127" end="6138" title="Evert Taube" label="Evert Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="6140" end="6144" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562653" start="6146" end="6161" title="Lasse Dahlquist" label="Lasse Dahlquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q233951" start="6163" end="6177" title="Birgit Nilsson" label="Birgit Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q941210" start="6179" end="6196" title="Pernilla Wahlgren" label="Pernilla Wahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q212524" start="6201" end="6217" title="Carola Häggkvist" label="Carola Häggkvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580969" start="6219" end="6236" title="Sten-Åke Cederhök" label="Sten-Åke Cederhök"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953107" start="6330" end="6346" title="Sonya Hedenbratt" label="Sonya Hedenbratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754561" start="6348" end="6361" title="Hagge Geigert" label="Hagge Geigert"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="6426" end="6436" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="6562" end="6572" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="6574" end="6586" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="6588" end="6606" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="6608" end="6621" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43510" start="6623" end="6632" title="Nightwish" label="Nightwish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073499" start="6634" end="6651" title="Delta Rhythm Boys" label="Delta Rhythm Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="6653" end="6680" title="The Jimi Hendrix Experience" label="The Jimi Hendrix Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q154216" start="6682" end="6693" title="Cat Stevens" label="Cat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="6695" end="6709" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="6711" end="6720" title="The Kinks" label="The Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="6722" end="6729" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610776" start="6731" end="6739" title="PJ Proby" label="PJ Proby"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="6741" end="6752" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q530362" start="6758" end="6782" title="The Mothers of Invention" label="The Mothers of Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="6784" end="6811" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="6813" end="6825" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="6831" end="6835" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567963" start="6865" end="6875" title="sing-along" label="sing-along"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684907" start="6894" end="6911" title="Lotta på Liseberg" label="Lotta på Liseberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q235440" start="6961" end="6974" title="Lotta Engberg" label="Lotta Engberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466723" start="7054" end="7057" title="TV4 (Sweden)" label="TV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413270" start="7145" end="7154" title="FlumeRide" label="FlumeRide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412219" start="7164" end="7173" title="log flume (ride)" label="log flume"/>
<link wikidata="Q162810" start="7472" end="7482" title="Gerstlauer" label="Gerstlauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817088" start="7486" end="7495" title="AtmosFear (Liseberg)" label="AtmosFear"/>
<link wikidata="Q66674" start="7971" end="7988" title="Anton Schwarzkopf" label="Anton Schwarzkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q202570" start="8241" end="8253" title="Ferris wheel" label="Ferris wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740326" start="11000" end="11010" title="water park" label="water park"/>
<link wikidata="Q260304" start="12162" end="12172" title="Gröna Lund" label="Gröna Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938567" start="12231" end="12254" title="Kolmården Wildlife Park" label="Kolmården Wildlife Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014641" start="12325" end="12362" title="Incidents at European amusement parks" label="Incidents at European amusement parks"/>
</links>
</doc>
