<doc id="69801" wikidata="Q167420" url="?curid=69801" title="Croats">
<text>The Croats (; , ) are a South Slavic ethnic group native to Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other neighboring countries in Central and Southeastern Europe who share a common Croatian ancestry, culture, history and language. They also form a sizeable minority in a number of neighboring countries, namely Slovenia, Austria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and Slovakia.

Due to political, social and economic reasons, many Croats migrated to North and South America as well as New Zealand and later Australia, establishing a diaspora in the aftermath of World War II, with grassroots assistance from earlier communities and the Roman Catholic Church. In Croatia (the nation state), 3.9 million people identify themselves as Croats, and constitute about 90.4% of the population. Another 553,000 live in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups, predominantly living in Western Herzegovina, Central Bosnia and Bosnian Posavina. The minority in Serbia number about 70,000, mostly in Vojvodina. The ethnic Tarara people, indigenous to Te Tai Tokerau in New Zealand, are of mixed Croatian and Māori (predominantly Ngāpuhi) descent. Tarara Day is celebrated every 15 March to commemorate their &quot;highly regarded place in present-day Māoridom&quot;.

Croats are mostly Roman Catholics. The Croatian language is official in Croatia, the European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatian is a recognized minority language within Croatian autochthonous communities and minorities in Montenegro, Austria (Burgenland), Italy (Molise), Romania (Carașova, Lupac) and Serbia (Vojvodina).

== Etymology ==

The foreign ethnonym variation &quot;Croats&quot; of the native name &quot;Hrvati&quot; derives from Medieval Latin , itself a derivation of North-West Slavic , by liquid metathesis from Common Slavic period &quot;*Xorvat&quot;, from proposed Proto-Slavic &quot;&quot; which possibly comes from the 3rd-century Scytho-Sarmatian form attested in the Tanais Tablets as (&#x27;, alternate forms comprise and &#x27;). The origin of the ethnonym is uncertain, but most probably is from Proto-Ossetian / Alanian *&quot;xurvæt-&quot; or *&quot;xurvāt-&quot;, in the meaning of &quot;one who guards&quot; (&quot;guardian, protector&quot;). The earliest preserved mentions of the ethnonym in stone inscriptions and written documents in the territory of Croatia are dated to the 8th-9th century (e.g. &quot;Dux Croatorum&quot; on Branimir inscription and &quot;Dux Chroatorum&quot; on Charter of Duke Trpimir), while in native Croatian language the earliest writing is from the Baška tablet (), which in Glagolitic script reads: (&quot;Zvonimir, king of Croats&quot;).

==History==
===Arrival of the Slavs===
Early Slavs, especially Sclaveni and Antae, including the White Croats, invaded and settled Southeastern Europe in the 6th and 7th century.

====Early medieval archaeology====
Archaeological evidence shows population continuity in coastal Dalmatia and Istria. In contrast, much of the Dinaric hinterland and appears to have been depopulated, as virtually all hilltop settlements, from Noricum to Dardania, were abandoned and few appear destroyed in the early 7th century. Although the dating of the earliest Slavic settlements was disputed, recent archaeological data established that the migration and settlement of the Slavs/Croats have been in late 6th and early 7th century.

====Croat ethnogenesis====

Much uncertainty revolves around the exact circumstances of their appearance given the scarcity of literary sources during the 7th and 8th century Middle Ages. Traditionally, scholarship has placed the arrival of the White Croats from Great/White Croatia in Eastern Europe in the early 7th century, primarily on the basis of the later Byzantine document &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;. As such, the arrival of the Croats was seen as part of main wave or a second wave of Slavic migrations, which took over Dalmatia from Avar hegemony. However, as early as the 1970s, scholars questioned the reliability of Porphyrogenitus&#x27; work, written as it was in the 10th century. Rather than being an accurate historical account, &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot; more accurately reflects the political situation during the 10th century. It mainly served as Byzantine propaganda praising Emperor Heraclius for repopulating the Balkans (previously devastated by the Avars, Sclaveni and Antes) with Croats, who were seen by the Byzantines as tributary peoples living on what had always been &#x27;Roman land&#x27;.

Scholars have hypothesized the name Croat (&quot;Hrvat&quot;) may be Iranian, thus suggesting that the Croatians were possibly a Sarmatian tribe from the Pontic region who were part of a larger movement at the same time that the Slavs were moving toward the Adriatic. The major basis for this connection was the perceived similarity between &quot;Hrvat&quot; and inscriptions from the Tanais dated to the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD, mentioning the name . Similar arguments have been made for an alleged Gothic-Croat link. Whilst there is possible evidence of population continuity between Gothic and Croatian times in parts of Dalmatia, the idea of a Gothic origin of Croats was more rooted in 20th century Ustaše political aspirations than historical reality.

====Other polities in Dalmatia and Pannonia====

Other, distinct polities and ethno-political groups existed around the Croat duchy. These included the Guduscans (based in Liburnia), Pagania (between the Cetina and Neretva River), Zachlumia (between Neretva and Dubrovnik), Bosnia, and Serbia in other eastern parts of ex-Roman province of &quot;Dalmatia&quot;. Also prominent in the territory of future Croatia was the polity of Prince Ljudevit who ruled the territories between the Drava and Sava rivers (&quot;Pannonia Inferior&quot;), centred from his fort at Sisak. Although Duke Liutevid and his people are commonly seen as a &quot;Pannonian Croats&quot;, he is, due to the lack of &quot;evidence that they had a sense of Croat identity&quot; referred to as &quot;dux Pannoniae Inferioris&quot;, or simply a Slav, by contemporary sources. A closer reading of the &quot;DAI&quot; suggests that Constantine VII&#x27;s consideration about the ethnic origin and identity of the population of Lower Pannonia, Pagania, Zachlumia and other principalities is based on tenth century political rule and does not indicate ethnicity, and although both Croats and Serbs could have been a small military elite which managed to organize other already settled and more numerous Slavs, it is possible that Narentines, Zachlumians and others also arrived as Croats or with Croatian tribal alliance. 

The Croats became the dominant local power in northern Dalmatia, absorbing Liburnia and expanding their name by conquest and prestige. In the south, while having periods of independence, the Naretines merged with Croats later under control of Croatian Kings. With such expansion, Croatia became the dominant power and absorbed other polities between Frankish, Bulgarian and Byzantine empire. Although the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja has been dismissed as an unreliable record, the mentioned &quot;Red Croatia&quot; suggests that Croatian clans and families might have settled as far south as Duklja/Zeta. According to Martin Dimnik writing for &quot;The New Cambridge Medieval History&quot;, &quot;at the beginning of the eleventh century the Croats lived in two more or less clearly defined regions&quot; of the &quot;Croatian lands&quot; which &quot;were now divided into three districts&quot; including Slavonia/Pannonian Croatia (between rivers Sava and Drava) on one side and Croatia/Dalmatian littoral (between Gulf of Kvarner and rivers Vrbas and Neretva) and Bosnia (around river Bosna) on other side, and that &quot;Croats, along with Serbs, also lived in Bosnia which at times came under the control of Croatian kings&quot;.

===Early medieval age===

The lands which constitute modern Croatia fell under three major geographic-politic zones during the Middle Ages, which were influenced by powerful neighbor Empires – notably the Byzantines, the Avars and later Magyars, Franks and Bulgars. Each vied for control of the Northwest Balkan regions. Two independent Slavic dukedoms emerged sometime during the 9th century: the Duchy of Croatia and Principality of Lower Pannonia.

====Pannonian Principality (&quot;Savia&quot;)====

Having been under Avar control, lower Pannonia became a march of the Carolingian Empire around 800. Aided by Vojnomir in 796, the first named Slavic Duke of Pannonia, the Franks wrested control of the region from the Avars before totally destroying the Avar realm in 803. After the death of Charlemagne in 814, Frankish influence decreased on the region, allowing Prince Ljudevit Posavski to raise a rebellion in 819. The Frankish margraves sent armies in 820, 821 and 822, but each time they failed to crush the rebels. Aided by Borna the Guduscan, the Franks eventually defeated Ljudevit, who withdrew his forces to the Serbs and conquered them, according to the Frankish Annals.

For much of the subsequent period, Savia was probably directly ruled by the Carinthian Duke Arnulf, the future East Frankish King and Emperor. However, Frankish control was far from smooth. The Royal Frankish Annals mention several Bulgar raids, driving up the Sava and Drava rivers, as a result of a border dispute with the Franks, from 827. By a peace treaty in 845, the Franks were confirmed as rulers over Slavonia, whilst Srijem remained under Bulgarian clientage. Later, the expanding power of Great Moravia also threatened Frankish control of the region. In an effort to halt their influence, the Franks sought alliance with the Magyars, and elevated the local Slavic leader Braslav in 892, as a more independent Duke over lower Pannonia.

In 896, his rule stretched from Vienna and Budapest to the southern Croat duchies, and included almost the whole of ex-Roman Pannonian provinces. He probably died 900 fighting against his former allies, the Magyars. The subsequent history of Savia again becomes murky, and historians are not sure who controlled Savia during much of the 10th century. However, it is likely that the ruler Tomislav, the first crowned King, was able to exert much control over Savia and adjacent areas during his reign. It is at this time that sources first refer to a &quot;Pannonian Croatia&quot;, appearing in the 10th century Byzantine work &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;.

===Dalmatian Croats===
The Dalmatian Croats were recorded to have been subject to the Kingdom of Italy under Lothair I, since 828. The Croatian Prince Mislav (835–845) built up a formidable navy, and in 839 signed a peace treaty with Pietro Tradonico, doge of Venice. The Venetians soon proceeded to battle with the independent Slavic pirates of the Pagania region, but failed to defeat them. The Bulgarian king Boris I (called by the Byzantine Empire Archont of Bulgaria after he made Christianity the official religion of Bulgaria) also waged a lengthy war against the Dalmatian Croats, trying to expand his state to the Adriatic.

The Croatian Prince Trpimir I (845–864) succeeded Mislav. In 854, there was a great battle between Trpimir&#x27;s forces and the Bulgars. Neither side emerged victorious, and the outcome was the exchange of gifts and the establishment of peace. Trpimir I managed to consolidate power over Dalmatia and much of the inland regions towards Pannonia, while instituting counties as a way of controlling his subordinates (an idea he picked up from the Franks). The first known written mention of the Croats, dates from 4 March 852, in statute by Trpimir. Trpimir is remembered as the initiator of the Trpimirović dynasty, that ruled in Croatia, with interruptions, from 845 until 1091. After his death, an uprising was raised by a powerful nobleman from Knin – Domagoj, and his son Zdeslav was exiled with his brothers, Petar and Muncimir to Constantinople.

Facing a number of naval threats by Saracens and Byzantine Empire, the Croatian Prince Domagoj (864–876) built up the Croatian navy again and helped the coalition of emperor Louis II and the Byzantine to conquer Bari in 871. During Domagoj&#x27;s reign piracy was a common practice, and he forced the Venetians to start paying tribute for sailing near the eastern Adriatic coast. After Domagoj&#x27;s death, Venetian chronicles named him &quot;The worst duke of Slavs&quot;, while Pope John VIII referred to Domagoj in letters as &quot;Famous duke&quot;. Domagoj&#x27;s son, of unknown name, ruled shortly between 876 and 878 with his brothers. They continued the rebellion, attacked the western Istrian towns in 876, but were subsequently defeated by the Venetian navy. Their ground forces defeated the Pannonian duke Kocelj (861–874) who was suzerain to the Franks, and thereby shed the Frankish vassal status. Wars of Domagoj and his son liberated Dalmatian Croats from supreme Franks rule. Zdeslav deposed him in 878 with the help of the Byzantines. He acknowledged the supreme rule of Byzantine Emperor Basil I. In 879, the Pope asked for help from prince Zdeslav for an armed escort for his delegates across southern Dalmatia and Zahumlje, but on early May 879, Zdeslav was killed near Knin in an uprising led by Branimir, a relative of Domagoj, instigated by the Pope, fearing Byzantine power.

Branimir&#x27;s (879–892) own actions were approved from the Holy See to bring the Croats further away from the influence of Byzantium and closer to Rome. Duke Branimir wrote to Pope John VIII affirming this split from Byzantine and commitment to the Roman Papacy. During the solemn divine service in St. Peter&#x27;s church in Rome in 879, John VIII] gave his blessing to the duke and the Croatian people, about which he informed Branimir in his letters, in which Branimir was recognized as the Duke of the Croats (&quot;Dux Chroatorum&quot;). During his reign, Croatia retained its sovereignty from both the Holy Roman Empire and Byzantine rule, and became a fully recognized state. After Branimir&#x27;s death, Prince Muncimir (892–910), Zdeslav&#x27;s brother, took control of Dalmatia and ruled it independently of both Rome and Byzantium as &quot;divino munere Croatorum dux&quot; (with God&#x27;s help, duke of Croats). In Dalmatia, duke Tomislav (910–928) succeeded Muncimir. Tomislav successfully repelled Magyar mounted invasions of the Arpads, expelled them over the Sava River, and united (western) Pannonian and Dalmatian Croats into one state.

===Kingdom of Croatia (925–1102)===


Tomislav (910–928) became king of Croatia by 925. The chief piece of evidence that Tomislav was crowned king comes in the form of a letter dated 925, surviving only in 16th-century copies, from Pope John X calling Tomislav &quot;rex Chroatorum&quot;. According to &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;, Tomislav&#x27;s army and navy could have consisted approximately 100,000 infantry units, 60,000 cavaliers, and 80 larger (&quot;sagina&quot;) and 100 smaller warships (&quot;condura&quot;), but generally isn&#x27;t taken as credible. According to the palaeographic analysis of the original manuscript of &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;, an estimation of the number of inhabitants in medieval Croatia between 440 and 880 thousand people, and military numbers of Franks and Byzantines – the Croatian military force was most probably composed of 20,000–100,000 infantrymen, and 3,000–24,000 horsemen organized in 60 allagions. The Croatian Kingdom as an ally of Byzantine Empire was in conflict with the rising Bulgarian Empire ruled by Tsar Simeon I. In 923, due to a deal of Pope John X and a Patriarch of Constantinopole, the sovereignty of Byzantine coastal cities in Dalmatia came under Tomislav&#x27;s Governancy. The war escalated on 27 May 927, in the battle of the Bosnian Highlands, after Serbs were conquered and some fled to the Croatian Kingdom. There Croats under leadership of their king Tomislav completely defeated the Bulgarian army led by military commander Alogobotur, and stopped Simeon&#x27;s extension westwards. The central town in the Duvno field was named Tomislavgrad (&quot;Tomislav&#x27;s town&quot;) in his honour in the 20th century.

Tomislav was succeeded by Trpimir II (928–935), and Krešimir I (935–945), this period, on the whole, however, is obscure. Miroslav (945–949) was killed by his ban Pribina during an internal power struggle, losing part of islands and coastal cities. Krešimir II (949–969) kept particularly good relations with the Dalmatian cities, while his son Stjepan Držislav (969–997) established better relations with the Byzantine Empire and received a formal authority over Dalmatian cities. His three sons, Svetoslav (997–1000), Krešimir III (1000–1030) and Gojslav (1000–1020), opened a violent contest for the throne, weakening the state and further losing control. Krešimir III and his brother Gojslav co-ruled from 1000 until 1020, and attempted to restore control over lost Dalmatian cities now under Venetian control. Krešimir was succeeded by his son Stjepan I (1030–1058), who continued his ambitions of spreading rule over the coastal cities, and during whose rule was established the diocese of Knin between 1040 and 1050 which bishop had the nominal title of &quot;Croatian bishop&quot; (Latin: &quot;episcopus Chroatensis&quot;).

Krešimir IV (1058–1074) managed to get the Byzantine Empire to confirm him as the supreme ruler of the Dalmatian cities. Croatia under Krešimir IV was composed of twelve counties and was slightly larger than in Tomislav&#x27;s time, and included the closest southern Dalmatian duchy of Pagania. From the outset, he continued the policies of his father, but was immediately commanded by Pope Nicholas II first in 1059 and then in 1060 to further reform the Croatian church in accordance with the Roman rite. This was especially significant to the papacy in the aftermath of the Great Schism of 1054.
He was succeeded by Dmitar Zvonimir, who was of the Svetoslavić branch of the House of Trpimirović, and a Ban of Slavonia (1064–1075). He was crowned on 8 October 1076 at Solin in the Basilica of Saint Peter and Moses (known today as &quot;Hollow Church&quot;) by a representative of Pope Gregory VII.

He was in conflict with dukes of Istria, while historical records &quot;Annales Carinthiæ&quot; and &quot;Chronica Hungarorum&quot; note he invaded Carinthia to aid Hungary in war during 1079/83, but this is disputed. Unlike Petar Krešimir IV, he was also an ally of the Normans, with whom he joined in wars against Byzantium. He married in 1063 Helen of Hungary, the daughter of King Bela I of the Hungarian Árpád dynasty, and the sister of the future King Ladislaus I. As King Zvonimir died in 1089 in unknown circumstances, with no direct heir to succeed him, Stjepan II ( 1089–1091) last of the main Trpimirović line came to the throne but reigned for two years.

After his death civil war and unrest broke out shortly afterward as northern nobles decided Ladislaus I for the Croatian King. In 1093, southern nobles elected a new ruler, King Petar Snačić ( 1093–1097), who managed to unify the Kingdom around his capital of Knin. His army resisted repelling Hungarian assaults, and restored Croatian rule up to the river Sava. He reassembled his forces in Croatia and advanced on Gvozd Mountain, where he met the main Hungarian army led by King Coloman I of Hungary. In 1097, in the Battle of Gvozd Mountain, the last native king Peter was killed and the Croats were decisively defeated (because of this, the mountain was this time renamed to Petrova Gora, &quot;Peter&#x27;s Mountain&quot;, but identified with the wrong mountain). In 1102, Coloman returned to the Kingdom of Croatia in force, and negotiated with the Croatian feudal lords resulting in joining of Hungarian and Croatian crowns (with the crown of Dalmatia held separate from that of Croatia).

According to &quot;The New Cambridge Medieval History&quot;, &quot;at the beginning of the eleventh century the Croats lived in two more or less clearly defined regions&quot; of the &quot;Croatian lands&quot; which &quot;were now divided into three districts&quot; including Slavonia/Pannonian Croatia (between rivers Sava and Drava) on one side and Croatia/Dalmatian littoral (between Gulf of Kvarner and rivers Vrbas and Neretva) and Bosnia (around river Bosna) on other side.

===Personal union with Hungary (1102–1918)===

In the 11th and 12th centuries &quot;the Croats were never unified under a strong central government. They lived in different areas - Pannonian Croatia, Dalmatian Croatia, Bosnia - which were at times ruled by indigenous kings but more frequently controlled by agents of Byzantium, Venice and Hungary. Even during periods of relatively strong centralized government, local lords frequently enjoyed an almost autonomous status&quot;.

In the union with Hungary, institutions of separate Croatian statehood were maintained through the Sabor (an assembly of Croatian nobles) and the ban (viceroy). In addition, the Croatian nobles retained their lands and titles. Coloman retained the institution of the Sabor and relieved the Croatians of taxes on their land. Coloman&#x27;s successors continued to crown themselves as Kings of Croatia separately in Biograd na Moru. The Hungarian king also introduced a variant of the feudal system. Large fiefs were granted to individuals who would defend them against outside incursions thereby creating a system for the defence of the entire state. However, by enabling the nobility to seize more economic and military power, the kingdom itself lost influence to the powerful noble families. In Croatia the Šubić were one of the oldest Croatian noble families and would become particularly influential and important, ruling the area between Zrmanja and the Krka rivers. The local noble family from Krk island (who later took the surname Frankopan) is often considered the second most important medieval family, as ruled over northern Adriatic and is responsible for the adoption of one of oldest European statutes, Law codex of Vinodol (1288). Both families gave many native bans of Croatia. Other powerful families were Nelipić from Dalmatian Zagora (14th–15th centuries); Kačić who ruled over Pagania and were famous for piracy and wars against Venice (12th–13th centuries); Kurjaković family, a branch of the old Croatian noble Gusić family from Krbava (14th–16th centuries); Babonić who ruled from western Kupa to eastern Vrbas and Bosna rivers, and were bans of Slavonia (13th–14th centuries); Iločki family who ruled over Slavonian stronghold-cities, and in the 15th century rose to power. During this period, the Knights Templar and the Knights Hospitaller also acquired considerable property and assets in Croatia.

In the second half of the 13th century, during the Árpád and Anjou dynasty struggle, the Šubić family became hugely powerful under Paul I Šubić of Bribir, who was the longest Croatian Ban (1274–1312), conquering Bosnia and declaring himself &quot;Lord of all of Bosnia&quot; (1299–1312). He appointed his brother Mladen I Šubić as Ban of Bosnia (1299–1304), and helped Charles I from House of Anjou to be the King of Hungary. After his death in 1312, his son Mladen II Šubić was the Ban of Bosnia (1304–1322) and Ban of Croatia (1312–1322). The kings from House of Anjou intended to strengthen the kingdom by uniting their power and control, but to do so they had to diminish the power of the higher nobility. Charles I had already tried to crash the aristocratic privileges, intention finished by his son Louis the Great (1342–1382), relying on the lower nobility and towns. Both kings ruled without the Parliament, and inner nobility struggles only helped them in their intentions. This led to Mladen&#x27;s defeat at the battle of Bliska in 1322 by a coalition of several Croatian noblemen and Dalmatian coastal towns with support of the King himself, in exchange of Šubić&#x27;s castle of Ostrovica for Zrin Castle in Central Croatia (thus this branch was named Zrinski) in 1347. Eventually, the Babonić and Nelipić families also succumbed to the king&#x27;s offensive against nobility, but with the increasing process of power centralization, Louis managed to force Venice by the Treaty of Zadar in 1358 to give up their possessions in Dalmatia. When King Louis died without successor, the question of succession remained open. The kingdom once again entered the time of internal unrest. Besides King Louis&#x27;s daughter Mary, Charles III of Naples was the closest king male relative with claims to the throne. In February 1386, two months after his coronation, he was assassinated by order of the queen Elizabeth of Bosnia. His supporters, bans John of Palisna, John Horvat and Stjepan Lacković planned a rebellion, and managed to capture and imprison Elizabeth and Mary. By orders of John of Palisna, Elizabeth was strangled. In retaliation, Magyars crowned Mary&#x27;s husband Sigismund of Luxembourg.

King Sigismund&#x27;s army was catastrophically defeated at the Battle of Nicopolis (1396) as the Ottoman invasion was getting closer to the borders of the Hungarian-Croatian kingdom. Without news about the king after the battle, the then ruling Croatian ban Stjepan Lacković and nobles invited Charles III&#x27;s son Ladislaus of Naples to be the new king. This resulted in the Bloody Sabor of Križevci in 1397, loss of interest in the crown by Ladislaus and selling of Dalmatia to Venice in 1403, and spreading of Croatian names to the north, with those of Slavonia to the east. The dynastic struggle didn&#x27;t end, and with the Ottoman invasion on Bosnia the first short raids began in Croatian territory, defended only by local nobles.
As the Turkish incursion into Europe started, Croatia once again became a border area between two major forces in the Balkans. Croatian military troops fought in many battles under command of Italian Franciscan priest fra John Capistrano, the Hungarian Generalissimo John Hunyadi, and Hungarian King Matthias Corvinus, like in the Hunyadi&#x27;s long campaign (1443–1444), battle of Varna (1444), second battle of Kosovo (1448), and contributed to the Christian victories over the Ottomans in the siege of Belgrade (1456) and Siege of Jajce (1463). At the time they suffered a major defeat in the battle of Krbava field (Lika, Croatia) in 1493 and gradually lost increasing amounts of territory to the Ottoman Empire. Pope Leo X called Croatia the &quot;forefront of Christianity (Antemurale Christianitatis)&quot; in 1519, given that several Croatian soldiers made significant contributions to the struggle against the Ottoman Turks. Among them there were ban Petar Berislavić who won a victory at Dubica on the Una river in 1513, the captain of Senj and prince of Klis Petar Kružić, who defended the Klis Fortress for almost 25 years, captain Nikola Jurišić who deterred by a magnitude larger Turkish force on their way to Vienna in 1532, or ban Nikola IV Zrinski who helped save Pest from occupation in 1542 and fought in the Battle of Szigetvar in 1566. During the Ottoman conquest tens of thousands of Croats were taken in Turkey, where they became slaves.

The Battle of Mohács (1526) and the death of King Louis II ended the Hungarian-Croatian union. In 1526, the Hungarian parliament elected two separate kings János Szapolyai and Ferdinand I Habsburg, but the choice of the Croatian sabor at Cetin prevailed on the side of Ferdinand I, as they elected him as the new king of Croatia on 1 January 1527, uniting both lands under Habsburg rule. In return they were promised the historic rights, freedoms, laws and defence of Croatian Kingdom.

However, the Hungarian-Croatian Kingdom was not enough well prepared and organized and the Ottoman Empire expanded further in the 16th century to include most of Slavonia, western Bosnia and Lika. For the sake of stopping the Ottoman conquering and possible assault on the capital of Vienna, the large areas of Croatia and Slavonia (even Hungary and Romania) bordering the Ottoman Empire were organized as a Military Frontier which was ruled directly from Vienna military headquarters. The invasion caused migration of Croats, and the area which became deserted was subsequently settled by Serbs, Vlachs, Germans and others. The negative effects of feudalism escalated in 1573 when the peasants in northern Croatia and Slovenia rebelled against their feudal lords due to various injustices. After the fall of Bihać fort in 1592, only small areas of Croatia remained unrecovered. The remaining were referred to as the &quot;reliquiae reliquiarum of the once great Croatian kingdom&quot;.

Croats stopped the Ottoman advance in Croatia at the battle of Sisak in 1593, 100 years after the defeat at Krbava field, and the short Long Turkish War ended with the Peace of Zsitvatorok in 1606, after which Croatian classes tried unsuccessfully to have their territory on the Military Frontier restored to rule by the Croatian Ban, managing only to restore a small area of lost territory but failed to regain large parts of Croatian Kingdom (present-day western Bosnia and Herzegovina), as the present-day border between the two countries is a remnant of this outcome.

====Croatian national revival (1593–1918)====

In the first half of the 17th century, Croats fought in the Thirty Years&#x27; War on the side of Holy Roman Empire, mostly as light cavalry under command of imperial generalissimo Albrecht von Wallenstein. Croatian Ban, Juraj V Zrinski, also fought in the war, but died in a military camp near Bratislava, Slovakia, as he was poisoned by von Wallenstein after a verbal duel. His son, future ban and captain-general of Croatia, Nikola Zrinski, participated during the closing stages of the war.
In 1664, the Austrian imperial army was victorious against the Turks, but Emperor Leopold failed to capitalize on the success when he signed the Peace of Vasvár in which Croatia and Hungary were prevented from regaining territory lost to the Ottoman Empire. This caused unrest among the Croatian and Hungarian nobility which plotted against the emperor. Nikola Zrinski participated in launching the conspiracy which later came to be known as the Magnate conspiracy, but he soon died, and the rebellion was continued by his brother, Croatian ban Petar Zrinski, Fran Krsto Frankopan and Ferenc Wesselényi. Petar Zrinski, along the conspirators, went on a wide secret diplomatic negotiations with a number of nations, including Louis XIV of France, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden, the Republic of Venice and even the Ottoman Empire, to free Croatia from the Habsburg sovereignty.

Imperial spies uncovered the conspiracy and on 30 April 1671 executed four esteemed Croatian and Hungarian noblemen involved in it, including Zrinski and Frankopan in Wiener Neustadt. The large estates of two most powerful Croatian noble houses were confiscated and their families relocated, soon after extinguished. Between 1670 and the revolution of 1848, there would be only 2 bans of Croatian nationality. The period from 1670 to the Croatian cultural revival in the 19th century was Croatia&#x27;s political Dark Age. Meanwhile, with the victories over Turks, Habsburgs all the more insistent they spent centralization and germanization, new regained lands in liberated Slavonia started giving to foreign families as feudal goods, at the expense of domestic element. Because of this the Croatian Sabor was losing its significance, and the nobility less attended it, yet went only to the one in Hungary.

In the 18th century, Croatia was one of the crown lands that supported Emperor Charles&#x27;s Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and supported Empress Maria Theresa in the War of the Austrian Succession of 1741–48. Subsequently, the empress made significant contributions to Croatian matters, by making several changes in the feudal and tax system, administrative control of the Military Frontier, in 1745 administratively united Slavonia with Croatia and in 1767 organized Croatian royal council with the ban on head, however, she ignored and eventually disbanded it in 1779, and Croatia was relegated to just one seat in the governing council of Hungary, held by the ban of Croatia. To fight the Austrian centralization and absolutism, Croats passed their rights to the united government in Hungary, thus to together resist the intentions from Vienna. But the connection with Hungary soon adversely affected the position of Croats, because Magyars in the spring of their nationalism tried to Magyarize Croats, and make Croatia a part of a united Hungary. Because of this pretensions, the constant struggles between Croats and Magyars emerged, and lasted until 1918. Croats were fighting in unfavorable conditions, against both Vienna and Budapest, while divided on Banska Hrvatska, Dalmatia and Military Frontier. In such a time, with the fall of the Venetian Republic in 1797, its possessions in eastern Adriatic mostly came under the authority of France which passed its rights to Austria the same year. Eight years later they were restored to France as the Illyrian Provinces, but won back to the Austrian crown 1815. Though now part of the same empire, Dalmatia and Istria were part of Cisleithania while Croatia and Slavonia were in Hungarian part of the Monarchy.

In the 19th century Croatian romantic nationalism emerged to counteract the non-violent but apparent Germanization and Magyarization. The Croatian national revival began in the 1830s with the Illyrian movement. The movement attracted a number of influential figures and produced some important advances in the Croatian language and culture. The champion of the Illyrian movement was Ljudevit Gaj who also reformed and standardized Croatian. The official language in Croatia had been Latin until 1847, when it became Croatian. The movement relied on a South Slavic and Panslavistic conception, and its national, political and social ideas were advanced at the time.

By the 1840s, the movement had moved from cultural goals to resisting Hungarian political demands. By the royal order of 11 January 1843, originating from the chancellor Metternich, the use of the Illyrian name and insignia in public was forbidden. This deterred the movement&#x27;s progress but it couldn&#x27;t stop the changes in the society that had already started. On 25 March 1848, was conducted a political petition &quot;Zahtijevanja naroda&quot;, which program included thirty national, social and liberal principles, like Croatian national independence, annexation of Dalmatia and Military Frontier, independence from Hungary as far as finance, language, education, freedom of speech and writing, religion, nullification of serfdom etc. In the revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire, the Croatian Ban Jelačić cooperated with the Austrians in quenching the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 by leading a military campaign into Hungary, successful until the Battle of Pákozd.

Croatia was later subject to Hungarian hegemony under ban Levin Rauch when the Empire was transformed into a dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary in 1867. Nevertheless, Ban Jelačić had succeeded in the abolition of serfdom in Croatia, which eventually brought about massive changes in society: the power of the major landowners was reduced and arable land became increasingly subdivided, to the extent of risking famine. Many Croatians began emigrating to the New World countries in this period, a trend that would continue over the next century, creating a large Croatian diaspora.

From 1804 to 1918, as many as 395 Croats received the rank of general or admiral, of which 379 in the army of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, 8 in the Russian Empire, two each in the French and Hungarian armies, and one each in the armies of the Ottoman Empire, the Republic of Venice, Portuguese Empire and Serbia. By rank, 173 were brigadier generals, 142 major generals, 55 lieutenant generals, two generals, three staff generals, 17 rear admirals, one viceadmiral and two admirals.

===Modern history (1918–present)===

After the First World War and dissolution of Austria-Hungary, most Croats were united within the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, created by unification of the short-lived State of SHS with the Kingdom of Serbia. Croats became one of the constituent nations of the new kingdom. The state was transformed into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929 and the Croats were united in the new nation with their neighbors – the South Slavs-Yugoslavs.

In 1939, the Croats received a high degree of autonomy when the Banovina of Croatia was created, which united almost all ethnic Croatian territories within the Kingdom. In the Second World War, the Axis forces created the Independent State of Croatia led by the Ustaše movement which sought to create an ethnically pure Croatian state on the territory corresponding to present-day countries of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Post-WWII Yugoslavia became a federation consisting of 6 republics, and Croats became one of two &quot;constituent peoples&quot; of two – Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croats in the Serbian autonomous province of Vojvodina are one of six main ethnic groups composing this region.

Following the democratization of society, accompanied with ethnic tensions that emerged ten years after the death of Josip Broz Tito, the Republic of Croatia declared independence, which was followed by war. In the first years of the war, over 200,000 Croats were displaced from their homes as a result of the military actions. In the peak of the fighting, around 550,000 ethnic Croats were displaced altogether during the Yugoslav wars.

Post-war government&#x27;s policy of easing the immigration of ethnic Croats from abroad encouraged a number of Croatian descendants to return to Croatia. The influx was increased by the arrival of Croatian refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina. After the war&#x27;s end in 1995, most Croatian refugees returned to their previous homes, while some (mostly Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Janjevci from Kosovo) moved into the formerly-held Serbian housing.

==Genetics==
Genetically, on the Y-chromosome DNA line, a majority (65%) of male Croats from Croatia belong to haplogroups I2 (39%-40%) and R1a (22%-24%), while a minority (35%) belongs to haplogroups E (10%), R1b (6%-7%), J (6%-7%), I1 (5-8%), G (2%), and others in &lt;2% traces. The distribution, variance and frequency of the I2 and R1a subclades (&gt;65%) among Croats are related to the early medieval Slavic migrations to Southeastern Europe, most probably from the territory of present-day Ukraine and Southeastern Poland. Genetically, on the maternal mitochondrial DNA line, a majority (&gt;65%) of Croats from Croatia (mainland and coast) belong to three of the eleven major European mtDNA haplogroups – H (45%), U (17.8–20.8%), J (3–11%), while a large minority (&gt;35%) belongs to many other smaller haplogroups. Based on autosomal IBD survey the speakers of Croatian share a very high number of common ancestors dated to the migration period approximately 1,500 years ago with Poland and Romania-Bulgaria clusters among others in Eastern Europe. It was caused by the early medieval Slavic migrations, a small population which expanded into vast regions of &quot;low population density beginning in the sixth century&quot;. Other IBD and admixture studies also found even patterns of admixture events among South, East and West Slavs at the time and area of Slavic expansion, and that the shared ancestral Balto-Slavic component among South Slavs is between 55 and 70%. A 2023 archaeogenetic study showed that the Croats roughly have 66.5% Central-Eastern European early medieval Slavic-ancestry, 31.2% local Roman and 2.4% West Anatolian ancestry.

==Language==

Croats primarily speak Croatian, a South Slavic lect of the Western South Slavic subgroup. Standard Croatian is considered a normative variety of Serbo-Croatian, and is mutually intelligible with the other three national standards, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin (see Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian) which are all based on the Shtokavian dialect.

Besides Shtokavian, Croats from the Adriatic coastline speak the Chakavian dialect, while Croats from the continental northwestern part of Croatia speak the Kajkavian dialect. Vernacular texts in the Chakavian dialect first appeared in the 13th century, and Shtokavian texts appeared a century later. Standardization began in the period sometimes called &quot;Baroque Slavism&quot; in the first half of the 17th century, while some authors date it back to the end of the 15th century. The modern Neo-Shtokavian standard that appeared in the mid 18th century was the first unified standard Croatian. Croatian is written in Gaj&#x27;s Latin alphabet.

The beginning of written Croatian can be traced to the 9th century, when Old Church Slavonic was adopted as the language of the Divine liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil. This language was gradually adapted to non-liturgical purposes and became known as the Croatian version of Old Slavonic. The two variants of the language, liturgical and non-liturgical, continued to be a part of the Glagolitic service as late as the middle of the 19th century. The earliest known Croatian Church Slavonic Glagolitic are &quot;Vienna Folios&quot; from the late 11th/early 12th century. Until the end of the 11th century Croatian medieval texts were written in three scripts: Latin, Glagolitic, and Cyrillic, and also in three languages: Croatian, Latin, and Old Slavonic. The latter developed into what is referred to as the Croatian variant of Church Slavonic between the 12th and 16th centuries.

The most important early monument of Croatian literacy is the Baška tablet from the late 11th century. It is a large stone tablet found in the small Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor on the Croatian island of Krk which contains text written mostly in Chakavian, today a dialect of Croatian, and in Shtokavian script. It mentions Zvonimir, the king of Croatia at the time. However, the luxurious and ornate representative texts of Croatian Church Slavonic belong to the later era, when they coexisted with the Croatian vernacular literature. The most notable are the &quot;Missal of Duke Novak&quot; from the Lika region in northwestern Croatia (1368), &quot;Evangel from Reims&quot; (1395, named after the town of its final destination), Hrvoje&#x27;s Missal from Bosnia and Split in Dalmatia (1404). and the first printed book in Croatian, the Glagolitic Missale Romanum Glagolitice (1483).

During the 13th century Croatian vernacular texts began to appear, the most important among them being the &quot;Istrian Land Survey&quot; of 1275 and the &quot;Vinodol Codex&quot; of 1288, both written in the Chakavian dialect. The Shtokavian dialect literature, based almost exclusively on Chakavian original texts of religious provenance (missals, breviaries, prayer books) appeared almost a century later. The most important purely Shtokavian dialect vernacular text is the Vatican Croatian Prayer Book (ca. 1400).

==Religion==

Croats are predominantly Roman Catholic, of the Latin Rite, and before Christianity, they adhered to Slavic paganism or Roman paganism. The earliest record of contact between the Pope and the Croats dates from a mid-7th century entry in the &quot;Liber Pontificalis&quot;. Pope John IV (John the Dalmatian, 640–642) sent an abbot named Martin to Dalmatia and Istria in order to pay ransom for some prisoners and for the relics of old Christian martyrs. This abbot is recorded to have travelled through Dalmatia with the help of the Croatian leaders, and he established the foundation for future relations between the Pope and the Croats.

The beginnings of the Christianization are also disputed in the historical texts: the Byzantine texts talk of Duke Porin who started this at the incentive of Emperor Heraclius (610–641), then of Duke Porga who mainly Christianized his people after the influence of missionaries from Rome. However, it can be reliably said that the Christianization of Croats began in the 7th century, initially probably encompassed only the elite and related people, but mostly completed by the 9th century. The earliest known Croatian autographs from the 8th century are found in the Latin Gospel of Cividale.

Croats were never obliged to use Latin—rather, they held masses in their own language and used the Glagolitic alphabet. In 1886 it arrived to the Principality of Montenegro, followed by the Kingdom of Serbia in 1914, and the Republic of Czechoslovakia in 1920, but only for feast days of the main patron saints. The 1935 concordat with the Kingdom of Yugoslavia anticipated the introduction of the Church Slavonic for all Croatian regions and throughout the entire state.

Smaller groups of Croats adhere to other religions, like Eastern Orthodoxy (especially in Žumberak), Protestantism and Islam. According to an official population census of Croatia by ethnicity and religion, roughly 16,600 ethnic Croats adhered to Orthodoxy, roughly 8,000 were Protestants, roughly 10,500 described themselves as &quot;other&quot; Christians, and roughly 9,600 were followers of Islam.

==Culture==

===Tradition===

The area settled by Croats has a large diversity of historical and cultural influences, as well as the diversity of terrain and geography. The coastland areas of Dalmatia and Istria were subject to Roman Empire, Venetian and Italian rule; central regions like Lika and western Herzegovina were a scene of battlefield against the Ottoman Empire, and have strong epic traditions. In the northern plains, Austro-Hungarian rule has left its marks. The most distinctive features of Croatian folklore include klapa ensembles of Dalmatia, tamburitza orchestras of Slavonia. Folk arts are performed at special events and festivals, perhaps the most distinctive being Alka of Sinj, a traditional knights&#x27; competition celebrating the victory against Ottoman Turks. The epic tradition is also preserved in epic songs sung with gusle. Various types of kolo circular dance are also encountered throughout Croatia.

===UNESCO | Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in Croatia===

List of Cultural Intangible Heritage e.g.:
* &quot;Bećarac singing and playing from Eastern Croatia&quot;;
* &quot;Festivity of Saint Blaise, the patron of Dubrovnik&quot;;
* &quot;Gingerbread craft from Northern Croatia&quot;;
* &quot;Klapa multipart singing of Dalmatia, southern Croatia&quot;;
* &quot;Lacemaking in Croatia&quot;;
* &quot;Međimurska popevka, a folksong from Međimurje&quot;;
* &quot;Nijemo Kolo, silent circle dance of the Dalmatian hinterland&quot;;
* &quot;Procession Za Križen (&#x27;following the cross&#x27;)&quot;;
* &quot;Spring procession of Ljelje/Kraljice (queens) from Gorjani&quot;;
* &quot;Traditional manufacturing of children&#x27;s wooden toys of Hrvatsko Zagorje&quot;;
* &quot;Two-part singing and playing in the Istrian scale&quot;;
* &quot;Zvončari, annual carnival bell ringers&#x27; pageant from the Kastav area.&quot;

===Arts===
Architecture in Croatia reflects the influences of bordering nations. Austrian and Hungarian influence is visible in public spaces and buildings in the north and in the central regions, architecture found along the coasts of Dalmatia and Istria exhibits Venetian influence. Large squares named after culture heroes, well-groomed parks, and pedestrian-only zones, are features of these orderly towns and cities, especially where large scale Baroque urban planning took place, for instance in Varaždin and Karlovac. Subsequent influence of the Art Nouveau was reflected in contemporary architecture. Along the coast, the architecture is Mediterranean with a strong Venetian and Renaissance influence in major urban areas exemplified in works of Giorgio da Sebenico and Niccolò Fiorentino such as the Cathedral of St. James in Šibenik.
The oldest preserved examples of Croatian architecture are the 9th-century churches, with the largest and the most representative among them being the Church of St. Donatus.

Besides the architecture encompassing the oldest artworks in Croatia, there is a long history of artists in Croatia reaching to the Middle Ages. In that period the stone portal of the Trogir Cathedral was made by Radovan, representing the most important monument of Romanesque sculpture in Croatia. The Renaissance had the greatest impact on the Adriatic Sea coast since the remainder of Croatia was embroiled in the Hundred Years&#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War. With the waning of the Ottoman Empire, art flourished during the Baroque and Rococo. The 19th and the 20th centuries brought about the affirmation of numerous Croatian artisans, helped by several patrons of the arts such as bishop Josip Juraj Strossmayer. Croatian artists of the period achieving worldwide renown were Vlaho Bukovac and Ivan Meštrović.

The Baška tablet, a stone inscribed with the Glagolitic alphabet found on the Krk island which is dated to 1100, is considered to be the oldest surviving prose in Croatian. The beginning of more vigorous development of Croatian literature is marked by the Renaissance and Marko Marulić. Besides Marulić, Renaissance playwright Marin Držić, Baroque poet Ivan Gundulić, Croatian national revival poet Ivan Mažuranić, novelist, playwright and poet August Šenoa, poet and writer Antun Gustav Matoš, poet Antun Branko Šimić, expressionist and realist writer Miroslav Krleža, poet Tin Ujević and novelist and short story writer Ivo Andrić are often cited as the greatest figures in Croatian literature.

==Symbols==


The flag of Croatia consists of a red-white-blue tricolour with the Coat of Arms of Croatia in the middle. The red-white-blue tricolor flag was chosen as those were the colours of Pan-Slavism, popular in the 19th century.

The Coat of arms of Croatia consists of the traditional red and white squares representing Croatian checkerboard on a coat-of-arms. It has been used to symbolise Croatia for centuries, with the earliest confirmed and dated to 1495 in Innsbruck, Austria during the time of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, and Chiesa dei Domenicani in Bolzano, Italy also from the late 15th century. The first and only time was officially used in the Kingdom of Croatia in the 16th century was during 1527 election in Cetin when Croatian noblemen elected Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor as the new King of Croatia. Before that, another CoA was official coat of arms of Croatia, dated at earliest since 1347 with three leopard or lion heads (later associated only with Dalmatia), while another with silver crescent moon and six pointed star (so-called Leliwa) is common misconception to be oldest CoA of Croatia. Region of Slavonia has oldest confirmed CoA, showcasing a marten between rivers Sava and Drava above which is six pointed star and officially granted in 1496 by Vladislaus II of Hungary. It was used as an official seal by the Slavonian Sabor since 1497, and since 1558 until early 19th century by the united Croatian and Slavonian Sabor. The first coat of arms uniting all three CoA of the Kingdoms of Dalmatia, Croatia and Slavonia dates to 1610.

The current design added the five crowning shields, which represent the historical regions from which Croatia originated. Unlike in many countries, Croatian design more commonly uses symbolism from the coat of arms, rather than from the Croatian flag. This is partly due to the geometric design of the shield which makes it appropriate for use in many graphic contexts (e.g. the insignia of Croatia Airlines or the design of the shirt for the Croatia national football team), and partly because neighbouring countries like Slovenia and Serbia use the same Pan-Slavic colours on their flags as Croatia. The Croatian interlace ( or ) is also a commonly used symbol which originally comes from monasteries built between the 9th and 12th centuries. The interlace can be seen in various emblems and is also featured in modern Croatian military ranks and Croatian police ranks insignia.

==Communities==

In Croatia (the nation state), 3.9 million people identify themselves as Croats and constitute about 90.4% of the population. Another 553,000 live in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups, predominantly living in Western Herzegovina, Central Bosnia and Bosnian Posavina. The minority in Serbia number about 70,000, mostly in Vojvodina, where also vast majority of the Šokci consider themselves Croats, as well as many Bunjevci (the latter, as well as other nationalities, settled the vast, abandoned area after the Ottoman retreat; this Croat subgroup originates from the south, mostly from the region of Bačka). Smaller Croat autochthonous minorities exist in Slovenia (mainly in Slovene Littoral, Prekmurje and in the Metlika area in Lower Carniola regions – 35,000 Croats), Montenegro (mostly in the Bay of Kotor – 6,800 Croats), and a regional community in Kosovo called Janjevci who nationally identify as Croats. In the 1991 census, Croats consisted 19.8% of the overall population of Yugoslavia; there were around 4.6 million Croats in the entire country.

The subgroups of Croats are commonly based on regional affiliation, like Dalmatians, Slavonians, Zagorci, Istrians etc., while inside and outside Croatia there exist several Croatian sub-ethnic groups: Šokci (Croatia, Serbia, Hungary), Bunjevci (Croatia, Serbia, Hungary), Burgenland Croats (Austria), Molise Croats (Italy), Bokelji (Montenegro), Raci (Hungary), Krashovani (Romania), and Janjevci (Kosovo).

===Autochthonous communities===
* Croatia is the nation-state of Croats.
* In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croats are one of three constitute ethnic groups, numbering around 544,780 people or 15.43% of the population. The entity of Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to the majority (495,000 or about little under 90%) of Bosnian and Herzegovinian Croats.
* In Montenegro, the Bay of Kotor, Croats are a national minority, numbering 6,021 people or 0.97% of the population.
* In Serbia, Croats are a national minority, numbering 57,900 people or 0.80% of the population. They mostly live in the region of Vojvodina, where Croatian is official (along with five other languages), and the national capital city of Belgrade.
* In Slovenia, Croats are not recognized as a minority, numbering 35,642 people or 1.81% of the population. They mostly live in Slovene Littoral, Prekmurje and in the Metlika area in Lower Carniola regions.

===Croatian communities with minority status===
* In Austria, Croats are an ethnic minority, numbering around 30,000 people in Burgenland (Burgenland Croats), the eastern part of Austria, and around 15,000 people in the capital city of Vienna.
* In the Czech Republic, Croats are a national minority, numbering 850–2,000 people, forming a portion of the 29% minority (as &quot;Others&quot;). They mostly live in the region of Moravia, in the villages of Jevišovka, Dobré Pole and Nový Přerov.
* In Hungary, Croats are an ethnic minority, numbering 25,730 people or 0.26% of the population.
* In Italy, Croats are a linguistic, and ethnic minority, numbering 23,880 people, of which 2,801 people belong to the ethnic minority of Molise Croats from the region of Molise.
* In Romania, Croats are a national minority, numbering 6,786 people. They mostly live in the Caraș-Severin County, in communes of Lupac (90.7%) and Carașova (78.28%).
* In Serbia, Croats (including Bunjevci and Šokci) are a national minority. They mostly live in the multiethnic autonomous province of Vojvodina.
* In Slovakia, Croats are an ethnic and national minority, numbering around 850 people. They mostly live in the area around Bratislava, in the villages of Chorvátsky Grob, Čunovo, Devínska Nová Ves, Rusovce and Jarovce.

===Other regions with Croat minorities===
* In Bulgaria, there exists a small Croatian community, a branch of Janjevci, Croats from Kosovo.
* In New Zealand, the mixed Croatian and Māori Tarara people have their own culture, traditions and customs, and live in Te Tai Tokerau, New Zealand&#x27;s northernmost region. 15 March is Tarara Day to celebrate their heritage.
* In Kosovo, Croats or Janjevci (Letničani), as they inhabited mostly the town of Janjevo, before 1991 numbered 8,062 people, but after the war many fled, and number only 270 people.
* In North Macedonia, Croats number 2,686 people or 0.1% of the population, mostly living in the capital city of Skopje, the city of Bitola and around the Lake Ohrid.

===Diaspora===

There are currently 4–4.5 million Croats in diaspora throughout the world. The Croat diaspora was the consequence of either mostly economic or political (coercion or expulsions) reasons:
* To other European countries (Slovenia, Italy, Austria, Slovakia, Germany, Hungary), caused by the conquering of Ottoman Turks, when Croats as Roman Catholics were oppressed.
* To the Americas (largely to Canada, the United States of America, Chile, and Argentina, with smaller communities in Brazil, Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador) in the end of 19th and early 20th century, large numbers of Croats emigrated particularly for economic reasons.
* To New Zealand, predominately the Northland Region, to work on Kauri gum plantations.
* A further, larger wave of emigration, this time for political reasons, took place after the end of the World War II in Yugoslavia. At this time, both collaborators of the Ustasha regime and those who did not want to live under a communist regime fled the country, to the Americas and Oceania once more.
* As immigrant workers, particularly to Germany, Austria, and Switzerland in the 1960s and 1970s. In addition, some emigrants left for political reasons. This migration made it possible for communist Yugoslavia to achieve lower unemployment and at the same time the money sent home by emigrants to their families provided an enormous source of foreign exchange income.
* The last large wave of Croat emigration occurred during and after the Yugoslav Wars (1991–1995). Migrant communities already established in the Americas, Oceania, and across Europe grew as a result.

The count for diaspora is approximate because of incomplete statistical records and naturalization. Overseas, the United States contains the largest Croatian emigrant group (414,714 according to the 2010 census), mostly in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois and California, with a sizable community in Alaska, followed by Australia (133,268 according to the 2016 census, with concentrations in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth) and Canada (133,965 according to the 2016 census, mainly in Southern Ontario, British Columbia and Alberta).

Various estimations put the total number of Americans and Canadians with at least some Croatian ancestry at 2 million, many of whom do not identify as such in the countries&#x27; censuses.

Croats have also emigrated in several waves to South America: chiefly Chile, Argentina, and Brazil; estimates of their number vary wildly, from 150,000 up to 500,000. Both the presidents of Chile (Gabriel Boric) and Argentina (Javier Milei) are of Croatian descent.

There are also smaller groups of Croatian descendants in Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, South Africa, Mexico, and South Korea. The most important organizations of the Croatian diaspora are the Croatian Fraternal Union, Croatian Heritage Foundation and the Croatian World Congress.
==Maps==
==Historiography==
==See also==

* Croatia, nation-state of Croats
* Demographics of Croatia
* Timeline of Croatian history
* List of Croats
* List of rulers of Croatia
* Genetic studies on Croats
* Origin hypotheses of the Croats
* Slavs; Medieval Slav tribes; South Slavs
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
*
==External links==

* Matica hrvatska
* Review of Croatian History at Central and Eastern European Online Library
* The Croatian nation at the beginning of the 20th century 
* Famous Croats and Croatian cultural heritage
* Croatians in Arizona</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="4" end="10" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="24" end="36" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="37" end="49" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="60" end="67" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="69" end="91" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="127" end="134" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="139" end="158" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="187" end="195" title="Cultural heritage" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748196" start="197" end="204" title="Culture of Croatia" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q210726" start="206" end="213" title="History of Croatia" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="218" end="226" title="Croatian language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187243" start="308" end="316" title="Croats of Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="318" end="325" title="Burgenland Croats" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503845" start="331" end="345" title="Croats in the Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q836398" start="347" end="354" title="Croats in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q510403" start="356" end="363" title="Croats of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632439" start="365" end="370" title="Croats of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628094" start="372" end="382" title="Croats of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q39615" start="384" end="391" title="Croats of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290108" start="393" end="399" title="Croats of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789572" start="404" end="412" title="Croats in Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253297" start="569" end="577" title="Croatian diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="598" end="610" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="672" end="693" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="711" end="723" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="846" end="868" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="902" end="927" title="Constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="constituent ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="961" end="972" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028933" start="974" end="988" title="Central Bosnia" label="Central Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="993" end="1009" title="Bosnian Posavina" label="Bosnian Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="1027" end="1033" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="1065" end="1074" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253297" start="1087" end="1100" title="Tarara (Māori Croatian ethnic mix)" label="Tarara people"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="1116" end="1130" title="Northland Region" label="Te Tai Tokerau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1173" end="1178" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283558" start="1194" end="1201" title="Ngāpuhi" label="Ngāpuhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685509" start="1212" end="1222" title="Tarara Day" label="Tarara Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647357" start="1316" end="1324" title="Māori culture" label="Māoridom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1351" end="1366" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="1372" end="1389" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1405" end="1412" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1418" end="1432" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="1437" end="1459" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="1486" end="1503" title="minority language" label="minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="1585" end="1595" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443" start="1605" end="1611" title="Molise" label="Molise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12108622" start="1623" end="1631" title="Carașova" label="Carașova"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724913" start="1633" end="1638" title="Lupac" label="Lupac"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="1652" end="1661" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="1694" end="1702" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961525" start="1739" end="1750" title="Names of the Croats and Croatia" label="native name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="1783" end="1797" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="1823" end="1840" title="West Slavic languages" label="North-West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291644" start="1846" end="1863" title="Slavic liquid metathesis and pleophony" label="liquid metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="1925" end="1937" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q749834" start="1993" end="2009" title="Scythian languages" label="Scytho-Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358309" start="2031" end="2045" title="Tanais Tablets" label="Tanais Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="2163" end="2177" title="Ossetian language" label="Proto-Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2180" end="2187" title="Scythian languages#Alanian" label="Alanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957376" start="2502" end="2522" title="Branimir inscription" label="Branimir inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640240" start="2557" end="2580" title="Charter of Duke Trpimir" label="Charter of Duke Trpimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330496" start="2650" end="2662" title="Baška tablet" label="Baška tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="2676" end="2693" title="Glagolitic script" label="Glagolitic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="2781" end="2792" title="Early Slavs" label="Early Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="2805" end="2813" title="Sclaveni" label="Sclaveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q571813" start="2818" end="2823" title="Antae" label="Antae"/>
<link wikidata="Q997263" start="2839" end="2851" title="White Croats" label="White Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="2873" end="2892" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="3020" end="3028" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="3033" end="3039" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="3066" end="3073" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="3166" end="3173" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q827501" start="3177" end="3185" title="Dardania (Roman province)" label="Dardania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3636" end="3647" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q997263" start="3706" end="3718" title="White Croats" label="White Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q167672" start="3724" end="3743" title="White Croatia" label="Great/White Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3824" end="3833" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="3849" end="3873" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="4015" end="4028" title="Avar Khaganate" label="Avar hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="4101" end="4116" title="Constantine VII" label="Porphyrogenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="4387" end="4396" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="4418" end="4425" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="4456" end="4461" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="4463" end="4471" title="Sclaveni" label="Sclaveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q571813" start="4476" end="4481" title="Antes (people)" label="Antes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="4674" end="4681" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="4734" end="4743" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q621672" start="4759" end="4765" title="Pontus (region)" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="4863" end="4871" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358309" start="4968" end="4980" title="Tanais Tablets" label="inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153416" start="4990" end="4996" title="Tanais" label="Tanais"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="5106" end="5112" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="5310" end="5316" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q606584" start="5517" end="5526" title="Guduscani" label="Guduscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965811" start="5548" end="5555" title="Pagania" label="Pagania"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="5580" end="5587" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="5596" end="5605" title="Zachlumia" label="Zachlumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="5627" end="5636" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340956" start="5639" end="5645" title="Bosnia (early medieval)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107370" start="5651" end="5657" title="Principality of Serbia (early medieval)" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725901" start="5802" end="5810" title="Ljudevit (Lower Pannonia)" label="Ljudevit"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="5849" end="5854" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="5859" end="5863" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840813" start="5878" end="5895" title="Slavs in Lower Pannonia" label="Pannonia Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="5929" end="5934" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965811" start="6375" end="6382" title="Pagania" label="Pagania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="6384" end="6393" title="Zachlumia" label="Zachlumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="7114" end="7123" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q371214" start="7159" end="7192" title="Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja" label="Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252942" start="7352" end="7358" title="Duklja" label="Duklja"/>
<link wikidata="Q11750130" start="7359" end="7363" title="Zeta (crown land)" label="Zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223802" start="7410" end="7444" title="The New Cambridge Medieval History" label="The New Cambridge Medieval History"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="7777" end="7792" title="Gulf of Kvarner" label="Gulf of Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="7842" end="7853" title="Bosna (river)" label="river Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="8233" end="8240" title="Hungarians" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="8242" end="8248" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="8253" end="8260" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="8394" end="8410" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="Duchy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840813" start="8415" end="8445" title="Principality of Lower Pannonia" label="Principality of Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="8569" end="8587" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437019" start="8609" end="8617" title="Vojnomir of Pannonian Croatia" label="Vojnomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="8791" end="8802" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q725901" start="8871" end="8888" title="Ljudevit Posavski" label="Ljudevit Posavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="8922" end="8930" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="8931" end="8939" title="margrave" label="margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q154936" start="9270" end="9281" title="Arnulf of Carinthia" label="Duke Arnulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q564409" start="9377" end="9398" title="Royal Frankish Annals" label="Royal Frankish Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="9593" end="9601" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="9610" end="9616" title="Syrmia" label="Srijem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193152" start="9683" end="9696" title="Great Moravia" label="Great Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849082" start="9865" end="9872" title="Braslav of Croatia" label="Braslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="9962" end="9968" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="9973" end="9981" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="10318" end="10326" title="Tomislav of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="10622" end="10637" title="Dalmatian Croat" label="Dalmatian Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q150735" start="10704" end="10713" title="Lothair I" label="Lothair I"/>
<link wikidata="Q913524" start="10746" end="10752" title="Mislav of Croatia" label="Mislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q458419" start="10829" end="10845" title="Pietro Tradonico" label="Pietro Tradonico"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="10847" end="10861" title="doge of Venice" label="doge of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965811" start="10945" end="10952" title="Pagania" label="Pagania"/>
<link wikidata="Q311057" start="11007" end="11014" title="Boris I of Bulgaria" label="Boris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11030" end="11046" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="11218" end="11226" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470713" start="11249" end="11258" title="Trpimir I of Croatia" label="Trpimir I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="11566" end="11574" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="11758" end="11765" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259999" start="11824" end="11843" title="Trpimirović dynasty" label="Trpimirović dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="11977" end="11981" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151306" start="11984" end="11991" title="Domagoj of Croatia" label="Domagoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q169123" start="12005" end="12012" title="Zdeslav of Croatia" label="Zdeslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259232" start="12053" end="12061" title="Muncimir of Croatia" label="Muncimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="12065" end="12079" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="12118" end="12126" title="Saracens" label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q215204" start="12256" end="12264" title="Louis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q102361734" start="12286" end="12298" title="Louis II&amp;#x27;s campaign against Bari (866–871)" label="conquer Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="12335" end="12341" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="12563" end="12577" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q709663" start="12901" end="12907" title="Kocelj" label="Kocelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="13172" end="13189" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41592" start="13190" end="13197" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="13211" end="13215" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="13318" end="13326" title="Zahumlje" label="Zahumlje"/>
<link wikidata="Q898531" start="13401" end="13409" title="Branimir of Croatia" label="Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="13545" end="13553" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="13609" end="13618" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="13662" end="13676" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="13735" end="13747" title="Papacy" label="Roman Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="13785" end="13801" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13812" end="13816" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="14094" end="14111" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="14116" end="14125" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259232" start="14205" end="14213" title="Muncimir of Croatia" label="Muncimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="14429" end="14437" title="Tomislav of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q51153" start="14531" end="14537" title="Árpád dynasty" label="Arpads"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="14562" end="14572" title="Sava" label="Sava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="14681" end="14689" title="Tomislav of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q227976" start="14875" end="14886" title="Pope John X" label="Pope John X"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="14910" end="14924" title="King of Croatia" label="rex Chroatorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="15056" end="15064" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="15141" end="15148" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975874" start="15157" end="15164" title="Kondura (ship)" label="condura"/>
<link wikidata="Q179957" start="15234" end="15247" title="Palaeography" label="palaeographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q251373" start="15601" end="15609" title="allagion" label="allagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="15696" end="15712" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="15727" end="15735" title="Simeon I of Bulgaria" label="Simeon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071751" start="15839" end="15853" title="Dalmatia (theme)" label="coastal cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q854523" start="15945" end="15976" title="Croatian–Bulgarian battle of 927" label="battle of the Bosnian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623350" start="16162" end="16172" title="Alogobotur" label="Alogobotur"/>
<link wikidata="Q998961" start="16267" end="16279" title="Tomislavgrad" label="Tomislavgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q942280" start="16377" end="16387" title="Trpimir II of Croatia" label="Trpimir II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058383" start="16403" end="16413" title="Krešimir I of Croatia" label="Krešimir I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177676" start="16473" end="16481" title="Miroslav of Croatia" label="Miroslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q355900" start="16514" end="16521" title="Pribina" label="Pribina"/>
<link wikidata="Q589567" start="16600" end="16611" title="Mihajlo Krešimir II" label="Krešimir II"/>
<link wikidata="Q370256" start="16696" end="16712" title="Stjepan Držislav" label="Stjepan Držislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063734" start="16849" end="16858" title="Svetoslav Suronja" label="Svetoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060473" start="16871" end="16883" title="Krešimir III of Croatia" label="Krešimir III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470425" start="16900" end="16907" title="Gojslav of Croatia" label="Gojslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q278038" start="17200" end="17209" title="Stjepan I of Croatia" label="Stjepan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q281316" start="17485" end="17496" title="Petar Krešimir IV of Croatia" label="Krešimir IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q117840" start="17871" end="17887" title="Pope Nicholas II" label="Pope Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="17980" end="17990" title="Roman rite" label="Roman rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="18062" end="18082" title="Great Schism of 1054" label="Great Schism of 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q470647" start="18104" end="18119" title="Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia" label="Dmitar Zvonimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259999" start="18162" end="18182" title="House of Trpimirović" label="House of Trpimirović"/>
<link wikidata="Q117814546" start="18190" end="18205" title="Ban of Slavonia" label="Ban of Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854595" start="18226" end="18233" title="Crown of Zvonimir" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q642828" start="18255" end="18260" title="Solin, Croatia" label="Solin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11295809" start="18268" end="18301" title="Hollow Church" label="Basilica of Saint Peter and Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="18368" end="18384" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Pope Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="18420" end="18426" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258850" start="18493" end="18512" title="Chronica Hungarorum" label="Chronica Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="18535" end="18544" title="Carinthia (state)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="18658" end="18665" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q267792" start="18733" end="18749" title="Helena of Hungary, Queen of Croatia" label="Helen of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311351" start="18772" end="18778" title="Bela I" label="Bela I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51153" start="18796" end="18809" title="Árpád dynasty" label="Árpád dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q26486" start="18845" end="18856" title="Ladislaus I of Hungary" label="Ladislaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060057" start="18950" end="18960" title="Stjepan II of Croatia" label="Stjepan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741354" start="19233" end="19245" title="Petar Snačić" label="Petar Snačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="19315" end="19319" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="19412" end="19416" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166811" start="19471" end="19485" title="Mala Kapela" label="Gvozd Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83066" start="19536" end="19556" title="Coloman of Hungary" label="Coloman I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q842361" start="19574" end="19598" title="Battle of Gvozd Mountain" label="Battle of Gvozd Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q84155" start="19734" end="19746" title="Petrova Gora" label="Petrova Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223802" start="20071" end="20105" title="The New Cambridge Medieval History" label="The New Cambridge Medieval History"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="20438" end="20453" title="Gulf of Kvarner" label="Gulf of Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="20503" end="20514" title="Bosna (river)" label="river Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="21112" end="21117" title="Sabor" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q399139" start="21427" end="21442" title="Biograd na Moru" label="Biograd na Moru"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="21496" end="21509" title="feudal system" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="21517" end="21521" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="21821" end="21826" title="House of Šubić" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q227187" start="21955" end="21962" title="Zrmanja" label="Zrmanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q591224" start="21971" end="21975" title="Krka (Croatia)" label="Krka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="22012" end="22015" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q943292" start="22051" end="22060" title="House of Frankopan" label="Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="22219" end="22226" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759584" start="22229" end="22249" title="Law codex of Vinodol" label="Law codex of Vinodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509635" start="22335" end="22342" title="House of Nelipić" label="Nelipić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158060" start="22348" end="22364" title="Zagora (Croatia)" label="Dalmatian Zagora"/>
<link wikidata="Q12793570" start="22388" end="22393" title="Kačić" label="Kačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965811" start="22409" end="22416" title="Pagania" label="Pagania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12635088" start="22491" end="22501" title="Kurjaković" label="Kurjaković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515192" start="22545" end="22557" title="Gusić family" label="Gusić family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110862" start="22563" end="22569" title="Krbava" label="Krbava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14697977" start="22593" end="22600" title="House of Babonić" label="Babonić"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="22624" end="22628" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126712" start="22640" end="22645" title="Vrbas (river)" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="22650" end="22655" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q849260" start="22713" end="22719" title="House of Iločki" label="Iločki"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="22834" end="22849" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="22858" end="22877" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q51153" start="22989" end="22994" title="Árpád dynasty" label="Árpád"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="22999" end="23004" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="23069" end="23091" title="Paul I Šubić of Bribir" label="Paul I Šubić of Bribir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716495" start="23251" end="23265" title="Mladen I Šubić of Bribir" label="Mladen I Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="23307" end="23316" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048627" start="23397" end="23412" title="Mladen II Šubić of Bribir" label="Mladen II Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="23744" end="23759" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870499" start="23962" end="23978" title="battle of Bliska" label="battle of Bliska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435292" start="24131" end="24140" title="Ostrovica, Croatia" label="Ostrovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396104" start="24145" end="24156" title="Zrin Castle" label="Zrin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q227184" start="24204" end="24211" title="House of Zrinski" label="Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345536" start="24423" end="24438" title="Treaty of Zadar" label="Treaty of Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154412" start="24666" end="24670" title="Mary, Queen of Hungary" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311861" start="24672" end="24693" title="Charles III of Naples" label="Charles III of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q231166" start="24849" end="24868" title="Elizabeth of Bosnia" label="Elizabeth of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275575" start="24891" end="24906" title="John of Palisna" label="John of Palisna"/>
<link wikidata="Q716784" start="24908" end="24919" title="John Horvat" label="John Horvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="25125" end="25148" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212220" start="25215" end="25234" title="Battle of Nicopolis" label="Battle of Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336445" start="25249" end="25265" title="Rise of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q772697" start="25410" end="25426" title="House of Lacković" label="Stjepan Lacković"/>
<link wikidata="Q317593" start="25469" end="25488" title="Ladislaus of Naples" label="Ladislaus of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514236" start="25530" end="25554" title="Bloody Sabor of Križevci" label="Bloody Sabor of Križevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="25900" end="25929" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="Turkish incursion into Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="26011" end="26018" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="26085" end="26091" title="Italia" label="Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="26093" end="26103" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="26111" end="26114" title="friar" label="fra"/>
<link wikidata="Q310359" start="26115" end="26130" title="Giovanni da Capistrano" label="John Capistrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q191079" start="26146" end="26159" title="Generalissimus" label="Generalissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q242688" start="26160" end="26172" title="János Hunyadi" label="John Hunyadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="26193" end="26210" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14366850" start="26239" end="26252" title="long campaign" label="long campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="26266" end="26281" title="battle of Varna" label="battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q698706" start="26297" end="26320" title="battle of Kosovo (1448)" label="battle of Kosovo (1448)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="26374" end="26382" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q244980" start="26390" end="26414" title="siege of Belgrade (1456)" label="siege of Belgrade (1456)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510113" start="26419" end="26433" title="Siege of Jajce" label="Siege of Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q694379" start="26490" end="26512" title="battle of Krbava field" label="battle of Krbava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="26514" end="26518" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="26611" end="26621" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q571811" start="26674" end="26700" title="Antemurale Christianitatis" label="Antemurale Christianitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="26813" end="26826" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="26850" end="26853" title="ban (title)" label="ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q793498" start="26854" end="26870" title="Petar Berislavić" label="Petar Berislavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q180290" start="26892" end="26898" title="Dubica, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Dubica"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="26906" end="26909" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q259466" start="26940" end="26944" title="Senj" label="Senj"/>
<link wikidata="Q738630" start="26959" end="26963" title="Klis" label="Klis"/>
<link wikidata="Q331053" start="26964" end="26976" title="Petar Kružić" label="Petar Kružić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712312" start="26995" end="27008" title="Klis Fortress" label="Klis Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q606632" start="27038" end="27052" title="Nikola Jurišić" label="Nikola Jurišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q467477" start="27141" end="27158" title="Nikola IV Zrinski" label="Nikola IV Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q210205" start="27175" end="27179" title="Pest (city)" label="Pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q606621" start="27222" end="27241" title="Battle of Szigetvar" label="Battle of Szigetvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="27360" end="27376" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="27406" end="27414" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q32607" start="27512" end="27527" title="János Szapolyai" label="János Szapolyai"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="27532" end="27552" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436757" start="27591" end="27599" title="Parliament on Cetin" label="at Cetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="28034" end="28038" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q221242" start="28251" end="28268" title="Military Frontier" label="Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="28433" end="28438" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="28440" end="28446" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="28448" end="28455" title="Ethnic German" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="28492" end="28501" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055358" start="28571" end="28579" title="Croatian and Slovenian peasant revolt" label="rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="28652" end="28657" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q701335" start="28884" end="28899" title="battle of Sisak" label="battle of Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q690361" start="28967" end="28983" title="Long Turkish War" label="Long Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q695212" start="28999" end="29019" title="Peace of Zsitvatorok" label="Peace of Zsitvatorok"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="29296" end="29318" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="29511" end="29533" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="29549" end="29566" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153545" start="29632" end="29656" title="Albrecht von Wallenstein" label="Albrecht von Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q899414" start="29672" end="29687" title="Juraj V Zrinski" label="Juraj V Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="29746" end="29756" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="29758" end="29766" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329803" start="29879" end="29893" title="Miklós Zrínyi" label="Nikola Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="30028" end="30035" title="Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q681401" start="30091" end="30106" title="Peace of Vasvár" label="Peace of Vasvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q255006" start="30392" end="30410" title="Magnate conspiracy" label="Magnate conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q508799" start="30491" end="30504" title="Petar Zrinski" label="Petar Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q559980" start="30506" end="30526" title="Fran Krsto Frankopan" label="Fran Krsto Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q588880" start="30531" end="30548" title="Ferenc Wesselényi" label="Ferenc Wesselényi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="30671" end="30690" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="30696" end="30726" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="30728" end="30734" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="30740" end="30758" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="30772" end="30786" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="31003" end="31018" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="31824" end="31831" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q313102" start="31839" end="31865" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="31888" end="31901" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="31909" end="31939" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="32406" end="32409" title="ban (title)" label="ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="33090" end="33107" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="33144" end="33152" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="33299" end="33317" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="33429" end="33441" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="33539" end="33559" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="33611" end="33624" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="33629" end="33642" title="Magyarization" label="Magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="33702" end="33719" title="Illyrian movement" label="Illyrian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="33820" end="33837" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q352617" start="33893" end="33905" title="Ljudevit Gaj" label="Ljudevit Gaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="34346" end="34356" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="34931" end="34973" title="revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire" label="revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="34988" end="34991" title="Ban (title)" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="34992" end="34999" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="35047" end="35075" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241936" start="35142" end="35158" title="Battle of Pákozd" label="Battle of Pákozd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535641" start="35219" end="35230" title="Levin Rauch" label="Levin Rauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="35287" end="35302" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="35372" end="35379" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="35617" end="35626" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="35730" end="35738" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="35803" end="35810" title="general officer" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="35814" end="35821" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="35855" end="35880" title="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy" label="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="35891" end="35905" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="35986" end="36000" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="36006" end="36024" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="36026" end="36043" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="36074" end="36091" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="36098" end="36111" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="36117" end="36135" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511995" start="36158" end="36172" title="Stožerni general" label="staff generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="36177" end="36189" title="rear admiral" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="36196" end="36207" title="viceadmiral" label="viceadmiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="36274" end="36289" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58672" start="36294" end="36324" title="dissolution of Austria-Hungary" label="dissolution of Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="36361" end="36398" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="36442" end="36454" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of SHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="36464" end="36481" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="36583" end="36604" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236807" start="36697" end="36706" title="Yugoslavs" label="Yugoslavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="36773" end="36792" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Banovina of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36885" end="36901" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="36907" end="36918" title="Axis forces" label="Axis forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="36931" end="36959" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="36971" end="36977" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="37149" end="37159" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="37169" end="37179" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="37358" end="37367" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="37543" end="37558" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="37629" end="37632" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="38349" end="38360" title="Genetics" label="Genetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q428875" start="38369" end="38385" title="Human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup" label="Y-chromosome DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512235" start="38459" end="38461" title="Haplogroup I-M438" label="I2"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="38476" end="38479" title="Haplogroup R1a (Y-DNA)" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033982" start="38537" end="38538" title="Haplogroup E (Y-DNA)" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="38546" end="38549" title="Haplogroup R1b (Y-DNA)" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584175" start="38559" end="38560" title="Haplogroup J (Y-DNA)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q428853" start="38570" end="38572" title="Haplogroup I-M253" label="I1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034232" start="38581" end="38582" title="Haplogroup G (Y-DNA)" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q632976" start="38744" end="38784" title="Slavic migrations to Southeastern Europe" label="Slavic migrations to Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356230" start="38896" end="38913" title="Human mitochondrial DNA haplogroup" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584156" start="39050" end="39051" title="Haplogroup H (mtDNA)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584199" start="39059" end="39060" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375490" start="39075" end="39076" title="Haplogroup J (mtDNA)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="39171" end="39180" title="Autosome" label="autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988338" start="39181" end="39184" title="Identity by descent" label="IBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="39275" end="39291" title="migration period" label="migration period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532875" start="39587" end="39596" title="Genetic admixture" label="admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q636489" start="39826" end="39840" title="archaeogenetic" label="archaeogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="40036" end="40044" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="40048" end="40060" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40138" end="40155" title="Variety (linguistics)#Standard varieties" label="normative variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="40159" end="40173" title="Serbo-Croatian language" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="40182" end="40203" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="40245" end="40252" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="40254" end="40261" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="40267" end="40278" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221190" start="40284" end="40349" title="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian" label="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="40378" end="40396" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="40464" end="40481" title="Chakavian dialect" label="Chakavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="40556" end="40573" title="Kajkavian dialect" label="Kajkavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="41021" end="41046" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="41122" end="41141" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="41184" end="41191" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="41470" end="41480" title="Glagolitic" label="Glagolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="41745" end="41750" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q894350" start="41768" end="41776" title="Croatian Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="41817" end="41822" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="41915" end="41930" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330496" start="42031" end="42043" title="Baška tablet" label="Baška tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4170102" start="42118" end="42147" title="Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor" label="Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="42174" end="42177" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372503" start="42294" end="42302" title="Zvonimir" label="Zvonimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q833590" start="42537" end="42543" title="Missal" label="Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263744" start="42703" end="42723" title="Hrvoje&amp;#x27;s Missal" label="Hrvoje&amp;#x27;s Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507302" start="42821" end="42848" title="Missale Romanum Glagolitice" label="Missale Romanum Glagolitice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759584" start="43019" end="43032" title="Vinodol Codex" label="Vinodol Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="43091" end="43109" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q833590" start="43200" end="43206" title="missal" label="missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="43209" end="43219" title="breviary" label="breviaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="43221" end="43233" title="Breviary" label="prayer books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917131" start="43336" end="43364" title="Vatican Croatian Prayer Book" label="Vatican Croatian Prayer Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="43417" end="43431" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="43440" end="43450" title="Latin-Rite" label="Latin Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q838267" start="43493" end="43508" title="Slavic paganism" label="Slavic paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="43512" end="43526" title="Roman paganism" label="Roman paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="43571" end="43575" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q309061" start="43639" end="43657" title="Liber Pontificalis" label="Liber Pontificalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199491" start="43665" end="43677" title="Pope John IV" label="Pope John IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="43716" end="43721" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="43738" end="43746" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="43751" end="43757" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="43812" end="43818" title="relics" label="relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="44053" end="44069" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="44197" end="44206" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587409" start="44605" end="44623" title="Gospel of Cividale" label="Gospel of Cividale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="44683" end="44687" title="mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q779011" start="44772" end="44798" title="Principality of Montenegro" label="Principality of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974058" start="44851" end="44877" title="History of Czechoslovakia (1918-38)" label="Republic of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376184" start="45156" end="45173" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Croatia" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q394286" start="45189" end="45197" title="Žumberak" label="Žumberak"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="45200" end="45213" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249399" start="45218" end="45223" title="Croat Muslims" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="45707" end="45713" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="45730" end="45742" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="45744" end="45752" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="45792" end="45796" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="45809" end="45820" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="45934" end="45950" title="Austro-Hungarian" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="46018" end="46026" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428470" start="46035" end="46040" title="klapa" label="klapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="46064" end="46074" title="tamburitza" label="tamburitza"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="46089" end="46097" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296569" start="46191" end="46195" title="Sinjska alka" label="Alka"/>
<link wikidata="Q216978" start="46199" end="46203" title="Sinj" label="Sinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q669370" start="46353" end="46358" title="gusle" label="gusle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076115" start="46377" end="46381" title="Kolo (dance)" label="kolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253861" start="46558" end="46565" title="Bećarac" label="Bećarac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630967" start="46622" end="46672" title="Festivity of Saint Blaise, the patron of Dubrovnik" label="Festivity of Saint Blaise, the patron of Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428470" start="46743" end="46748" title="Klapa" label="Klapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023341" start="46812" end="46833" title="Lacemaking in Croatia" label="Lacemaking in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63064412" start="46849" end="46867" title="Međimurska popevka" label="Međimurska popevka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034534" start="46910" end="46921" title="Nijemo Kolo" label="Nijemo Kolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504711" start="46997" end="47006" title="Za Križen" label="Za Križen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630167" start="47175" end="47206" title="wooden toys of Hrvatsko Zagorje" label="wooden toys of Hrvatsko Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089067" start="47258" end="47271" title="Istrian scale" label="Istrian scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="47820" end="47827" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="47871" end="47879" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="47884" end="47892" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="47922" end="47933" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q510203" start="48123" end="48142" title="Giorgio da Sebenico" label="Giorgio da Sebenico"/>
<link wikidata="Q735988" start="48147" end="48165" title="Niccolò Fiorentino" label="Niccolò Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q391973" start="48178" end="48200" title="Šibenik Cathedral" label="Cathedral of St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549" start="48204" end="48211" title="Šibenik" label="Šibenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q426935" start="48364" end="48385" title="Church of St. Donatus" label="Church of St. Donatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434349" start="48572" end="48588" title="Trogir Cathedral" label="Trogir Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254704" start="48601" end="48608" title="Radovan (master)" label="Radovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46805" start="48654" end="48664" title="Romanesque art" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312467" start="48691" end="48702" title="Renaissance in Croatia" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="48805" end="48845" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="48912" end="48919" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="48924" end="48930" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q434257" start="49078" end="49101" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q468219" start="49166" end="49179" title="Vlaho Bukovac" label="Vlaho Bukovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q313828" start="49184" end="49198" title="Ivan Meštrović" label="Ivan Meštrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330496" start="49205" end="49217" title="Baška tablet" label="Baška tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="49279" end="49282" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q336571" start="49473" end="49486" title="Marko Marulić" label="Marko Marulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q380525" start="49528" end="49539" title="Marin Držić" label="Marin Držić"/>
<link wikidata="Q317588" start="49554" end="49567" title="Ivan Gundulić" label="Ivan Gundulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="49569" end="49594" title="Croatian national revival" label="Croatian national revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q453536" start="49600" end="49614" title="Ivan Mažuranić" label="Ivan Mažuranić"/>
<link wikidata="Q347672" start="49646" end="49658" title="August Šenoa" label="August Šenoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q610015" start="49676" end="49694" title="Antun Gustav Matoš" label="Antun Gustav Matoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277590" start="49701" end="49719" title="Antun Branko Šimić" label="Antun Branko Šimić"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="49721" end="49734" title="Expressionism" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="49739" end="49746" title="Literary realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q325428" start="49754" end="49769" title="Miroslav Krleža" label="Miroslav Krleža"/>
<link wikidata="Q347643" start="49776" end="49786" title="Tin Ujević" label="Tin Ujević"/>
<link wikidata="Q47561" start="49823" end="49833" title="Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q133015" start="49917" end="49932" title="flag of Croatia" label="flag of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919464" start="49962" end="49971" title="Triband (flag)" label="tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q184252" start="49981" end="50004" title="Coat of Arms of Croatia" label="Coat of Arms of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q406991" start="50093" end="50104" title="Pan-Slavic colors" label="Pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184252" start="50140" end="50163" title="Coat of arms of Croatia" label="Coat of arms of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087863" start="50227" end="50248" title="Croatian checkerboard" label="Croatian checkerboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="50370" end="50379" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="50408" end="50440" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237965" start="50446" end="50467" title="Chiesa dei Domenicani" label="Chiesa dei Domenicani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526" start="50471" end="50478" title="Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436757" start="50620" end="50642" title="1527 election in Cetin" label="1527 election in Cetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="50674" end="50705" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592503" start="50917" end="50958" title="Crescent and star (symbol)" label="silver crescent moon and six pointed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993924" start="50970" end="50976" title="Leliwa coat of arms" label="Leliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="51089" end="51095" title="marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="51141" end="51157" title="Mars" label="six pointed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="51192" end="51216" title="Vladislaus II of Hungary" label="Vladislaus II of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q308974" start="51871" end="51887" title="Croatia Airlines" label="Croatia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="51923" end="51953" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q406991" start="52036" end="52054" title="Pan-Slavic colours" label="Pan-Slavic colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147416" start="52086" end="52104" title="Croatian interlace" label="Croatian interlace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507722" start="52301" end="52324" title="Croatian military ranks" label="Croatian military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="52395" end="52407" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="52529" end="52551" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="52585" end="52610" title="Nations of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="constituent ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="52644" end="52655" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028933" start="52657" end="52671" title="Central Bosnia" label="Central Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="52676" end="52692" title="Bosnian Posavina" label="Bosnian Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="52710" end="52716" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="52748" end="52757" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q178419" start="52791" end="52796" title="Šokci" label="Šokci"/>
<link wikidata="Q591964" start="52841" end="52849" title="Bunjevci" label="Bunjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q210300" start="53028" end="53033" title="Bačka" label="Bačka"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="53084" end="53092" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="53104" end="53120" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="53122" end="53131" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q15896" start="53143" end="53150" title="Metlika" label="Metlika"/>
<link wikidata="Q861573" start="53159" end="53173" title="Lower Carniola" label="Lower Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187243" start="53191" end="53197" title="Croats of Slovenia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="53200" end="53210" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="53226" end="53238" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Bay of Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628094" start="53247" end="53253" title="Croats of Montenegro" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="53284" end="53290" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276880" start="53298" end="53306" title="Janjevci" label="Janjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="53414" end="53424" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471494" start="53533" end="53541" title="Regions of Croatia" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q178419" start="53689" end="53694" title="Šokci" label="Šokci"/>
<link wikidata="Q591964" start="53723" end="53731" title="Bunjevci" label="Bunjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="53760" end="53777" title="Burgenland Croats" label="Burgenland Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q960850" start="53789" end="53802" title="Molise Croats" label="Molise Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628094" start="53812" end="53819" title="Croats of Boka Kotorska" label="Bokelji"/>
<link wikidata="Q510403" start="53834" end="53838" title="Croats of Hungary" label="Raci"/>
<link wikidata="Q39615" start="53850" end="53860" title="Krashovani" label="Krashovani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276880" start="53876" end="53884" title="Janjevci" label="Janjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="53945" end="53957" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="53974" end="53996" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="54022" end="54046" title="Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="constitute ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="54123" end="54159" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="54223" end="54255" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian and Herzegovinian Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="54262" end="54272" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="54278" end="54290" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Bay of Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628094" start="54292" end="54298" title="Croats of Montenegro" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="54380" end="54386" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290108" start="54388" end="54394" title="Croats of Serbia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="54506" end="54515" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="54612" end="54620" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="54627" end="54635" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187243" start="54637" end="54643" title="Croats of Slovenia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="54750" end="54766" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="54768" end="54777" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q15896" start="54789" end="54796" title="Metlika" label="Metlika"/>
<link wikidata="Q861573" start="54805" end="54819" title="Lower Carniola" label="Lower Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="54957" end="54967" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="54969" end="54986" title="Burgenland Croats" label="Burgenland Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="55066" end="55072" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="55083" end="55097" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503845" start="55099" end="55105" title="Croats in the Czech Republic" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="55256" end="55263" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013870" start="55284" end="55293" title="Jevišovka" label="Jevišovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023870" start="55295" end="55305" title="Dobré Pole" label="Dobré Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023808" start="55310" end="55321" title="Nový Přerov" label="Nový Přerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q510403" start="55337" end="55343" title="Croats of Hungary" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632439" start="55432" end="55438" title="Croats of Italy" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q36254" start="55445" end="55455" title="Molise Croatian" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q960850" start="55558" end="55571" title="Molise Croats" label="Molise Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443" start="55591" end="55597" title="Molise" label="Molise"/>
<link wikidata="Q39615" start="55613" end="55619" title="Croats of Romania" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q187925" start="55693" end="55713" title="Caraș-Severin County" label="Caraș-Severin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q659103" start="55718" end="55726" title="communes of Romania" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724913" start="55730" end="55735" title="Lupac" label="Lupac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12108622" start="55748" end="55756" title="Carașova" label="Carașova"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="55772" end="55778" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290108" start="55780" end="55786" title="Croats of Serbia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q591964" start="55798" end="55806" title="Bunjevci" label="Bunjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q178419" start="55811" end="55816" title="Šokci" label="Šokci"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="55902" end="55911" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="55918" end="55926" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789572" start="55928" end="55934" title="Croats in Slovakia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="56037" end="56047" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q258143" start="56068" end="56083" title="Chorvátsky Grob" label="Chorvátsky Grob"/>
<link wikidata="Q341724" start="56085" end="56091" title="Čunovo" label="Čunovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q970325" start="56093" end="56110" title="Devínska Nová Ves" label="Devínska Nová Ves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091791" start="56112" end="56119" title="Rusovce" label="Rusovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055697" start="56124" end="56131" title="Jarovce" label="Jarovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="56181" end="56189" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276880" start="56244" end="56252" title="Janjevci" label="Janjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="56266" end="56272" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253297" start="56321" end="56327" title="Tarara (Māori Croatian ethnic mix)" label="Tarara"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="56395" end="56409" title="Northland Region" label="Te Tai Tokerau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685509" start="56463" end="56473" title="Tarara Day" label="Tarara Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q942917" start="56585" end="56592" title="Janjevo" label="Janjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="56691" end="56706" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187238" start="56708" end="56714" title="Croats in North Macedonia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="56799" end="56805" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="56819" end="56825" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q156258" start="56841" end="56851" title="Lake Ohrid" label="Lake Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="56914" end="56922" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="57024" end="57032" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187243" start="57088" end="57096" title="Croats of Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632439" start="57098" end="57103" title="Croats of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="57105" end="57112" title="Croatians in Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789572" start="57114" end="57122" title="Croats in Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836398" start="57124" end="57131" title="Croats in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q510403" start="57133" end="57140" title="Croats of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="57171" end="57184" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57217" end="57231" title="Persecution of Christians#Ottoman Empire" label="were oppressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187097" start="57263" end="57269" title="Croatian Canadians" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003133" start="57275" end="57299" title="Croatian Americans" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503021" start="57301" end="57306" title="Croatian Chileans" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514225" start="57312" end="57321" title="Croatian Argentines" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507533" start="57351" end="57357" title="Croatian Brazilians" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503027" start="57359" end="57363" title="Croatian Peruvians" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997267" start="57365" end="57373" title="Croatian Colombians" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16578805" start="57379" end="57386" title="Croatian Ecuadorians" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="57536" end="57552" title="Northland Region" label="Northland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737159" start="57565" end="57574" title="Kauri gum" label="Kauri gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="57693" end="57719" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="57761" end="57768" title="Ustaše" label="Ustasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="57819" end="57828" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="57874" end="57881" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187246" start="57955" end="57966" title="Croats of Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="58009" end="58018" title="emigrants" label="emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="58093" end="58103" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="58334" end="58347" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="58548" end="58562" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003133" start="58613" end="58636" title="Croatian Americans" label="Croatian emigrant group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="58687" end="58691" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="58693" end="58705" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="58707" end="58715" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="58720" end="58730" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="58760" end="58766" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187093" start="58780" end="58789" title="Croatian Australians" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="58852" end="58858" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="58860" end="58869" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="58874" end="58879" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033752" start="58941" end="58957" title="Southern Ontario" label="Southern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="58959" end="58975" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="58980" end="58987" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503021" start="59251" end="59256" title="Croatian Chileans" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514225" start="59258" end="59267" title="Croatian Argentines" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507533" start="59273" end="59279" title="Croatian Brazilians" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297876" start="59378" end="59391" title="Gabriel Boric" label="Gabriel Boric"/>
<link wikidata="Q52395487" start="59408" end="59420" title="Javier Milei" label="Javier Milei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16578805" start="59513" end="59520" title="Croatian Ecuadorians" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503027" start="59522" end="59526" title="Croatian Peruvians" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="59616" end="59624" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504962" start="59633" end="59657" title="Croatian Fraternal Union" label="Croatian Fraternal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187126" start="59659" end="59687" title="Croatian Heritage Foundation" label="Croatian Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="59765" end="59772" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="59799" end="59822" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="Demographics of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805702" start="59825" end="59853" title="Timeline of Croatian history" label="Timeline of Croatian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202072" start="59856" end="59870" title="List of Croats" label="List of Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="59873" end="59898" title="List of rulers of Croatia" label="List of rulers of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631424" start="59901" end="59926" title="Genetic studies on Croats" label="Genetic studies on Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562575" start="59929" end="59960" title="Origin hypotheses of the Croats" label="Origin hypotheses of the Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="59963" end="59968" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q159837" start="59970" end="59990" title="List of Medieval Slavic tribes" label="Medieval Slav tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="59992" end="60003" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69802" wikidata="Q5756" url="?curid=69802" title="Community of Madrid">
<text>The Community of Madrid (; ) is one of the seventeen autonomous communities and 50 provinces of Spain. It is located in the centre of the Iberian Peninsula, and of the Central Plateau (). Its capital and largest municipality is Madrid, which is also the capital of the country. The Community of Madrid is bounded to the south and east by Castilla–La Mancha and to the north and west by Castile and León. It was formally created in 1983, in order to address the particular status of the city of Madrid as the capital of the Spanish State and in urban hierarchy. Its boundaries are coextensive with those of the province of Madrid, which was until then conventionally included in the historical region of New Castile (&quot;Castilla la Nueva&quot;).

The Community of Madrid is the third most populous in Spain with 7,058,041 (2024) inhabitants, roughly a seventh of the national total, mostly concentrated in the metropolitan area of Madrid. It is also the most densely populated autonomous community. Madrid has both the largest nominal GDP, slightly ahead of that of Catalonia, and the highest GDP per capita in the country. Madrid&#x27;s economy is highly tertiarised, having a leading role in Spain&#x27;s logistics and transportation.

The Community of Madrid is almost entirely comprised in the Tagus Basin, from the Central System (&quot;Sistema Central&quot;) reliefs in the north and northwest to the Tagus River bed in the southern border. The climate is generally temperate, ranging from mediterranean to semi-arid, except in the Central System highlands. It contains four World Heritage Sites: the Monastery and Royal Site of El Escorial, the university and historic centre of Alcalá de Henares, the cultural landscape of Aranjuez and the Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro park in Madrid City. In addition, the is part of the transnational Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe world heritage site.

==Geography==

Despite the existence of a large urban area of nearly 7 million people, the Community of Madrid still retains some remarkably unspoiled and diverse habitats and landscapes. Madrid is home to mountain peaks rising above 2,000 m, holm oak dehesas and low-lying plains. The slopes of the Guadarrama mountain range are cloaked in dense forests of Scots pine and Pyrenean oak. The Lozoya Valley supports a large black (monk) vulture colony, and one of the last bastions of the Spanish imperial eagle in the world is found in the Park Regional del Suroeste in dehesa hills between the Gredos and Guadarrama ranges. The recent possible detection of the existence of Iberian lynx in the area between the Cofio and Alberche rivers is testament to the biodiversity of the area. Taking advantage of the orography, there are several reservoirs and local dams, with the Santillana reservoir being the largest.
When looking at a map of the province of Madrid, it can be seen that it is almost an equilateral triangle, in whose center would be the city. First, by the western side, it borders the &quot;Sistema Central&quot; (the Guadarrama mountain range), the southern border features a protrusion following the Tagus River in order to include the royal site of Aranjuez in the region; the eastern edge of the triangle comes from the rupture of the fluvial river basins. This autonomous community is located in the basin of the Tagus River. The Tagus passes through the southern border of the Autonomy in its path west toward the Atlantic Ocean, draining the waters of the Jarama River (collecting in turn the waters of the Lozoya, the Guadalix, the Manzanares, the Henares and the Tajuña), the Alberche and the Guadarrama in the Community.

This autonomous community also includes the exclave of Dehesa de la Cepeda (part of the municipality of Santa María de la Alameda), a mostly open-area geographically located between the provinces of Ávila and Segovia in the autonomous community of Castile and León.

The Province of Madrid occupies a surface area of approximately (1.6% of all Spanish territory). More specifically, the exact position of Madrid is 3° 40&#x27; of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and 40° 23&#x27; north of the equator.

Most of the province lies between 600 and 1,000 m above sea level. However, there the altitude ranges from 2,428 metres of Peñalara to 430 metres at the Alberche river when it leaves Villa del Prado into the province of Toledo. Other considerable heights, as well as being famous, are the Bola del Mundo (&quot;Ball of the World&quot;) in Navacerrada, at a height of 2,258 m, the Siete Picos (&quot;Seven Peaks&quot;) in Cercedilla, at 2,138 m, and the Peña Cebollera (2,129 m) at the northernmost end of the province, a tripoint between the Madrid region and the provinces of Segovia and Guadalajara.

;Fauna
Among the protected species of birds nesting in the region stand out the Spanish imperial eagle, the golden eagle, the Bonelli&#x27;s eagle, the cinereous vulture, the peregrine falcon and the black stork.

Exotic invasive species of birds and mammals in the region include the red-eared slider, the monk parakeet, the common snapping turtle, the rose-ringed parakeet, the American mink and the raccoon. Species described as &quot;out of place&quot; and with an increasing population include the black-headed gull, the lesser black-backed gull, the great cormorant and Eurasian collared dove, while the emblematic iberian ibex is presented as a case of a species &quot;gone out of control&quot; in La Pedriza following its re-introduction in the region in 1990 after roughly a century disappeared from the Madrilenian mountains.

The mountain amphibians living at a high altitude include the fire salamander, the marbled newt, the alpine newt, the iberian frog, the European tree frog or the common midwife toad. At a middle elevation in the mountain reaches close to water streams there are species such as the Bosca&#x27;s newt, the southern marbled newt, the mediterranean tree frog or the iberian midwife toad. The common parsley frog and the &quot;Alytes obstetricans pertinax&quot; dwell in the limestone lowlands near the Tagus in the south-east of the region. Among the all-around amphibians adaptable to different heights stand out the natterjack toad, the common toad and the iberian green frog. Other species with a wide distribution range (although in this case restricted by altitude) are the gallipato, the iberian spadefoot toad, the iberian painted frog, and the Spanish painted frog.

Regarding the reptiles, species such as the Cyren&#x27;s rock lizard, the European wall lizard, the iberian emerald lizard, the deaf adder or snakes such as the smooth snake or the &quot;Vipera latastei&quot; dwell in the mountain heights. At the lower reaches of the mountains the European pond turtle and the Brediaga&#x27;s skink can be found, while the western false smooth snake is restricted to areas in the south of the region. Among the species of all-around reptiles, adaptable to different biomes stand out the Spanish pond turtle, the salamanquesa, the western three-toed skink, the spiny-footed lizard, the ocellated lizard, the Algerian sand racer, Spanish psammodromus, the ubiquitous iberian wall lizard, the iberian worm lizard, the &quot;Coronella girondica&quot;, the Montpellier snake; grass snake and the viperine snake.

The fish species are affected by the high number of reservoirs in the region. Among the threatened species in the rivers stand out the European eel, the iberian barbel, the &quot;Squalius alburnoides&quot;, the &quot;Cobitis calderoni&quot; and, potentially, the &quot;Chondrostoma lemmingii&quot;. Conversely the set of invasive species of fish includes pike, black bullhead catfish, pumpkinseed, zander, common bleak and black-bass.

;Vegetation

In the vicinity of the mountain peaks, oromediterranean vegetation such as &quot;Agrostis truncatula&quot;, &#x27;, &quot;Festuca indigesta&quot;, &#x27;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Minuartia recurva&quot;, &quot;Pilosella vahlii&quot;, &quot;Plantago holosteum&quot; and the &quot;Thymus praecox&quot; is common. Below the summit line, shrubby species such as the Cytisus oromediterraneus and the common juniper as well as the Scots pine take over. There are also masses of black pine and the pyrenean oak situated above the domain of the holm oak.

Eurosiberian flora is not common in the region, and species such as the moor birch and the silver birch are restricted to very specific humid valley areas with special climate conditions.
The climax vegetation in the &quot;campiña&quot; is the holly oak. Some of the species that take over when the holly oak forest degrades are the &quot;sticky shrub&quot;, the Retama sphaerocarpa, the French lavender, the &quot;Thymus mastichina&quot; and the &quot;Thymus zygis&quot;.

The lower reaches of Guadarrama Mountain Range are populated by species such as the &quot;Juniperus thurifera&quot;, the maritime pine, the Portuguese oak, the stone pine; only in the somewhat more humid westernmost end of the region, near the , there are forests of chestnut trees.

54,4% of the surface of the region is soil categorised as forest areas of which the 51.4% (27.7% of the total of the region) it is already covered by forests, so there is room for tree re-population. The first modest efforts towards tree re-population were taken in the Lozoya Valley in the late 19th century intending to achieve a purer water from the river, that provided the capital with water for consumption. However, the bulk of the process took place after the Spanish Civil War, with a largely successful repopulation with several species of conifers.

== Climate ==
The Madrid region features a climate marked by dry summers, while average temperature varies with altitude, marking different climate subtypes. Most of the region (including the capital) has a climate intermediate between a hot-summer mediterranean climate (Köppen &quot;Csa&quot;) and a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen &quot;BSk&quot;), with a dry summer and a moderate to low amount of rain primarily distributed throughout the rest of the year (in the case of the capital, roughly an equinoctial pattern of precipitation maximums), as well as summer temperature averages over 22 °C (with daily maximums consistently surpassing 30 °C in July and August). The areas at a higher altitude close to the Sierra de Guadarrama feature a colder climate, also generally with more precipitation (particularly in the winter), with climate subtypes ranging from the &quot;Csa&quot; to the warm-summer mediterranean climate (Köppen: &quot;Csb&quot;) and the dry summer continental climate (Köppen: &quot;Dsb&quot;) on the peaks of the mountain range, with temperature averages below freezing point during January and February in the later case.

==History==

===Prehistory ===

The territory of the Community of Madrid has been populated since the Lower Paleolithic, mainly in the valleys between the rivers of Manzanares, Jarama, and Henares, where several archaeological findings have been made.

Some notable discoveries of the region the bell-shaped vase of Ciempozuelos (between 1970 and 1470 BCE), from the Bell beaker culture.

=== Romans and Visigoths ===

During the Roman Empire, the region was part of the Citerior Tarraconese province, except for the south-west portion of it, which belonged to Lusitania. It was crossed by two important Roman roads, the &quot;via xxiv-xxix&quot; (joining Astorga to Laminium and &quot;via xxv&quot; (which joined Emerita Augusta and Caesaraugusta), and contained some important conurbations. The city of Complutum (today Alcalá de Henares) became an important metropolis, whereas Titulcia and Miaccum were important crossroad communities.

During the period of the Visigothic Kingdom, the region lost its importance. The population was scattered amongst several small towns. Complutum was designated the bishopric seat in the 5th century by orders of Asturio, archbishop of Toledo, but this event was not enough to bring back the lost splendor of the city.

===Al-Andalus===
The centre of the peninsula (the Middle Mark of Al-Andalus or &quot;aṯ-Ṯaḡr al-Awsaṭ&quot;) became a strategic military post in the 11th century. The Muslim rulers created a defensive system of fortresses and towers all across the region with which they tried to stop the advance of the Christian kingdoms of the north.

The fortress of &quot;Mayrit&quot; (Madrid) was built somewhere between 860 and 880 AD, as a walled precinct where a military and religious community lived, and which constituted the foundation of the city. It soon became the most strategic fortress in defense of the city of Toledo above the fortresses of Talamanca and Qal&#x27;-at&#x27;-Abd-Al-Salam (Alcalá de Henares). In 1083 (or 1085) Alfonso VI took the city of Madrid in the context of his wider campaign to conquer Toledo. Alcalá de Henares fell in 1118 in a new period of Castilian annexation.

===Christian repopulation===
The recently conquered lands by the Christian kingdoms were desegregated into several constituencies, as a consequence of a long process of repopulation that took place over the course of four centuries. The feudal and ecclesiastical lords came into constant conflict with the different councils that had been granted the authority to repopulate.
In the 13th century, Madrid was the only town of the current-day region that preserved its own juridical personality, at first with the Old &quot;Fuero&quot; (Charter) and later with the Royal &quot;Fuero&quot;, granted by Alfonso X of Castile in 1262 and ratified by Alfonso XI in 1339. On the other hand, the town of Buitrago del Lozoya, Alcalá de Henares and Talamanca de Jarama, which were rapidly repopulated until that century, were under the dominion of the feudal or ecclesiastical lords. Specifically, Alcalá de Henares was under the hands of the archbishopric of Toledo and remained so until the 19th century.

Around the town of Madrid, an administrative territory was created known as &quot;Tierra de Madrid&quot; (Land of Madrid), the origin of the province that included the areas of the current municipalities of San Sebastián de los Reyes, Cobeña, Las Rozas de Madrid, Rivas-Vaciamadrid, Torrejón de Velasco, Alcorcón, San Fernando de Henares, and Griñón.

Madrid was in constant strife with the powerful council of Segovia, whose jurisdiction extended south of the Guadarrama Mountains; they both fought for the control of the Real de Manzanares, a large comarca (shire) that was finally given to the House of Mendoza.

Castilian monarchs showed a predilection for the center of the peninsula, with abundant forests and game. &quot;El Pardo&quot; was a region visited frequently by kings since the time of Henry III, in the 14th century. The Catholic Monarchs started the construction of the Royal Palace of Aranjuez. In the 16th century, San Lorenzo de El Escorial was built and became another royal site of the province.

===Early modern period===

The town of Madrid, which was one of the eighteen cities with the right to vote in the Cortes of Castile, was seat of the Courts themselves on several occasions and was the residence of several monarchs, amongst them the emperor Charles I who reformed and expanded the &quot;Alcázar&quot; or Castle of the city. Alcalá de Henares grew in importance as cultural center since the foundation by the Cardinal Cisneros of its university.
In 1561, King Philip II made Madrid the capital of the Hispanic Monarchy. The surrounding territories became economically subordinated to the town itself, even beyond the present day limits of the Community of Madrid. But it was not a unified region as several lords and churches had jurisdiction over their own autonomous territories.

During the 18th century, the fragmented administration of the region was not solved despite several attempts. During the reign of Philip V, the &quot;intendencia&quot; was created as a political and administrative division. Nonetheless, the &quot;intendencia&quot; of Madrid did not fully solve the problem, and the region was still fragmented into several small dominions even though some processes were centralized. This territorial dispersion had a negative effect on its economic growth; while the town of Madrid received economic resources from the entire country as the capital, the surrounding territories—in hands of noblemen or the clergy—became impoverished.

During the eighteenth century, the town of Madrid was transformed through several grandiose buildings and monuments as well as through the creation of many social, economic, and cultural institutions, some of which are still operating. Madrid grew to a population of 156,672 inhabitants by the end of the eighteenth century.

=== Province ===

The current territory of the region was roughly defined with the 1833 reorganization of Spain into provinces promoted by Javier de Burgos, in which the province of Madrid was classified in the region of New Castile (lacking the later any sort of administrative institution at the regional level nonetheless). The government institution at the provincial level was the deputation (&quot;diputación&quot;). In addition to the former body, another provincial political authority was the civil governor discretionarily designated by the central government. Two modest changes to the 1833 provincial boundaries that concerned Madrid took place shortly before 1845, when Aranjuez (187 km2) left the province of Toledo and joined that of Marid, and in 1850, when the small municipality of Valdeavero (19 km2), until then part of the province of Guadalajara, joined the province of Madrid.

One of the limits so far for the growth of the capital, water supply, experienced a substantial change in 1858 following the arrival to the city of Madrid of water from the Lozoya River with the inauguration of the bringing of the Canal de Isabel II.
In decadence since the middle 18th century, the city of Alcalá de Henares, experienced a relative demographic and economic upturn in the second half of the 19th century, based on its newly acquired condition of military outpost, to which an embryonic industrial nucleus was also added.

During the reign of Ferdinand VII the south of the province was made up of small agricultural settlements of limited population. Among them, Getafe stood out in population, and became the seat of a judicial district in 1834, with the main economic activity of the former jurisdiction still being non-irrigated agriculture. Rail transport arrived in 1851, with the Strawberry train, the railway connecting Madrid and Aranjuez.
During the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), the territory was divided by the battlefront, with the southwest of the province controlled by the rebel faction, and the capital as well as a great part of the rest of the province by the side loyal to the Republic. The city of Madrid was target of many bombings during the conflict, becoming the first big city in Europe to suffer such systematic and massive air attacks.

Since the 1970s, a process of a population transfer from the capital to the rest of municipalities of the metropolitan area emerged. This process accelerated when the autonomous community was founded, and it took place along a strong decrease of birth rates.

=== Autonomous community ===
The creation of the contemporary Community of Madrid was preceded by an intense political debate. Autonomous communities were to be created by one or more provinces with a distinct regional identity. Since the 1833 provincial organization, Madrid was part of the historical region of New Castile along with the provinces of Guadalajara, Toledo, Cuenca and Ciudad Real. Thus, it was first planned that the province of Madrid would be part of the future community of Castile–La Mancha (which was roughly similar to New Castile, with the addition of Albacete) but with some special considerations as the home of the national capital. The other provinces that were to become part of Castile–La Mancha expressed fears of inequality if Madrid were associated with them. These provinces opposed such a special status, and after considering other options for Madrid—like its inclusion in the community of Castile and León or its constitution as an entity similar to a federal district—it was decided that the province of Madrid would become a single-province autonomous community by virtue of Article 144 of the Constitution, which empowers the Cortes to create an autonomous community in the &quot;nation&#x27;s interest&quot; even if it did not satisfy the requirement of having a distinct historical identity. Thus, in 1983, the Community of Madrid was constituted and a Statute of Autonomy was approved taking over all the competences of the old &quot;Diputación Provincial&quot; and the new ones the Statute considered.

During the first 25 years of the &quot;autonomic&quot; period, this autonomous community accounted for the biggest economic growth in Spain, becoming a platform for the internationalisation of the Spanish economy, featuring a marked preponderance of the service sector. By the turn of the 21st century, a strong boost to the construction sub-sector also took place. During this period the Community of Madrid stood out due to its role as centre for welcoming immigration, due to its condition as transport node vis-à-vis the Spanish geography, and due to its condition as scientific and cultural centre of the country.

== Government and politics ==
=== Autonomous institutions of government ===

Like the rest of autonomous communities, the Community of Madrid is organized politically within a parliamentary system; that is, the head of government—known as the &quot;president&quot;—is dependent on the direct support from the autonomous legislature, whose members elect him by a majority.

The Statute of Autonomy of the Madrid Autonomous Community is the fundamental organic law in conjunction with (and subordinated to) the Spanish constitution. The Statute of Autonomy establishes that the powers through which the self-government of the autonomous community is exercised are the following institutions:

* The Assembly of Madrid, a directly elected body, represents the people of Madrid and exercises the legislative power of the community in approving and supervising the budget and in coordinating and controlling the actions of the government. The seat of the Assembly is located in Madrid, in the district of Puente de Vallecas. The members of the legislature (currently 132) are elected through proportional representation with closed-party lists and a 5% electoral threshold in a single region-wide constituency. The last election took place on 26 May 2019.
* The President of the Community of Madrid is the supreme representative of the autonomous community and the ordinary representation of the State. It presides and heads the activities of the Madrilenian autonomous government, designates and dismisses the vice-presidents and the ministers (&quot;consejeros&quot;) which conform an executive cabinet. The investiture of the regional president, who is nominated as candidate by the Speaker of the Assembly among its members after holding consultations, is voted by a qualified majority of the plenary of the legislature (or, failing to achieve the former, a simple majority of &#x27;yes&#x27; votes in a second round voting 48 hours later) and then formally appointed by the King through a Royal Decree. The seat of the Presidency is the Real Casa de Correos located at the Puerta del Sol at the center of Madrid. Since 2019, the president is Isabel Díaz Ayuso, of the People&#x27;s Party (PP).
* The Government of the Community of Madrid is the collegiate body that heads the politics and the executive and administrative powers of the community. The incumbent Council of Government comprises the President, the vice-president (assuming additional competences) and twelve more ministers.

=== Delegation of the Central Government ===
Since the creation of autonomous communities, the Government of Spain appoints a special representative to each autonomous community, the Government Delegate, part of the Peripheral State Administration. Unlike other single-province autonomous communities, the Government also appoints the Government Sub-delegate, the successor office to the provincial civil governor. The seats of both the delegation and the subdelegation are located at the in Madrid.

=== Administrative divisions ===
The Community of Madrid, following the long-standing form of local government in Spain, is divided administratively into 179 municipalities (featuring 801 towns and entities). Its municipalities comprise 2.2% of the Spanish territory (8,110). It is ranked 23rd amongst Spanish provinces in number of municipalities, which is slightly above average.
The average is 165 municipalities by province. The &quot;ayuntamiento&quot;, presided by its &quot;alcalde&quot; (Mayor) is the formal institution charged with the government and administration of most municipalities. The municipal councillors forming the deliberative assembly of the &quot;ayuntamiento&quot; are directly elected through proportional representation with closed party lists and a 5% electoral threshold. In turn, the councillors are charged with electing from among themselves (by default candidates are the head of each electoral list) the Mayor presiding over the &quot;ayuntamiento&quot;.

There are twenty judicial districts (&quot;partidos judiciales&quot;), whose seats correspond to the municipalities of Alcalá de Henares, Alcobendas, Alcorcón, Aranjuez, Arganda del Rey, Collado Villalba, Colmenar Viejo, Coslada, Fuenlabrada, Getafe, Leganés, Madrid, Majadahonda, Móstoles, Navalcarnero, Parla, San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Torrejón de Ardoz, Torrelaguna, Valdemoro, and Valdaracete (the historical judicial district of San Martín de Valdeiglesias is no longer a judicial district as of 1985). These jurisdictions relate to the judicial administration, with their seat having at least one court of first instance.

==Economy==

Madrid is the autonomous community with the highest income per capita in Spain, at €38,435 in 2022 – significantly above the national average and ahead of the Basque Country, with €35,832, Navarra, €33,798, and Catalonia, €32,550. In that year, the GDP per capita growth was 8.6%. Madrid has a GDP of €230.8 billion ($281 billion) as of 2018; making it the largest economy of Spain, ahead of Catalonia, where regional GDP amounted to €228.7 billion and the most populated Spanish region, Andalusia (€160.6 billion).

In 2005, the Community of Madrid was the main receptor of foreign investment in the country, at 34.3% of the total. The community ranks 34th amongst all European regions (evaluated in 2002), and 50th amongst the most competitive cities-regions worldwide, ahead of Barcelona and Valencia, the other two largest metropolitan areas of Spain. The strengths of the economy of the community are its low unemployment rate, its high investment in research, its high development, and the added-value services therein performed. Its weaknesses include the low penetration of broadband and new technologies of information and an unequal male to female occupation.

The service, construction, and industry sectors are prominent in Madrid&#x27;s commercial productive structure. According to the &quot;Directorio Central de Empresas&quot; (Central Companies Directory of the INE), Madrid&#x27;s active businesses stand in third place nationally in terms of numbers as at 1 January 2006. The branches of activity with most active businesses are other business activities, retail trade, construction, wholesale trade, hospitality, property activities, land transport, and pipeline transport.

Madrid&#x27;s levels of industrial activity set it at fourth place in Spain. The following areas predominate in terms of business numbers: publishing and graphic arts, manufacture of metal products (except machinery and equipment), manufacture of furniture and other manufacturing industries, wearing apparel and fur industry, and food product industry. The province also boasts a higher concentration of high and medium technology activities and services than the rest of Spain. This is the case in the following areas: manufacture of office machinery and IT equipment; manufacture of electronic products, manufacture of radio equipment, and devices; manufacture of medical and surgical, precision, optical and timekeeping equipment and instruments; post and telecommunications; IT activities; and research and development.

Regional authorities have put a notable effort in the development of logistics infrastructures in both the region of Madrid and the city proper. These include the Coslada Dry Port, the freight zone of the Madrid-Barajas Airport, Mercamadrid, the logistics centre, the Villaverde&#x27;s Logistics Centre and the Vicálvaro&#x27;s Logistics Centre to name a few. Overall, logistics companies has greatly developed along the A-2 highway (Coslada, San Fernando de Henares, Torrejón de Ardoz) in the eastern part of the region, the so-called &quot;Henares Corridor&quot; to become what has come to be termed as the &quot;golden mile&quot; of logistics and e-commerce in Spain.

The unemployment rate stood at 10% in 2019 and was lower than the national average.
==Demographics==


As of 1 January 2024, the Community of Madrid has a registered population of 7,001,715 inhabitants, and it is the most populated province and third most populated autonomous community in Spain. Population density is 829.62 hab/km2, much higher than the national average of 93.8 hab/km2. Population density varies with the community itself; the municipality of Madrid has a density of 5,300 hab/km2, whereas the Sierra Norte has a population density of less than 10 hab/km2. The vast majority of the population lives in the capital and its metropolitan area, which is the most populated in Spain.

Madrid also has the greatest population density in Spain. Its inhabitants are mainly concentrated in the capital (which is the Spanish city with the highest resident population) and in a series of municipalities (Móstoles, Alcalá de Henares, Fuenlabrada, Leganés, Alcorcón, Getafe, Torrejón de Ardoz, and Alcobendas), as opposed to in rural areas with low population density. Its citizens have diverse origins, and Madrid is the province with the highest number of residents born outside its territory and with the largest foreign population (13.32%). It is a focus of attraction for those migrating for reasons of employment. Population growth in Madrid is mainly due to the arrival of foreigners.

As of 1 January 2024, the region&#x27;s population included 1,038,671 people born in Spanish-speaking countries from the Americas, up from 81,552 in 1999.

The Community of Madrid is the EU-Region with the highest average life expectancy at birth. The average life expectancy was 82.2 years for males and 87.8 for females in 2016.
===Foreign population===
As of 2022, the region had a foreign-born population of 949,969. The largest groups of foreigners were those of Romanian, Moroccan, Chinese, Colombian, Ecuadorian, Venezuelan and Italian citizenship.
==Education==

State Education in Spain is free and compulsory from six to sixteen years of age. The current education system is called LOMLOE (Ley Orgánica 3/2020, de 29 de diciembre, por la que se modifica la Ley Orgánica 2/2006, de 3 de mayo, de Educación).

===Levels===

*From three to six years – Educación Infantil (Preparatory School)
*From six to twelve years – Educación Primaria (Primary School), years first through sixth
*From twelve to sixteen years – Educación Secundaria Obligatoria (Compulsory Secondary School), years first through fourth
*From sixteen to seventeen years – Bachillerato (Post-Compulsory School), years first and second

Children from three to five years old in Spain have the option of attending the pre-school stage, which is non-compulsory and free for all students. It is regarded as an integral part of the education system with infantil classes in almost every primary school. There are some separate Colegios Infantiles or nursery schools.

Spanish students aged six to sixteen undergo primary and secondary school education, which are compulsory and free of charge. Successful students are awarded a Secondary Education Certificate, which is necessary for entering further (optional) education as is Bachillerato for their University or Formación Profesional (vocational studies).
Once students have finished their Bachillerato, they can take their University Entrance Exam (Pruebas de Acceso a la Universidad, popularly called &quot;Selectividad&quot;) which differs greatly from region to region.

The secondary stage of education is normally referred to by its initials, e. g., ESO or Educación Secundaria Obligatoria for secondary education.

EducaMadrid is the educational platform that offers teachers and students in these and other non-university studies (professional studies, arts, languages, adult education and others) a virtual environment with all the necessary Internet services, in compliance with GDPR. It is safe, free, sustainable and based on Open source software.

===Universities===
Madrid is home to a large number of public and private universities.
The Complutense University of Madrid is one of the most prestigious, and the largest, university in Spain and one of the oldest universities in the world. It has 10,000 staff members and a student population of 117,000. Nearly all academic staff are Spanish. It is located on two campuses, in the university quarter Ciudad Universitaria at Moncloa in Madrid, and in Somosaguas. The Complutense University of Madrid was founded in Alcalá de Henares, old Complutum, by Cardinal Cisneros in 1499. Nevertherless, its real origin dates back from 1293, when King Sancho IV of Castile built the General Schools of Alcalá, which would give rise to Cisnero&#x27;s Complutense University. During the course of 1509-1510 five schools were already operative: Artes y Filosofía (Arts &amp; Philosophy), Teología (Theology), Derecho Canónico (Canonical Laws), Letras (Liberal Arts) and Medicina (Medicine). In 1836, during the reign of Isabel II, the university was moved to Madrid, where it took the name of Central University and was located at San Bernardo Street. Subsequently, in 1927, a new University City (&quot;Ciudad Universitaria&quot;) was planned to be built in the district of Moncloa-Aravaca. The Spanish Civil War turned the University City into a war zone, with several faculties sustaining severe damage during the conflict. By 1943 the Central University started to be known as the University of Madrid.

In 1970 the University of Madrid was renamed to Complutense University of Madrid. It was then when the new campus at Somosaguas was created in order to house the new School of Social Sciences. The old Alcalá campus was reopened as the independent University of Alcalá in 1977.

Another important university is the Autonoma, perhaps Spain&#x27;s best university for research along with the Complutense, was instituted under the leadership of the famous physicist, Nicolás Cabrera. The Autonoma is widely recognised for its research strengths in theoretical physics. Known simply as &quot;la Autónoma&quot; in Madrid, its main site is the Cantoblanco Campus, situated 15 kilometers to the north of the capital (M-607) and close to the municipal areas of Madrid, namely Alcobendas, San Sebastián de los Reyes, Tres Cantos and Colmenar Viejo.
Located on the main site are the Rectorate building and the Faculties of Science, Philosophy and Fine Arts, Law, Economic Science and Business Studies, Psychology, Higher School of Computing Science and Engineering, and the Faculty of Teacher Training and Education. The Medical School is located outside the main site and beside the Hospital Universitario La Paz.

Other local universities, among many others, are the Technical University of Madrid, as the result of merging the different Technical Schools of Engineering; the Universidad de Alcalá de Henares, founded in 1499; the Carlos III, whose philosophy is to create responsible free-thinking people with a sensitivity to social problems and an involvement in the concept of progress based on freedom, justice and tolerance and the Universidad Pontificia Comillas, involved in a number of academic exchange programmes, work practice schemes and international projects with over 200 Higher Education Institutions in Europe, South America, North America, and Asia.

Other universities in Madrid: Rey Juan Carlos University (public), Alfonso X El Sabio University, Universidad Antonio de Nebrija, Universidad Camilo José Cela, Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Universidad Europea de Madrid, and Universidad San Pablo (all of them private).

Madrid is also home to the Escuela Superior de Música Reina Sofía, the Real Conservatorio Superior de Música de Madrid, and many other private educational institutions.

==Transportation==

===Air===
Madrid is served by Barajas International Airport. Barajas is the main hub of Iberia Airlines and consequently serves as the main gateway to the Iberian peninsula from Europe, the Americas, and the rest of the world. Current passenger volumes range upwards of 52 million passengers per year, putting it in the top 10 busiest airports in the world. Given annual increases close to 10%, a new fourth terminal has been constructed. It has significantly reduced delays and doubled the capacity of the airport to more than 70 million passengers per year. Two additional runways have also been constructed, making Barajas a fully operational four-runway airport.

===Commuter rail===
Cercanías Madrid is the commuter rail service that serves Madrid, the capital of Spain, and its metropolitan area. It is operated by Cercanías, the commuter rail division of Renfe, the former monopoly of rail services in Spain. The system is infamous for being the target of 11 March 2004 Madrid train bombings. The attacks triggered a small reduction in the ridership of the system, but it is still the most used and most profitable (by 2004) of the commuter rail services in Spain. The total length spans .

Spain&#x27;s railway system, the &quot;Red Nacional de Ferrocarriles Españoles&quot; (Renfe), operates the vast majority of Spain&#x27;s railways. In Madrid, the main rail terminals are Atocha in the south and Chamartín in the north.

=== High-speed rail ===
The crown jewel of Spain&#x27;s next decade of infrastructure construction is the Spanish high-speed rail network, Alta Velocidad Española AVE. Currently, an ambitious plan includes the construction of a network, centered on Madrid. The overall goal is to have all important provincial cities be no more than four hours away from Madrid and no more than six hours away from Barcelona. As of 2008, AVE high-speed trains link Madrid-Atocha station to Seville, Málaga, and Toledo in the south, Valencia, Albacete, Cuenca and Alicante in the east, and to Zaragoza, Tarragona, Girona, Leida, Huesca and Barcelona in the north-east. AVE trains also arrive to Segovia, Valladolid, Zamora and León.

Already connected by tunnels used by conventional rail lines, a tunnel link connecting the Atocha and Chamartín stations with high-speed rail services is finished but, as of August 2019, yet to be inaugurated.

===Metro===
Serving the city&#x27;s population of some six million, the Madrid Metro is one of the most extensive and fastest-growing metro networks in the world. With the addition of a loop serving suburbs to Madrid&#x27;s south-west &quot;Metrosur&quot;, it is now the second largest metro system in Western Europe, second only to London&#x27;s Underground. In 2007, Madrid&#x27;s metro system was expanded, and it currently runs over of line. The province of Madrid is also served by an extensive commuter rail network called Cercanías.

Metro fees are regulated by the Consorcio Regional de Transportes de Madrid (CRTM) jointly with fees for commuter rail, bus transport and light-rail.

== Culture ==
=== Symbols ===
The flag, coat of arms and hymn of the Community of Madrid were set through the regional Law 2/1983 published in the official regional gazette on 24 December 1983:
;Flag
The flag is described as follows: &quot;&quot;the flag of the Community of Madrid is crimson red, with seven silver five-pointed stars, arranged 4 and 3 on the centre of the canvas&quot;. According to the law, the flag should wave both at the outdoors (occupying a preferential place next to the flag of Spain) and at the indoors of every public building of the autonomous administration as well as every public building of the municipal administrations located within the territory of the autonomous community.

;Coat of arms

The arms are described as follows:
&quot;The coat of arms of the Community of Madrid features just one partition gules, and on it, two paired, embattled, turreted, castles or, with port and windows tinctured azure, masoned sable, surmounted by seven five-pointed stars argent arranged four and three on chief.&quot;&quot; The crest describes the heraldic representation of the royal crown of Spain.

;Hymn

The official anthem was defined along the flag and coat of arms. However it has very limited institutional use, and thus, it is barely known.

=== Cuisine ===

Although the region does not produce enough food to be self-sufficient, the varied territory of the region outside the urbanised centre provides enough food commodities to create its own cuisine: cheese of Campo Real, vine with Vinos de Madrid DO, strawberries and aspargus from Aranjuez, melons from Villaconejos, artichokes from Ciempozuelos, &quot;judiones&quot; from Montejo de la Sierra, garlic from Chinchón, chickpeas from Navalcarnero, lentils from Colmenar de Oreja, cauliflower from Griñón or a number of vegetables from the Alberche Valley.
In addition, due to the rich restaurant business in the region, &quot;all the regional cuisines of Spain are represented in Madrid&quot; according to . As the madrilenian cuisine has absorbed much from the rest of regional cuisines of Spain, there is ambiguity when it comes to define the former; however, dishes such as the &quot;cocido madrileño&quot;, the &quot;potaje de garbanzos&quot;, the &quot;&quot;, the &quot;sopa de ajo&quot; or the &quot;tortilla de patatas&quot; are considered part of the madrilenian cuisine regardless of their geographical specificity. By April 2011 the region had over 40,000 bars, 2,700 coffee shops and nearly 10,000 restaurants.

=== Religion ===

The majority of the religious population is Catholic, Roman Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in Community of Madrid. According to a 2019 CIS poll, 18.9% of the surveyed people in the region identified as practising Catholic and 43.0% as non-practising Catholic. The most important religious minorities are evangelicals, Jews and Muslims.

Among the evangelical denominations the following denominations stand out:
Spanish Evangelical Church (IEE), several Presbiterian or Reformed Churches, the Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church (IERE), Baptist and Free churches (Unión Evangélica Bautista Española, Federación de las Iglesias Evangélicas Independientes de España), the Asambleas de Hermanos), Pentecostal Churches (Asambleas de Dios, Iglesia de la Biblia Abierta, Iglesia Filadelfia, Iglesia Cuadrangular), Charismatic churches (Iglesias de Buenas Noticias, Asamblea Cristiana, Asamblea para la Evangelización Mundial para Cristo), minor churches such as The Salvation Army, Mennonite Churches and Hermanos en Cristo), non-grouped evangelical churches, and adventist churches. Pentecostal churches have lately experienced a notable growth due to the arrival of immigrants from Latin-America. Evangelicals also have a notable following among the Romani population. The Muslim population includes the first contemporary Muslims in Spain (who came from Middle East and had middle class university background), converts (chiefly sunni Muslims) and representatives of a second arrival of Muslim economic migrants (with more of an economic migrant profile than the first wave).

Since the second half of the 20th century the Jewish population in the region grew due to both Sephardi Jews that came from the MENA, as well as exiles from Latin America (mostly Argentinians) primordially Ashkenazim.

There are also Greek, Romanian and Russian orthodox Christians, Jehovah Witnesses (15,031 according to 2001 estimations) and Mormons (6,700 according to 2007 estimations). There are some buddhists (the majority of which have Spanish citizenship and are from the middle to upper middle class), and small minorities of believers of religions of vedic origin: hinduism (primordially Sindhis), sikhism, Hare Krishna and Brahma Kumaris. There are a scarce amount of believers of the Baháʼí Faith. Other confessions, often derided as &quot;cults&quot; (&quot;sectas&quot;) in the country, such as the Unification movement and Scientology, have a marginal presence.

=== Feasts ===

The regional day is the 2 May, commemorating the Dos de Mayo Uprising of the citizens of Madrid against the French occupation in 1808 that triggered the wave of insurrections marking the beginning of the Peninsular War. It is a public holiday in the Community of Madrid since 1984, when it was approved by the regional legislature and sanctioned as law.

A floral tribute is traditionally offered to the fallen &quot;heroes&quot; by the regional authorities. The ceremony of presentation of commemorative medals to stand out individuals also take place on this day in the Royal House of the Post Office.

=== Sports ===
According to a 2010 study by the National Sports Council (CSD), madrilenians led the country in terms of grassroots sports practice.

Roughly a 52% of the regional population between 15 and 75 years old practised one sports modality, while a 10% of the population between 15 and 75 years old practised two or more sports. The most practised sports modalities were: fitness gymnastics (43.6%), football (22.1%), swimming (20.7%), cycling (19.6%), jogging/running (16.2%), padel (9.9%), athletics (8.3%), basketball (6.9%), other football modalities (6.6%), hiking (6.1%), martial arts (4.5%), body-building (3.5%), shooting/hunting (0.9%), and recreational fishing (0.2%).

Association football is the most popular sport in Spain in terms of passive following. The Madrid Football Federation is the governing body of the sport of football in region. The Community of Madrid has its own autonomous team, the Madrid autonomous football team, taking part in friendly fixtures. It currently has 2 top flight men&#x27;s football teams: Real Madrid and Atlético Madrid. The first of them, Real Madrid, has become one of the most valuable sports teams in the planet.

The regional administration had its own big track and field stadium, &quot;La Peineta&quot;, inaugurated in 1994. It was later transferred to the Madrid City Council, becoming the center of two unsuccessful bids of the city of Madrid to the Summer Olympics.

== International relations ==
;Twinning
* Beijing, China (2005)

== Notes ==
==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

*Official website of Community of Madrid
*Official website of Community of Madrid on tourism and business
*Official website of Madrid–Barajas International Airport
*Official website of Community of Madrid&#x27;s Transports System
*Official website of Metro Madrid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5756" start="4" end="23" title="Community of Madrid" label="Community of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="53" end="75" title="autonomous communities" label="autonomous communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q162620" start="83" end="92" title="provinces of Spain" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="96" end="101" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="138" end="155" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q821626" start="168" end="183" title="Meseta Central" label="Central Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="228" end="234" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748" start="338" end="356" title="Castilla–La Mancha" label="Castilla–La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="386" end="402" title="Castile and León" label="Castile and León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947581" start="703" end="714" title="New Castile (Spain)" label="New Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q959356" start="912" end="939" title="metropolitan area of Madrid" label="metropolitan area of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1037" end="1040" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="1068" end="1077" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="1158" end="1169" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiarised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5793719" start="1300" end="1311" title="Tagus Basin" label="Tagus Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53715" start="1322" end="1336" title="Sistema Central" label="Central System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14294" start="1409" end="1414" title="Tagus" label="Tagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="1498" end="1511" title="Mediterranean climate" label="mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="1515" end="1524" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1583" end="1602" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="1609" end="1648" title="El Escorial" label="Monastery and Royal Site of El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="1688" end="1705" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q486792" start="1733" end="1741" title="Aranjuez" label="Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079615" start="1750" end="1765" title="Paseo del Prado" label="Paseo del Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131807" start="1770" end="1781" title="Parque del Buen Retiro, Madrid" label="Buen Retiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q156011" start="1849" end="1930" title="Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe" label="Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q220715" start="2196" end="2204" title="Quercus rotundifolia" label="holm oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q53711" start="2253" end="2278" title="Guadarrama mountain range" label="Guadarrama mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="2311" end="2321" title="Scots pine" label="Scots pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="2335" end="2338" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2344" end="2357" title="Lozoya Valley" label="Lozoya Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="2375" end="2395" title="Eurasian black vulture" label="black (monk) vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q499568" start="2440" end="2462" title="Spanish imperial eagle" label="Spanish imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129727" start="2627" end="2639" title="Iberian lynx" label="Iberian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141049" start="2664" end="2669" title="Cofio River" label="Cofio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513" start="2674" end="2682" title="Alberche" label="Alberche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373807" start="2825" end="2845" title="Santillana reservoir" label="Santillana reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q53715" start="3056" end="3071" title="Sistema Central" label="Sistema Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q53711" start="3083" end="3108" title="Guadarrama mountain range" label="Guadarrama mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q14294" start="3167" end="3178" title="Tagus" label="Tagus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q486792" start="3217" end="3225" title="Aranjuez" label="Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3485" end="3499" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16508" start="3528" end="3540" title="Jarama River" label="Jarama River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16511" start="3579" end="3585" title="Lozoya River" label="Lozoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115196" start="3591" end="3599" title="Guadalix River" label="Guadalix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16512" start="3605" end="3615" title="Manzanares River" label="Manzanares"/>
<link wikidata="Q16510" start="3621" end="3628" title="Henares River" label="Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509" start="3637" end="3643" title="Tajuña River" label="Tajuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513" start="3650" end="3658" title="Alberche" label="Alberche"/>
<link wikidata="Q16507" start="3667" end="3677" title="Guadarrama River" label="Guadarrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252238" start="3752" end="3771" title="Dehesa de la Cepeda" label="Dehesa de la Cepeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769405" start="3801" end="3826" title="Santa María de la Alameda" label="Santa María de la Alameda"/>
<link wikidata="Q55288" start="3896" end="3901" title="Province of Ávila" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="3906" end="3913" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="3945" end="3961" title="Castile and Leon" label="Castile and León"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="4145" end="4154" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478880" start="4328" end="4336" title="Peñalara" label="Peñalara"/>
<link wikidata="Q320398" start="4388" end="4403" title="Villa del Prado" label="Villa del Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095610" start="4494" end="4508" title="Bola del Mundo" label="Bola del Mundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648718" start="4544" end="4555" title="Navacerrada" label="Navacerrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q53711" start="4585" end="4596" title="Siete Picos" label="Siete Picos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646215" start="4626" end="4636" title="Cercedilla" label="Cercedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8537996" start="4658" end="4672" title="Peña Cebollera" label="Peña Cebollera"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="4726" end="4734" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q499568" start="4888" end="4910" title="Spanish imperial eagle" label="Spanish imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="4916" end="4928" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q234722" start="4934" end="4954" title="Bonelli&amp;#x27;s eagle" label="Bonelli&amp;#x27;s eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="4960" end="4977" title="cinereous vulture" label="cinereous vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="4983" end="4999" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398" start="5008" end="5019" title="black stork" label="black stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q207839" start="5093" end="5109" title="Trachemys scripta elegans" label="red-eared slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q724987" start="5115" end="5128" title="Myiopsitta monachus" label="monk parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q289435" start="5134" end="5156" title="Chelydra serpentina" label="common snapping turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208060" start="5162" end="5182" title="Psittacula krameri" label="rose-ringed parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="5188" end="5201" title="Neovison vison" label="American mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="5210" end="5217" title="Procyon lotor" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="5311" end="5328" title="Larus ridibundus" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q27160" start="5334" end="5358" title="Larus fuscus" label="lesser black-backed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440" start="5364" end="5379" title="Phalacrocorax carbo" label="great cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q54696" start="5384" end="5406" title="Streptopelia decaocto" label="Eurasian collared dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q549108" start="5429" end="5441" title="iberian ibex" label="iberian ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q55489" start="5513" end="5523" title="La Pedriza" label="La Pedriza"/>
<link wikidata="Q784280" start="5538" end="5553" title="re-introduction" label="re-introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q26395" start="5707" end="5722" title="Salamandra salamandra" label="fire salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q983768" start="5728" end="5740" title="Triturus marmoratus" label="marbled newt"/>
<link wikidata="Q282715" start="5746" end="5757" title="mesotriton alpestris" label="alpine newt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071372" start="5763" end="5775" title="Rana iberica" label="iberian frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142057" start="5781" end="5799" title="Hyla arborea" label="European tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q837990" start="5807" end="5826" title="Alytes obstetricans" label="common midwife toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q771492" start="5927" end="5944" title="Lissotriton boscai" label="Bosca&amp;#x27;s newt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934196" start="5950" end="5971" title="Triturus pygmaeus" label="southern marbled newt"/>
<link wikidata="Q610523" start="5977" end="6000" title="Hyla meridionalis" label="mediterranean tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q927501" start="6008" end="6028" title="Alytes cisternasii" label="iberian midwife toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q523730" start="6034" end="6053" title="Pelodytes punctatus" label="common parsley frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q622886" start="6260" end="6275" title="Bufo calamita" label="natterjack toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q146375" start="6281" end="6292" title="Bufo bufo" label="common toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655856" start="6301" end="6319" title="Pelophylax perezi" label="iberian green frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q534989" start="6421" end="6430" title="Pleurodeles waltl" label="gallipato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084912" start="6436" end="6458" title="Pelobates cultripes" label="iberian spadefoot toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518297" start="6464" end="6484" title="Discoglossus galganoi" label="iberian painted frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q302887" start="6494" end="6514" title="Discoglossus jeanneae" label="Spanish painted frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633187" start="6561" end="6585" title="Iberolacerta cyreni" label="Cyren&amp;#x27;s rock lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q186615" start="6591" end="6611" title="Podarcis muralis" label="European wall lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628813" start="6617" end="6639" title="Lacerta schreiberi" label="iberian emerald lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q183660" start="6645" end="6655" title="Anguis fragilis" label="deaf adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208648" start="6678" end="6690" title="Coronella austriaca" label="smooth snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247992" start="6704" end="6719" title="Vipera latastei" label="Vipera latastei"/>
<link wikidata="Q187036" start="6799" end="6819" title="Emys orbicularis" label="European pond turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305769" start="6828" end="6849" title="Chalcides bedriagai" label="Brediaga&amp;#x27;s skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021003" start="6874" end="6900" title="western false smooth snake" label="western false smooth snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q582797" start="7038" end="7057" title="Mauremys leprosa" label="Spanish pond turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q901720" start="7063" end="7075" title="Tarentola mauritanica" label="salamanquesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121134" start="7081" end="7105" title="western three-toed skink" label="western three-toed skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q205053" start="7111" end="7130" title="Acanthodactylus erythrurus" label="spiny-footed lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q843236" start="7136" end="7152" title="Timon lepidus" label="ocellated lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851181" start="7158" end="7177" title="Psammodromus algirus" label="Algerian sand racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301017" start="7179" end="7199" title="Psammodromus hispanicus" label="Spanish psammodromus"/>
<link wikidata="Q514666" start="7216" end="7235" title="Podarcis hispanica" label="iberian wall lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q200664" start="7241" end="7260" title="Blanus cinereus" label="iberian worm lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290250" start="7272" end="7291" title="Coronella girondica" label="Coronella girondica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324701" start="7303" end="7320" title="Malpolon monspessulanus" label="Montpellier snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q170713" start="7322" end="7333" title="Natrix natrix" label="grass snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541871" start="7342" end="7356" title="Natrix maura" label="viperine snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387" start="7494" end="7506" title="Anguilla anguilla" label="European eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q136849" start="7512" end="7526" title="iberian barbel" label="iberian barbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030115" start="7538" end="7558" title="Squalius alburnoides" label="Squalius alburnoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q304350" start="7576" end="7593" title="Cobitis calderoni" label="Cobitis calderoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q902866" start="7628" end="7650" title="Chondrostoma lemmingii" label="Chondrostoma lemmingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="7714" end="7718" title="Esox lucius" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q998380" start="7720" end="7742" title="Ictalurus melas" label="black bullhead catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q826713" start="7744" end="7755" title="Lepomis gibbosus" label="pumpkinseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q146641" start="7757" end="7763" title="Stizostedion lucioperca" label="zander"/>
<link wikidata="Q200473" start="7765" end="7777" title="Alburnus alburnus" label="common bleak"/>
<link wikidata="Q755105" start="7782" end="7792" title="Micropterus salmoides" label="black-bass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7889" end="7908" title="Agrostis truncatula" label="Agrostis truncatula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861405" start="7930" end="7947" title="Festuca indigesta" label="Festuca indigesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315635" start="7983" end="8000" title="Minuartia recurva" label="Minuartia recurva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8014" end="8030" title="Pilosella vahlii" label="Pilosella vahlii"/>
<link wikidata="Q17813604" start="8044" end="8062" title="Plantago holosteum" label="Plantago holosteum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697123" start="8083" end="8097" title="Thymus praecox" label="Thymus praecox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009532" start="8166" end="8190" title="Cytisus oromediterraneus" label="Cytisus oromediterraneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26325" start="8199" end="8213" title="Juniperus communis" label="common juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="8229" end="8239" title="Pinus sylvestris" label="Scots pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145954" start="8276" end="8286" title="Pinus nigra" label="black pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899686" start="8295" end="8307" title="Quercus pyrenaica" label="pyrenean oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="8424" end="8434" title="Betula alba" label="moor birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q156895" start="8443" end="8455" title="Betula pendula" label="silver birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q218155" start="8596" end="8605" title="Quercus ilex" label="holly oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q789800" start="8685" end="8709" title="Cistus ladanifer" label="&amp;quot;sticky shrub&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661602" start="8715" end="8734" title="Retama sphaerocarpa" label="Retama sphaerocarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251970" start="8740" end="8755" title="Lavandula pedunculata" label="French lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q292582" start="8767" end="8784" title="Thymus mastichina" label="Thymus mastichina"/>
<link wikidata="Q851544" start="8805" end="8817" title="Thymus zygis" label="Thymus zygis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510186" start="8916" end="8935" title="Juniperus thurifera" label="Juniperus thurifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q271582" start="8947" end="8960" title="Pinus pinaster" label="maritime pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432250" start="8966" end="8980" title="Quercus faginea" label="Portuguese oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q106094" start="8986" end="8996" title="Pinus pinea" label="stone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22699" start="9093" end="9107" title="Castanea sativa" label="chestnut trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="9660" end="9668" title="conifers" label="conifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="9909" end="9941" title="hot-summer mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9943" end="9949" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9973" end="9995" title="Semi-arid climate#Cold semi-arid climates" label="cold semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q53711" start="10385" end="10405" title="Sierra de Guadarrama" label="Sierra de Guadarrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="10631" end="10661" title="Continental climate" label="dry summer continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="10921" end="10938" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16512" start="10984" end="10994" title="Manzanares (river)" label="Manzanares"/>
<link wikidata="Q16508" start="10996" end="11002" title="Jarama" label="Jarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16510" start="11008" end="11015" title="Henares" label="Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="11186" end="11205" title="Bell beaker culture" label="Bell beaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="11249" end="11261" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11290" end="11310" title="Citerior Tarraconese" label="Citerior Tarraconese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="11380" end="11389" title="Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q465078" start="11475" end="11482" title="Astorga, Spain" label="Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9020124" start="11486" end="11494" title="Laminium" label="Laminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583842" start="11533" end="11548" title="Emerita Augusta" label="Emerita Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932882" start="11553" end="11566" title="Caesaraugusta" label="Caesaraugusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485393" start="11624" end="11633" title="Complutum" label="Complutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="11641" end="11658" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647106" start="11700" end="11708" title="Titulcia" label="Titulcia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11713" end="11720" title="Miaccum" label="Miaccum"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="11785" end="11803" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423027" start="11994" end="12000" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toledo" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="12143" end="12153" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641021" start="12723" end="12732" title="Talamanca de Jarama" label="Talamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q235080" start="12808" end="12818" title="Alfonso VI of León and Castile" label="Alfonso VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q123550" start="13494" end="13499" title="Fuero" label="Fuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="13571" end="13591" title="Alfonso X of Castile" label="Alfonso X of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="13616" end="13626" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648730" start="13667" end="13686" title="Buitrago del Lozoya" label="Buitrago del Lozoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641021" start="13710" end="13729" title="Talamanca de Jarama" label="Talamanca de Jarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423027" start="13904" end="13927" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toledo" label="archbishopric of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="14380" end="14387" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53711" start="14430" end="14450" title="Guadarrama Mountains" label="Guadarrama Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345234" start="14520" end="14527" title="Comarcas of Spain" label="comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q56146588" start="14566" end="14582" title="House of Mendoza" label="House of Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q312104" start="14771" end="14780" title="Henry III of Castile" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="14807" end="14824" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q530129" start="14857" end="14881" title="Royal Palace of Aranjuez" label="Royal Palace of Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q371748" start="14904" end="14930" title="San Lorenzo de El Escorial" label="San Lorenzo de El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="15103" end="15120" title="Cortes of Castile" label="Cortes of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="15245" end="15254" title="Charles I of Spain" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="15412" end="15429" title="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros" label="Cardinal Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243904" start="15433" end="15447" title="University of Alcalá de Henares" label="its university"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="15463" end="15472" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="15504" end="15521" title="Spanish empire" label="Hispanic Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="15916" end="15924" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320835" start="16865" end="16908" title="1833 territorial division of Spain" label="1833 reorganization of Spain into provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087826" start="16921" end="16937" title="Javier de Burgos" label="Javier de Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947581" start="17003" end="17014" title="New Castile (Spain)" label="New Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044930" start="17168" end="17178" title="Provincial deputation (Spain)" label="deputation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17284" end="17298" title="civil governor" label="civil governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54929" start="17493" end="17511" title="province of Toledo" label="province of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647110" start="17582" end="17592" title="Valdeavero" label="Valdeavero"/>
<link wikidata="Q54925" start="17626" end="17649" title="province of Guadalajara" label="province of Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q16511" start="17856" end="17868" title="Lozoya River" label="Lozoya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407104" start="17914" end="17932" title="Canal de Isabel II" label="Canal de Isabel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="17990" end="18007" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="18241" end="18254" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052846" start="18419" end="18436" title="Judicial districts of Spain" label="judicial district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="18544" end="18558" title="Rail transport" label="Rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622527" start="18585" end="18601" title="Strawberry train" label="Strawberry train"/>
<link wikidata="Q486792" start="18637" end="18645" title="Aranjuez" label="Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="18658" end="18675" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="18788" end="18801" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="rebel faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456351" start="18878" end="18904" title="Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="side loyal to the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620908" start="19616" end="19633" title="historical region" label="historical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947581" start="19637" end="19648" title="New Castile (Spain)" label="New Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748" start="19818" end="19835" title="Castile–La Mancha" label="Castile–La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q54889" start="19900" end="19908" title="Province of Albacete" label="Albacete"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="20313" end="20329" title="federal district" label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q731236" start="20719" end="20738" title="Statute of Autonomy" label="Statute of Autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="20986" end="21001" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050" start="21068" end="21083" title="Spanish economy" label="Spanish economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="21125" end="21139" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="21196" end="21219" title="Construction" label="construction sub-sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="21667" end="21687" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="21702" end="21720" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="21811" end="21822" title="legislative power" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="21853" end="21861" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q731236" start="21868" end="21887" title="Statute of Autonomy" label="Statute of Autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="22000" end="22020" title="Spanish constitution" label="Spanish constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q139971" start="22188" end="22206" title="Assembly of Madrid" label="Assembly of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="22283" end="22300" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003054" start="22491" end="22509" title="Puente de Vallecas" label="Puente de Vallecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="22578" end="22605" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="22639" end="22658" title="electoral threshold" label="electoral threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592158" start="22701" end="22714" title="2019 Madrilenian regional election" label="last election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133837" start="22748" end="22784" title="President of the Community of Madrid" label="President of the Community of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42971290" start="23172" end="23195" title="List of Presidents of the Madrid Assembly" label="Speaker of the Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="23480" end="23492" title="Royal Decree" label="Royal Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067027" start="23528" end="23548" title="Royal House of the Post Office" label="Real Casa de Correos"/>
<link wikidata="Q427163" start="23564" end="23578" title="Puerta del Sol" label="Puerta del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q50634772" start="23633" end="23650" title="Isabel Díaz Ayuso" label="Isabel Díaz Ayuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="23659" end="23678" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q578788" start="23691" end="23728" title="Government of the Community of Madrid" label="Government of the Community of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="23784" end="23819" title="executive power" label="executive and administrative powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194749" start="24075" end="24094" title="Government of Spain" label="Government of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q597685" start="24163" end="24182" title="Government Delegation (Spain)" label="Government Delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188408" start="24575" end="24600" title="local government in Spain" label="local government in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074737" start="24639" end="24653" title="Municipalities of Spain" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q22996476" start="24920" end="24932" title="ayuntamiento (Spain)" label="ayuntamiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="25202" end="25229" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="25263" end="25282" title="electoral threshold" label="electoral threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052846" start="25490" end="25508" title="Judicial districts of Spain" label="judicial districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="25592" end="25609" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q487679" start="25611" end="25621" title="Alcobendas" label="Alcobendas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372" start="25623" end="25631" title="Alcorcón" label="Alcorcón"/>
<link wikidata="Q486792" start="25633" end="25641" title="Aranjuez" label="Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q497692" start="25643" end="25658" title="Arganda del Rey" label="Arganda del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q735759" start="25660" end="25676" title="Collado Villalba" label="Collado Villalba"/>
<link wikidata="Q55480" start="25678" end="25692" title="Colmenar Viejo" label="Colmenar Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164197" start="25694" end="25701" title="Coslada" label="Coslada"/>
<link wikidata="Q54902" start="25703" end="25714" title="Fuenlabrada" label="Fuenlabrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8802" start="25716" end="25722" title="Getafe" label="Getafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q77433" start="25724" end="25731" title="Leganés" label="Leganés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="25733" end="25739" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q427505" start="25741" end="25752" title="Majadahonda" label="Majadahonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q187826" start="25754" end="25762" title="Móstoles" label="Móstoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623099" start="25764" end="25776" title="Navalcarnero" label="Navalcarnero"/>
<link wikidata="Q824651" start="25778" end="25783" title="Parla" label="Parla"/>
<link wikidata="Q371748" start="25785" end="25811" title="San Lorenzo de El Escorial" label="San Lorenzo de El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q489839" start="25813" end="25830" title="Torrejón de Ardoz" label="Torrejón de Ardoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641236" start="25832" end="25843" title="Torrelaguna" label="Torrelaguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q840373" start="25845" end="25854" title="Valdemoro" label="Valdemoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647098" start="25860" end="25871" title="Valdaracete" label="Valdaracete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26078" end="26101" title="Judiciary of Spain#Courts of first instance" label="court of first instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="26169" end="26186" title="income per capita" label="income per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="26276" end="26290" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="26306" end="26313" title="Navarra" label="Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="26328" end="26337" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="26411" end="26414" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="26509" end="26518" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="26605" end="26614" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="26692" end="26710" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="26898" end="26907" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="26912" end="26920" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="26944" end="26962" title="metropolitan areas" label="metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868068" start="28707" end="28732" title="Logistics center" label="logistics infrastructures"/>
<link wikidata="Q61961235" start="28801" end="28817" title="Coslada Dry Port" label="Coslada Dry Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="28843" end="28865" title="Madrid-Barajas Airport" label="Madrid-Barajas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010695" start="28867" end="28878" title="Mercamadrid" label="Mercamadrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q776532" start="29059" end="29062" title="Autovía A-2" label="A-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q842211" start="29081" end="29104" title="San Fernando de Henares" label="San Fernando de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q489839" start="29106" end="29123" title="Torrejón de Ardoz" label="Torrejón de Ardoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="29288" end="29298" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="29607" end="29625" title="Population density" label="Population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="29757" end="29779" title="Madrid" label="municipality of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q187826" start="30223" end="30231" title="Móstoles" label="Móstoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="30233" end="30250" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q54902" start="30252" end="30263" title="Fuenlabrada" label="Fuenlabrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q77433" start="30265" end="30272" title="Leganés" label="Leganés"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372" start="30274" end="30282" title="Alcorcón" label="Alcorcón"/>
<link wikidata="Q8802" start="30284" end="30290" title="Getafe" label="Getafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q489839" start="30292" end="30309" title="Torrejón de Ardoz" label="Torrejón de Ardoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q487679" start="30315" end="30325" title="Alcobendas" label="Alcobendas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="30897" end="30906" title="NUTS regions" label="EU-Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="30932" end="30947" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="31178" end="31185" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="31188" end="31196" title="Morocco" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="31198" end="31205" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="31207" end="31215" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="31218" end="31225" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="31230" end="31239" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="31245" end="31252" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="32001" end="32011" title="pre-school" label="pre-school"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="32293" end="32300" title="primary school" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="32305" end="32321" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="33222" end="33226" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="GDPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="33271" end="33291" title="Open-source software" label="Open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q219694" start="33386" end="33418" title="Complutense University of Madrid" label="Complutense University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="33812" end="33829" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="33849" end="33866" title="Cardinal Cisneros" label="Cardinal Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="34304" end="34313" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101402" start="34465" end="34480" title="University City of Madrid" label="University City"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="34580" end="34597" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243904" start="35039" end="35059" title="University of Alcalá" label="University of Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q788091" start="35106" end="35114" title="Autonomous University of Madrid" label="Autonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183434" start="35255" end="35270" title="Nicolás Cabrera (physicist)" label="Nicolás Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q487679" start="35559" end="35569" title="Alcobendas" label="Alcobendas"/>
<link wikidata="Q484717" start="35571" end="35597" title="San Sebastián de los Reyes" label="San Sebastián de los Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q910410" start="35599" end="35610" title="Tres Cantos" label="Tres Cantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55480" start="35615" end="35629" title="Colmenar Viejo" label="Colmenar Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25864" start="36050" end="36080" title="Technical University of Madrid" label="Technical University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243904" start="36159" end="36191" title="University of Alcalá" label="Universidad de Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247135" start="36214" end="36224" title="Universidad Carlos III de Madrid" label="Carlos III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687025" start="36421" end="36452" title="Comillas Pontifical University" label="Universidad Pontificia Comillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000629" start="36683" end="36709" title="Rey Juan Carlos University" label="Rey Juan Carlos University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599574" start="36720" end="36749" title="Alfonso X El Sabio University" label="Alfonso X El Sabio University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36751" end="36781" title="Universidad Antonio de Nebrija" label="Universidad Antonio de Nebrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894248" start="36783" end="36811" title="Universidad Camilo José Cela" label="Universidad Camilo José Cela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495688" start="36813" end="36845" title="Universidad Francisco de Vitoria" label="Universidad Francisco de Vitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290716" start="36847" end="36876" title="Universidad Europea de Madrid" label="Universidad Europea de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36882" end="36903" title="Universidad San Pablo" label="Universidad San Pablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108475" start="36955" end="36993" title="Escuela Superior de Música Reina Sofía" label="Escuela Superior de Música Reina Sofía"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062675" start="36999" end="37046" title="Madrid Conservatory" label="Real Conservatorio Superior de Música de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="37148" end="37177" title="Barajas International Airport" label="Barajas International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="37199" end="37202" title="Airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="37206" end="37221" title="Iberia Airlines" label="Iberia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396578" start="37438" end="37444" title="World&amp;#x27;s busiest airport" label="top 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="37830" end="37843" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="37864" end="37870" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054782" start="37939" end="37948" title="Cercanías" label="Cercanías"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476154" start="37980" end="37985" title="Renfe" label="Renfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213531" start="38081" end="38116" title="11 March 2004 Madrid train bombings" label="11 March 2004 Madrid train bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476154" start="38402" end="38407" title="Renfe" label="Renfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23093" start="38502" end="38508" title="Madrid Atocha railway station" label="Atocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766348" start="38526" end="38535" title="Chamartín (Madrid)" label="Chamartín"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="38714" end="38717" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="38949" end="38958" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="38972" end="38975" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="38976" end="38993" title="high-speed trains" label="high-speed trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="39024" end="39031" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="39033" end="39039" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="39045" end="39051" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="39126" end="39134" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="39136" end="39145" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="39173" end="39182" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="39202" end="39205" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="39228" end="39235" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="39237" end="39247" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q191987" start="39550" end="39562" title="Madrid Metro" label="Madrid Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="39612" end="39617" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="39780" end="39794" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="39825" end="39836" title="London Underground" label="Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="39978" end="39991" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054782" start="40007" end="40016" title="Cercanías" label="Cercanías"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350122" start="40051" end="40094" title="Consorcio Regional de Transportes de Madrid" label="Consorcio Regional de Transportes de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q303826" start="40455" end="40466" title="crimson" label="crimson red"/>
<link wikidata="Q379860" start="40486" end="40503" title="five-pointed star" label="five-pointed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q121688" start="40666" end="40679" title="flag of Spain" label="flag of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="41011" end="41016" title="Gules (heraldry)" label="gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="41070" end="41072" title="Or (heraldry)" label="or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785501" start="41106" end="41111" title="Azure (heraldry)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q936496" start="41121" end="41126" title="Sable (heraldry)" label="sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="41167" end="41173" title="Argent (heraldry)" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475346" start="41201" end="41206" title="Chief (heraldry)" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="41224" end="41229" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632209" start="41275" end="41295" title="Regalia of Spain" label="royal crown of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999732" start="41671" end="41681" title="Campo Real" label="Campo Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527172" start="41693" end="41708" title="Vinos de Madrid" label="Vinos de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139487" start="41709" end="41711" title="Denominación de origen" label="DO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545103" start="41754" end="41760" title="Santa Claus melon" label="melons"/>
<link wikidata="Q966101" start="41766" end="41778" title="Villaconejos" label="Villaconejos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23041430" start="41780" end="41789" title="artichoke" label="artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751930" start="41796" end="41808" title="Ciempozuelos" label="Ciempozuelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q159753" start="41816" end="41824" title="Phaseolus coccineus" label="judiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772215" start="41836" end="41856" title="Montejo de la Sierra" label="Montejo de la Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="41858" end="41864" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q915395" start="41870" end="41878" title="Chinchón" label="Chinchón"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="41880" end="41888" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623099" start="41895" end="41907" title="Navalcarnero" label="Navalcarnero"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="41909" end="41915" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q686674" start="41922" end="41939" title="Colmenar de Oreja" label="Colmenar de Oreja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772237" start="41958" end="41964" title="Griñón" label="Griñón"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513" start="42000" end="42015" title="Alberche River" label="Alberche Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105215" start="42348" end="42364" title="cocido madrileño" label="cocido madrileño"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42382" end="42401" title="potaje de garbanzos" label="potaje de garbanzos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121455" start="42437" end="42448" title="sopa de ajo" label="sopa de ajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q281751" start="42468" end="42487" title="tortilla de patatas" label="tortilla de patatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="42628" end="42631" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="42640" end="42652" title="Coffeehouse" label="coffee shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="42671" end="42681" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="42747" end="42755" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="42757" end="42774" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306726" start="43129" end="43155" title="Spanish Evangelical Church" label="Spanish Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q937313" start="43210" end="43243" title="Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church" label="Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="43409" end="43427" title="Pentecostal Church" label="Pentecostal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="43523" end="43541" title="Charismatic church" label="Charismatic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="43671" end="43689" title="The Salvation Army" label="The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="43691" end="43709" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonite Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="43773" end="43791" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="adventist churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365830" start="43961" end="43978" title="Gitanos" label="Romani population"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="44384" end="44397" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="44417" end="44421" title="MENA" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="44446" end="44459" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="44495" end="44505" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="44572" end="44589" title="Jehovah Witnesses" label="Jehovah Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="44633" end="44640" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="44865" end="44873" title="hinduism" label="hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258074" start="44888" end="44894" title="Sindhis" label="Sindhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="44898" end="44905" title="sikhism" label="sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="44907" end="44919" title="International Society for Krishna Consciousness" label="Hare Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q897299" start="44924" end="44938" title="Brahma Kumaris" label="Brahma Kumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="44986" end="44998" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="45103" end="45123" title="Unification movement" label="Unification movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="45128" end="45139" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q181146" start="45233" end="45253" title="Dos de Mayo Uprising" label="Dos de Mayo Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="45388" end="45402" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="45412" end="45426" title="public holiday" label="public holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067027" start="45756" end="45786" title="Royal House of the Post Office" label="Royal House of the Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162819" start="45837" end="45860" title="Consejo Superior de Deportes" label="National Sports Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="46197" end="46205" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="46215" end="46223" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="46233" end="46240" title="cycling" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q816261" start="46250" end="46257" title="jogging" label="jogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582389" start="46275" end="46280" title="Padel (sport)" label="padel"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="46289" end="46298" title="Sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="46307" end="46317" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="46360" end="46366" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="46375" end="46387" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="46396" end="46409" title="body-building" label="body-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="46418" end="46426" title="Shooting sports" label="shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="46427" end="46434" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q283534" start="46447" end="46467" title="recreational fishing" label="recreational fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728629" start="46568" end="46594" title="Madrid Football Federation" label="Madrid Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15502813" start="46710" end="46741" title="Madrid autonomous football team" label="Madrid autonomous football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="46758" end="46775" title="friendly match" label="friendly fixtures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="46834" end="46845" title="Real Madrid" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="46850" end="46865" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369687" start="47039" end="47049" title="Metropolitano Stadium" label="La Peineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="47265" end="47272" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69804" wikidata="Q177302" url="?curid=69804" title="Phidias">
<text>Phidias or Pheidias (; , &quot;Pheidias&quot;; ) was an Ancient Greek sculptor, painter, and architect, active in the 5th century BC. His Statue of Zeus at Olympia was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Phidias also designed the statues of the goddess Athena on the Athenian Acropolis, namely the &quot;Athena Parthenos&quot; inside the Parthenon, and the &quot;Athena Promachos&quot;, a colossal bronze which stood between it and the Propylaea, a monumental gateway that served as the entrance to the Acropolis in Athens. Phidias was the son of Charmides of Athens. The ancients believed that his masters were Hegias and Ageladas.

Plutarch discusses Phidias&#x27;s friendship with the Greek statesman Pericles, recording that enemies of Pericles tried to attack him through Phidias – who was accused of stealing gold intended for the Parthenon&#x27;s statue of Athena, and of impiously portraying himself and Pericles on the shield of the statue. The historical value of this account, as well as the legend about accusations against the &#x27;Periclean circle&#x27;, is debatable, but Aristophanes mentions an incident with Phidias around that time.

Phidias is often credited as the main instigator of the Classical Greek sculptural design. Today, most critics and historians consider him one of the greatest of all ancient Greek sculptors.
== Life and work ==
Of Phidias&#x27;s life, little is known apart from his works. Although no original works exist that can be attributed to him with certainty, numerous Roman copies of varying degrees of fidelity are known to exist.

The earliest of Phidias&#x27;s works were dedications in memory of Marathon, celebrating the Greek victory. His first commission was a group of national heroes with Miltiades as a central figure. At Delphi he created a great group in bronze including the figures of Greek gods Apollo and Athena, several Attic heroes, and General Miltiades the Younger. On the Acropolis of Athens, Phidias constructed a colossal bronze statue of Athena, the &quot;Athena Promachos&quot;, which was visible far out at sea. Athena was the goddess of wisdom and warriors and the protector of Athens. At Pellene in Achaea, and at Plataea, Phidias made two other statues of Athena, as well as a statue of the goddess Aphrodite in ivory and gold for the people of Elis.

In antiquity, Phidias was celebrated for his statues in bronze and his chryselephantine works (statues made of gold and ivory). In the &quot;Hippias Major&quot;, Plato claims that Phidias seldom, if ever, executed works in marble unlike many sculptors of his time. Plutarch writes that he superintended the great works ordered by Greek statesman Pericles on the Acropolis. Ancient critics take a very high view of the merits of Phidias. They especially praise the ethos or permanent moral level of his works as compared with those of the later so called &quot;pathetic&quot; school. Both Pausanias and Plutarch mention works of his depicting the warlike Athena Areia. Demetrius calls his statues sublime, and at the same time precise.

In 447 BC, Pericles commissioned several sculptures for Athens from Phidias to celebrate the Greek victory against the Persians at the Battle of Marathon during the Greco-Persian Wars (490 BC). Pericles used some of the money from the maritime League of Delos, to rebuild and decorate Athens to celebrate this victory. Inscriptions prove that the marble blocks intended for the pedimental statues of the Parthenon were not brought to Athens until 433–434BC. It is therefore possible that most of sculptural decoration of the Parthenon was the work of Phidias&#x27;s workshop including pupils of Phidias, such as Alcamenes and Agoracritus.

According to Pausanias (1.28.2), the original bronze &quot;Athena Lemnia&quot; was created by Phidias ( 450–440BC) for Athenians living on Lemnos. He described it as &quot;the best of all Pheidias&#x27;s works to see&quot;. Adolf Furtwängler suggested that he found a copy of the &quot;Athena Lemnia&quot; in a statue of which the head is located in Bologna and the body is at Dresden. Some 5th-centuryBC torsos of Athena have been found at Athens. The torso of Athena in the École des Beaux-Arts at Paris, which has lost its head, gives some idea of what the original statue may have looked like.
For the ancient Greeks, two works of Phidias far outshone all others: the colossal chryselephantine Statue of Zeus ( 432BC), which was erected in the Temple of Zeus at Olympia, and the &quot;Athena Parthenos&quot; (lit. &quot;Athena the Virgin&quot;), a sculpture of the virgin goddess Athena, which was housed in the Parthenon in Athens. Both sculptures belong to about the middle of the 5th century BC. A number of replicas and works inspired by it, both ancient and modern, have been made. Upon completing the &quot;Athena Parthenos&quot;, Phidias was accused of embezzlement. Specifically, he was charged with shortchanging the amount of gold that was supposed to be used for the statue and keeping the extra for himself. It seems that the charge was politically motivated a result of his friendship with Pericles, who had many enemies in Athens.

Phidias supposedly weighed the gold robe of the &quot;Athena Parthenos&quot; to prove his innocence, but was then accused of impiously portraying himself and Pericles on the shield of the statue, which was apparently true.

Plutarch records that Phidias was imprisoned and died in jail.

Aristophanes&#x27;s play &quot;Peace&quot; () mentions an unfortunate incident involving Phidias, but little context is provided.

According to Philochorus, as quoted by a scholiast on Aristophanes, Phidias was put to death by the Eleans after he completed the Statue of Zeus at Olympia for them.
From the late 5th century BC, small copies of the statue of Zeus were found on coins from Elis, which give a general notion of the pose and the character of the head. The god was seated on a throne, every part of which was used for sculptural decoration. His body was of ivory, his robe of gold. His head was of a somewhat archaic type; the bust of Zeus found at Otricoli, which used to be regarded as a copy of the head of the Olympian statue, is certainly more than a century later in style.
==Archaeological discovery==

A significant advancement in the knowledge of Phidias&#x27;s working methodology came during 1954–58 with the excavation of the workshop at Olympia where he created the Statue of Zeus. Tools, terracotta molds and a cup inscribed on the bottom &quot;Φειδίου εἰμί&quot; (Pheidíou eimí) – &quot;I belong to Phidias&quot;; literally: &quot;of Phidias I am&quot;, were found here, just where Pausanias said the statue was constructed. The discovery has enabled archaeologists to re-create the techniques used to make the statue and confirm its date.

== Legacy ==
By 1910, mathematician Mark Barr began using the Greek letter Phi (φ) as a symbol for the golden ratio after Phidias. However, Barr later wrote that he thought it unlikely that Phidias actually used the golden ratio.

*Phidias (crater)
*4753 Phidias, a main-belt asteroid named after Phidias.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
*Ancient Greek sculpture 
*Pediments of the Parthenon

==References==
Footnotes
Citations
===Sources===
*Andrew Stewart, &quot;One Hundred Greek Sculptors: Their Careers and Extant Works,&quot; Part III of Stewart&#x27;s &quot;Greek Sculpture&quot;, (Yale University Press).

== External links ==
* Phidias as a first name in the US</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="0" end="7" title="Phidias" label="Phidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="11" end="19" title="Phidias" label="Pheidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q617793" start="56" end="78" title="Ancient Greek sculptor" label="Ancient Greek sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46239" start="138" end="163" title="Statue of Zeus at Olympia" label="Statue of Zeus at Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="179" end="213" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="264" end="270" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="278" end="296" title="Acropolis, Athens" label="Athenian Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070605" start="315" end="331" title="Athena Parthenos" label="Athena Parthenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="349" end="358" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q755221" start="374" end="390" title="Athena Promachos" label="Athena Promachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407649" start="447" end="456" title="Propylaea (Acropolis of Athens)" label="Propylaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q174532" start="623" end="629" title="Hegias of Athens" label="Hegias"/>
<link wikidata="Q452536" start="634" end="642" title="Ageladas" label="Ageladas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="645" end="653" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="715" end="723" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="1099" end="1111" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="1221" end="1236" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q31900" start="1658" end="1666" title="Battle of Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210350" start="1756" end="1765" title="Miltiades the Younger" label="Miltiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="1790" end="1796" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1857" end="1867" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1868" end="1874" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1879" end="1885" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="1895" end="1900" title="Attica" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210350" start="1921" end="1942" title="Miltiades the Younger" label="Miltiades the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q755221" start="2038" end="2054" title="Athena Promachos" label="Athena Promachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="2111" end="2118" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068130" start="2174" end="2181" title="Pellene" label="Pellene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="2185" end="2191" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q742538" start="2200" end="2207" title="Plataea" label="Plataea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="2286" end="2295" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2342" end="2351" title="classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088535" start="2410" end="2426" title="chryselephantine" label="chryselephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q634846" start="2480" end="2493" title="Hippias Major" label="Hippias Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2562" end="2568" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="2604" end="2612" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="2685" end="2693" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="2701" end="2710" title="Acropolis" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484318" start="2803" end="2808" title="ethos" label="ethos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2927" end="2936" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710552" start="2993" end="3005" title="Athena Areia" label="Athena Areia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190631" start="3007" end="3016" title="Demetrius" label="Demetrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="3240" end="3258" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="3319" end="3334" title="League of Delos" label="League of Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="3479" end="3488" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505640" start="3687" end="3696" title="Alcamenes" label="Alcamenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q395404" start="3701" end="3712" title="Agoracritus" label="Agoracritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q950701" start="3774" end="3787" title="Athena Lemnia" label="Athena Lemnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="3854" end="3860" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q61423" start="3939" end="3956" title="Adolf Furtwängler" label="Adolf Furtwängler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="4065" end="4072" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="4092" end="4099" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056289" start="4191" end="4211" title="École des Beaux-Arts" label="École des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088535" start="4396" end="4412" title="chryselephantine" label="chryselephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46239" start="4413" end="4427" title="Statue of Zeus at Olympia" label="Statue of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="4463" end="4477" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="4481" end="4488" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070605" start="4504" end="4520" title="Athena Parthenos" label="Athena Parthenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="4631" end="4640" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="5453" end="5465" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193602" start="5484" end="5489" title="Peace (play)" label="Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q266299" start="5597" end="5608" title="Philochorus" label="Philochorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="5684" end="5690" title="Eleans" label="Eleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10870" start="6113" end="6121" title="Otricoli" label="Otricoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766662" start="6856" end="6865" title="Mark Barr" label="Mark Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="6882" end="6894" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10029" start="6895" end="6898" title="Phi" label="Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="6908" end="6914" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="6923" end="6935" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181618" start="7052" end="7068" title="Phidias (crater)" label="Phidias (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q313541" start="7070" end="7082" title="4753 Phidias" label="4753 Phidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="7086" end="7095" title="Asteroid belt" label="main-belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="7096" end="7104" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q617793" start="7157" end="7180" title="Ancient Greek sculpture" label="Ancient Greek sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753726" start="7183" end="7209" title="Pediments of the Parthenon" label="Pediments of the Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="7407" end="7428" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69808" wikidata="Q105813667" url="?curid=69808" title="Egyptian">
<text>Egyptian describes something of, from, or related to Egypt.

Egyptian or Egyptians may refer to:

==Nations and ethnic groups==
* Egyptians, a national group in North Africa
** Egyptian culture, a complex and stable culture with thousands of years of recorded history
** Egyptian cuisine, the local culinary traditions of Egypt
* Egypt, the modern country in northeastern Africa
** Egyptian Arabic, the language spoken in contemporary Egypt
** A citizen of Egypt; see Demographics of Egypt
* Ancient Egypt, a civilization from c. 3200 BC to 343 BC
** Ancient Egyptians, ethnic people of ancient Egypt
** Ancient Egyptian architecture, the architectural structure style
** Ancient Egyptian cuisine, the cuisine of ancient Egypt
** Egyptian language, the oldest known language of Egypt and a branch of the Afroasiatic language family
* Copts, the ethnic Egyptian Christian minority
** Coptic language or Coptic Egyptian, the latest stage of the Egyptian language, spoken in Egypt until the 17th century, surviving in Coptic liturgy
* Romani people a.k.a. Gypsy, an ethnic group living mostly in Europe and the Americas
** Egyptians (Balkans), an Albanian-speaking ethnic minority of Kosovo and Macedonia

==Culture and Religion==
* Egyptian mythology
* Kemetism (ancient Egyptian religion)

== Art and entertainment ==
* Egyptian (band), an American indie rock band
* The Egyptians (band), an English band
* &quot;The Egyptian&quot;, a 1945 historical novel by Mika Waltari
* &quot;The Egyptian&quot; (film), a 1954 film by Michael Curtiz, based on Waltari&#x27;s novel
* Piano Concerto No. 5 (Saint-Saëns) a.k.a. &quot;The Egyptian&quot;, a piano concerto by Camille Saint-Saëns

==Other uses==
* Egyptian (typeface), a type of serif typeface characterized by thick, block-like serifs
* The Egyptian (prophet), a nameless 1st-century messianic revolt leader
* Little Egypt (region), something of, from, or related to the region of Southern Illinois
* Egyptian Lover (born 1963), American musician, vocalist, producer and DJ
* Egyptian Healy (1866–1899), pitcher for Major League Baseball in the 19th century
* Egyptian (ship), various ships with that name
* Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia, Wikipedia in Egyptian dialect of Arabic

==See also==
* Egypt (disambiguation)
* Egyptienne (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="53" end="58" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q105813667" start="61" end="69" title="Egyptian" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105813667" start="73" end="82" title="Egyptian" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="130" end="139" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655498" start="177" end="193" title="Egyptian culture" label="Egyptian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="251" end="267" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346230" start="271" end="287" title="Egyptian cuisine" label="Egyptian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="330" end="335" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="382" end="397" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354232" start="468" end="489" title="Demographics of Egypt" label="Demographics of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="492" end="505" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="551" end="568" title="Ancient Egyptians" label="Ancient Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q842352" start="604" end="633" title="Ancient Egyptian architecture" label="Ancient Egyptian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q432535" start="672" end="696" title="Ancient Egyptian cuisine" label="Ancient Egyptian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="730" end="747" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="834" end="839" title="Copts" label="Copts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="883" end="898" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="1032" end="1045" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q282427" start="1120" end="1139" title="Egyptians (Balkans)" label="Egyptians (Balkans)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205740" start="1230" end="1248" title="Egyptian mythology" label="Egyptian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081042" start="1251" end="1259" title="Kemetism" label="Kemetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348367" start="1319" end="1334" title="Egyptian (band)" label="Egyptian (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q931909" start="1366" end="1386" title="The Egyptians (band)" label="The Egyptians (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q830643" start="1412" end="1424" title="The Egyptian" label="The Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528304" start="1474" end="1505" title="The Egyptian (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Egyptian&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q239698" start="1570" end="1604" title="Piano Concerto No. 5 (Saint-Saëns)" label="Piano Concerto No. 5 (Saint-Saëns)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892715" start="1696" end="1715" title="Egyptian (typeface)" label="Egyptian (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877670" start="1790" end="1808" title="Egyptian (prophet)" label="Egyptian (prophet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256684" start="1859" end="1880" title="Little Egypt (region)" label="Little Egypt (region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q705532" start="1950" end="1964" title="Egyptian Lover" label="Egyptian Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348412" start="2025" end="2039" title="Egyptian Healy" label="Egyptian Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113559873" start="2109" end="2124" title="Egyptian (ship)" label="Egyptian (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374285" start="2157" end="2182" title="Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia" label="Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399620" start="2240" end="2262" title="Egypt (disambiguation)" label="Egypt (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348526" start="2265" end="2292" title="Egyptienne (disambiguation)" label="Egyptienne (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69810" wikidata="Q1254876" url="?curid=69810" title="Erik Balling">
<text>Erik Balling (29 November 1924 – 19 November 2005) was a Danish TV and film director. He created two of Denmark&#x27;s most popular TV-series, &quot;Matador&quot; and &quot;Huset på Christianshavn&quot;.

His feature film &quot;Qivitoq&quot; (1956) was nominated for a Golden Palm at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival, and for an Oscar as Best Foreign Language Film. His 1962 film &quot;Den kære familie&quot; was entered into the 3rd Moscow International Film Festival.

Together with Henning Bahs, he also created the hugely popular series of &quot;Olsen Gang&quot; feature films.

== Biography ==
Balling started working for the largest and oldest Danish film production company, Nordisk Films Kompagni, in 1946. He later became the boss of the company.

His made his directing debut with &quot;Adam &amp; Eva&quot; (1953), which was nominated for a Bodil-award as Best Film.

In 1956 he directed &quot;Kispus&quot;, which was the first Danish movie filmed in color.

The most popular films directed by Balling were the feature film comedies about a trio of small-time crooks, the Olsen Gang.
There were 13 episodes of this movie series between 1968 and 1981, starting with &quot;Olsen-banden&quot;. They were remade in several languages.

In 1998, Erik Balling received an Honorary Robert Award.

== Filmography ==
== Literature ==
* , &quot;Balling – Hans liv og film&quot;, Informations Forlag, 2011. .
* , &quot;Erik Balling : manden med de største succeser i dansk film&quot;, Møntergården, 1996. .
* &quot;Erik Balling – Som barn var jeg voldsomt hidsig&quot;, Aschehoug, 1998. .
* &quot;Erik Balling – Gedächtnisbilder: Über ein Leben, die Olsenbande und all die anderen schöne Filme&quot;, Mosamax Verlag, Dresden 2016. 

== References ==

== External links ==
* Erik Balling at the British Film Institute
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1254876" start="0" end="12" title="Erik Balling" label="Erik Balling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="57" end="63" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="71" end="84" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275157" start="149" end="156" title="Matador (Danish TV series)" label="Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q391766" start="173" end="196" title="Huset på Christianshavn" label="Huset på Christianshavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403033" start="228" end="235" title="Qivitoq" label="Qivitoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="269" end="280" title="Golden Palm" label="Golden Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q598055" start="288" end="313" title="1957 Cannes Film Festival" label="1957 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="326" end="331" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q224618" start="383" end="399" title="Den kære familie" label="Den kære familie"/>
<link wikidata="Q130370" start="427" end="465" title="3rd Moscow International Film Festival" label="3rd Moscow International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q343362" start="482" end="494" title="Henning Bahs" label="Henning Bahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047863" start="547" end="557" title="Olsen-banden" label="Olsen Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891982" start="679" end="691" title="Nordisk Film" label="Nordisk Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q889842" start="849" end="860" title="Bodil Awards" label="Bodil-award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416864" start="902" end="908" title="Kispus" label="Kispus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047863" start="1080" end="1090" title="Olsen-banden" label="Olsen Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453733" start="1273" end="1294" title="Robert (award)" label="Honorary Robert Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="1790" end="1812" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69811" wikidata="Q297743" url="?curid=69811" title="Lillie Langtry">
<text>Emilie Charlotte, Lady de Bathe (née Le Breton, formerly Langtry; 13 October 1853 – 12 February 1929), known as Lillie (or Lily) Langtry and nicknamed &quot;The Jersey Lily&quot;, was a British socialite, stage actress and producer.

Born on the island of Jersey, she moved to London in 1876, two years after marrying. Her looks and personality attracted interest, commentary, and invitations from artists and society hostesses, and she was celebrated as a young woman of great beauty and charm. During the aesthetic movement in England, she was painted by aesthete artists. In 1882, she became the poster-girl for Pears soap, and thus the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product.

In 1881, Langtry became an actress and made her West End debut in the comedy &quot;She Stoops to Conquer&quot;, causing a sensation in London by becoming the first socialite to appear on stage. She starred in many plays in both the United Kingdom and the United States, including &quot;The Lady of Lyons&quot;, and Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;As You Like It&quot;. Eventually she ran her own stage production company. In later life she performed &quot;dramatic sketches&quot; in vaudeville. From the mid-1890s until 1919, Langtry lived at Regal Lodge at Newmarket in Suffolk, England. There she maintained a successful horse racing stable. The Lillie Langtry Stakes horse race is named after her.

One of the most glamorous British women of her era, Langtry was the subject of widespread public and media interest. Her acquaintances in London included Oscar Wilde, who encouraged Langtry to pursue acting. She was known for her relationships with royal figures and noblemen, including the future King Edward VII, Lord Shrewsbury, and Prince Louis of Battenberg. 

However, by lack of reliable sources - Lillie Langtry refused to write her &quot;real reminiscences&quot; - she still remains an enigmatic personality. Even though she lived the most public of lives – as a ‘professional beauty’, as a royal mistress, as an actress, as a racehorse owner, as a squanderer of fortunes and collector of lovers – she remains elusive. Opinions about her are contradictory. To some, she was simply a calculating, cold-hearted creature who used her physical attractions to further her own career; to others she appeared charming, open, with “far more heart than she was given credit for”.

==Biography==

Born in 1853 and known as Lillie from childhood, she was the daughter of the Very Reverend William Corbet Le Breton and his wife, Emilie Davis (née Martin), a recognised beauty. Lillie&#x27;s parents had eloped to Gretna Green in Scotland, and, in 1842, married at St Luke&#x27;s Church, Chelsea, London. The couple lived in Southwark, London, before William was offered the post of rector and dean of Jersey. Emilie Charlotte (Lillie) was born at the Old Rectory, St Saviour, on Jersey. She was baptised in St Saviour on 9 November 1853.

Lillie was the sixth of seven children and the only girl. Her brothers were Francis Corbet Le Breton (1843–1872), William Inglis Le Breton (1846–1924), Trevor Alexander Le Breton (1847–1870), Maurice Vavasour Le Breton (1849–1881), Clement Martin Le Breton (10 January 1851 – 1 July 1927), and Reginald Le Breton (1855–1876). Purportedly, one of their ancestors was Richard le Breton, allegedly one of the assassins in 1170 of Thomas Becket.

In an 1882-interview Lillie said: &#x27;Yes, I was born and educated in Jersey, but it is not correct for you to say that I spent my bread-and-butter days there. I never had any bread-and-butter days. As the only sister of six stout brothers I shared their outdoor sports in a most boyish fashion. It would be more accurate to describe my girlhood as my &quot; tomboy days,&quot; I think.&#x27;

Lillie&#x27;s French governess was reputed to have been unable to manage her, so Lillie was educated by her brothers&#x27; tutor. This education was of a wider and more solid nature than that typically given to girls at that time. Although their father held the respectable position of Dean of Jersey, he earned an unsavoury reputation as a philanderer, and fathered illegitimate (or natural) children by various of his parishioners. When his wife Emilie finally left him in 1880, he left Jersey.

===From Jersey to London===

On 9 March 1874, 20-year-old Lillie married 26-year-old Irish landowner Edward Langtry (1847–1897), a widower. He had been married to the late Jane Frances Price. Her sister, Elizabeth Ann Price, had married Lillie&#x27;s brother William.

In an 1882-interview Lillie said:&#x27;My brother Clement Le Breton, who is a barrister in good standing in London, married Lord Ranelagh&#x27;s daughter, and it was through Lord Ranelagh and the painter, Frank Miles, that I was first introduced into London society. This was after I had been married some years to Mr Langtry, who at the time of my marriage owned property in Ireland worth about £3,000 a year, but which is now not worth more than £300. My life in Jersey had been spent almost entirely in the open air, and as Mr Langtry was fond of yachting I became an expert yachtswoman and was very fond of all sorts of outdoor exercise, but I longed to see something more of the world.&#x27;

Lillie and Edward held their wedding reception at The Royal Yacht Hotel in St Helier, Jersey. Langtry was wealthy enough to own a large sailing yacht called &quot;Red Gauntlet&quot;, and Lillie insisted that he take her away from the Channel Islands. In 1876 they rented an apartment in Eaton Place, Belgravia, London, and early in 1878 they moved to 17 Norfolk Street (now 19 Dunraven Street) off Park Lane to accommodate the growing demands of Lillie&#x27;s society visitors.

In an interview published in several newspapers (including the &quot;Brisbane Herald&quot;) in 1882, Lillie Langtry said:
It was through Lord Raneleigh and the painter Frank Miles that I was first introduced to London society ... I went to London and was brought out by my friends. Among the most enthusiastic of these was Mr Frank Miles, the artist. I learned afterwards that he saw me one evening at the theatre, and tried in vain to discover who I was. He went to his clubs and among his artist friends declaring he had seen a beauty, and he described me to everybody he knew, until one day one of his friends met me and he was duly introduced. Then Mr Miles came and begged me to sit for my portrait. I consented, and when the portrait was finished he sold it to Prince Leopold. From that time I was invited everywhere and made a great deal of by many members of the royal family and nobility. After Frank Miles I sat for portraits to Millais and Burne-Jones and now Frith is putting my face in one of his great pictures.
In 1877 Lillie&#x27;s brother Clement Le Breton married Alice, an illegitimate daughter of Thomas Heron Jones, 7th Viscount Ranelagh, who was a friend of their father. Following a chance meeting with Lillie in London, Ranelagh invited her to a reception attended by several noted artists at the home of Sir John and Lady Sebright at 23 Lowndes Square, Knightsbridge, which took place on 29 April 1877. Here she attracted notice for her beauty and wit. Langtry was in mourning for her youngest brother, who had been killed in a riding accident, so in contrast to the elaborate clothes of most women in attendance, she wore a simple black dress (which was to become her trademark) and no jewellery. Before the end of the evening, Frank Miles had completed several sketches of her that became very popular on postcards.

Another guest, Sir John Everett Millais, also a Jersey native, eventually painted her portrait. Langtry&#x27;s nickname, the &quot;Jersey Lily&quot;, was taken from the Jersey lily flower (&quot;Amaryllis belladonna&quot;), a symbol of Jersey. The nickname was popularised by Millais&#x27; portrait, entitled &quot;A Jersey Lily&quot;. (According to tradition, the two Jersey natives spoke Jèrriais to each other during the sittings.) The painting attracted great interest when exhibited at the Royal Academy and had to be roped off to avoid damage by the crowds. Langtry was portrayed holding a Guernsey lily (&quot;Nerine sarniensis&quot;) in the painting rather than a Jersey lily, as none of the latter was available during the sittings. A friend of Millais, Rupert Potter (father of Beatrix Potter), was a keen amateur photographer and took pictures of Lillie whilst she was visiting Millais in Scotland in 1879. She also sat for Sir Edward Poynter and is depicted in works by Sir Edward Burne-Jones.

Lillie Langtry arrived in the late 1870s, the heyday of &quot;The Professional Beauties&quot;. Margot Asquith, the wife of a Prime Minister in the early 20th Century: &#x27;These were the days of the great beauties. London worshipped beauty like the Greeks. Photographs of the Princess of Wales, Mrs. Langtry, Mrs. Cornwallis West, Mrs. Wheeler and Lady Dudley collected crowds in front of shop windows. I have seen great and conventional ladies like old Lady Cadogan and others standing on iron chairs in the Park to see Mrs. Langtry walk past; and whenever Georgiana Lady Dudley drove there were crowds round her carriage when it pulled up, to see this vision of beauty, holding a large holland umbrella over the head of her lifeless husband.&#x27; According to Margot Asquith Lillie became the centre of social excitement which excelled the other &quot;Beauties&quot;. &#x27;“The Jersey Lily” – as Mrs. Langtry was called – had Greek features, a transparent skin, arresting eyes, fair hair, and a firm white throat. She held herself erect, refused to tighten her waist, and to see her walk was if you saw a beautiful hound set upon its feet. It was a day of conspicuous feminine looks and the miniature beauties of to-day would have passed with praise, but without emotion.&#x27; Mrs Langtry was new to the public, and photographs of her exhibited in the shop windows made every passerby pause to gaze at them. &#x27;My sister – Chartie Ribblesdale – told me that she had been in a London ballroom were several fashionable ladies had stood upon their chairs to see Mrs. Langtry come into the room. In a shining top-hat, and skin-tight habit, she rode a chestnut thoroughbred of conspicuous action very evening in Rotten Row. Among her adorers were the Prince of Wales, (King Edward) and the present Earl of Lonsdale. One day, when I was riding, I saw Mrs. Langtry – who was accompanied by Lord Lonsdale – pause at the railings in Rotten Row to talk to a man of her acquaintance. I do not know what she could have said to him, but after a brief exchange of words, Lord Lonsdale jumped off his horse, sprang over the railings, and with clenched fists hit Mrs. Langtry’s admirer in the face. Upon this, a free fight ensued, and to the delight of the surprised spectators, Lord Lonsdale knocked his adversary down.&#x27;

Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick, tried to analyse Langtry&#x27;s success. As a young girl, accompanied by her stepfather, she met Lillie in the studio of Frank Miles. 

Theo Aronson, royal biographer and author of a book about King Edward’s three “official mistresses”, has put attention to the changing nature of London high society in the late nineteenth century. According to Aronson Lillie was fortunate in her timing. ‘Society, by the late 1870s, was undergoing a transformation. Until then, the English aristocracy had been an exclusive clan, made up of about ten thousand people who, in turn, belonged to about fifteen hundred families. A title (the older the better) or a long established lineage were two of the qualifications necessary to belong to this select group; a third was the ownership of land… But in the course of the last few years things had begun to change. Much of this was due to the attitude of the Prince of Wales. With his penchant for very rich men – whether they be self-made, Jewish or foreign, or indeed all three – he extended the boundaries of the upper classes beyond the gilded stockade of the landed aristocracy. Business acumen, beauty and, to a lesser extent, brains were becoming enough to get one accepted… It was this opening-up of society that partly explains the ease with which Lillie Langtry was accepted; partly, but not entirely.’ Much of Lillie’s success of due to her own particular qualities. ‘For one thing, she was not some brash arriviste. She was, by Victorian standards, a lady. Her husband, whatever his shortcomings, did not do anything so vulgar as work for his living. His grandfather might have been a self-made shipping magnate, but Edward was a gentleman of leisure. Then Lillie herself was the daughter of the Dean of Jersey; and clergymen’s daughters, if not exactly aristocratic, were certainly socially acceptable. In the Victorian hierarchy, clergymen ranked besides the landed gentry…. Her air, despite her vivacity and sensuality, was well-bred: she knew how to conduct herself in public.’ Above all, Lillie had in 1877, at the age of twenty-three, the advantage of not only being beautiful but of also having an unusual type of beauty. Here were the looks then in favour with the artistic avant garde…. In the age of Pre-Raphaelites, Lillie Langtry was the Pre-Raphaelite woman personified. Everything – the column of a neck, the square jaw, the well-defined lips, the straight nose, the slate-blue eyes, the pale skin (she was nicknamed Lillie, she tells us, because of her lily-white complexion), even the hair loosely knotted in the nape off the neck – conformed to the artistic ideal of feminine good looks. It was no wonder that so many eminent artists fell over each other in their eagerness to paint her… Yet at the same time, Lillie was not one of the languid, ethereal maidens so beloved of the bohemian brotherhood of the day. Her beauty was brought to life by her vivacity.&#x27; Lillie possessed beauty, personal magnetism, a curiosity value and an aura of sensuality with the promise of an almost animal passion. Highly intelligent and erudite, Lillie was also one of the most calculating of women. The particular combination of qualities was behind a meteoric rise to fame.

Lillie Langtry was introduced into a bohemian set of London society, after a year of living a quite obscure life in London with her husband Edward Langtry, when she received an invitation by Sir John and Lady Sebright. In Lady Sebright’s crowded drawing room the aristocratic and artistic world overlapped. In the words of Theo Aronson, ‘For Lillie, it was the ideal springboard.’ John Everett Millais, also born in Jersey and the most famous painter in the country, was her table-companion that evening. ‘‘That evening at the Sebrights’ transformed Lillie Langtry’s life. The particular milieu – aesthetic, arty-crafty, unconventional – into which she had just been introduced was always on the outlook for new diversion, new sensations and new faces. And there were few faces as striking as hers. Within a few days the hall table of her Eaton Place apartment was heaped with invitations – to lunch, to dine or to dance. By the end of the month the Langtry’s landlady was grumbling about the number of times she was having to answer the door as yet another liveried footman delivered yet another gilt-edged invitation.’ The combination of her beauty, personal magnetism and her curiosity value made Lillie one the best-known faces within weeks after Lady Sebright’s party. John Everett Millais and Frank Miles, far from blind of the opportunities Lillie offered, pictured her. ‘My sketches of Lillie during her first London season,’ wrote Miles twenty years later, ‘earned far more than I’ve ever made on the largest commissions for my most expensive paintings.’ Winning Lillie even wider recognition were her photographic likeness. At a time when photography was a relatively new art and an appreciation of feminine beauty at one of its heights, reproductions of attractive women were being bought by a vast public. The “Professional Beauties”, all members of high society, were photographed in every conceivable attitude. The craze for collecting these pictures – a craze foreshadowing the popularity of first film stars and then pop stars – was not confined to the middle classes. Also many an aristocratic drawing room boasted a leather-bound, brass-locked album featuring the faces of the “Professional Beauty’s” of the season.

In 1878 Lillie Langtry attracted a lot of attention during the Ascot races. Lady Augusta Fane: &#x27;She was then at the height of her beauty and fame; wherever she went crowds of staring people followed her, even standing on chairs in the Park to look at the most advertised beauty in Europe. What really made Mrs. Langtry so wonderful was her charming personality and “naturalness.” She had no affections and no “make-up,” either of face or mind; she was just herself, so no one could help loving her, with her gay, light-hearted nature. Above all things she was no snob; indeed, had she possessed more worldly wisdom and less heart, she would not have quarrelled with her most illustrious friend for the sake of a handsome young peer of the realm! For a short time she was very happy as her youthful lover was devoted to her, and then he suddenly left her and eloped with the beautiful wife of an elderly man, but what appeared by making her life far more interesting, as it was the cause of her going on the stage and making a great name for herself. During her career she met and entertained most of the cleverest men of the day, travelled all over the world and was received with acclamation whenever she went. I saw Mrs. Langtry make her first appearance on the stage in &quot;She stoops to Conquer&quot; at the Haymarket Theatre. The house was packed with her friends and admirers applauded wildly. She looked lovely, but to me she seemed like a lost goddess who had strayed on to the stage by mistake.&#x27;

However, there was another reason why Lillie Langtry attracted so much attention in 1878: the Prince of Wales was often seen in public with Lillie not very far away from him.

===Royal mistress===
On 24 May, 1877, while his wife was staying in Athens with her brother, King George of Greece, Prince Edward visited the opera. Afterwards he took supper with the Arctic explorer, Sir Allen Young. With pre-arrangement he met for the first time the colourless sportsman Edward Langtry and his 23-years old wife Lillie. Just discovered one month earlier, Lillie had already taken London society by storm. She had attended all the gay parties and her photograph had appeared everywhere. Within a month of meeting the Prince of Wales, crowds started to collect whenever she, alone or in his company, drove in London. It was presumed Lillie had become the mistress of Albert Edward, The Prince of Wales (later Edward VII – &quot;Bertie&quot; for family and friends). No immediate scandal arose. Alexandra, Princess of Wales accepted the situation and received Lillie Langtry for parties in Marlborough House, the London House of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
The actor John Nettles (&quot;Bergerac&quot;, &quot;Midsomer Murders&quot;) wrote an introduction for a renewed publication of Lillie Langtry&#x27;s memoirs: &#x27;There was an elegant and simple logic which ruled Lillie Langtry&#x27;s life. Her need was for fame and fortune and to achieve both she used her universally acknowledged beauty and vibrant sensuality, at first artlessly, but later with a courtesan&#x27;s skill, to gain entry into the wondrously trivial and effete fin de siecle Society circles of the 1870s.&#x27; John Nettles, also born on Jersey, continued that Lillie Langtry enchanted the poet Oscar Wilde and the liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone. &#x27;Last, but not least, came the over-indulged and under-employed Bertie, Prince of Wales, heir to the Throne, more noted for his libido than his intellect, and very sensible indeed of Lillie&#x27;s charms. In the stomach-churning prose of Pierre Sichel&#x27;s &quot;The Story of the Fabulous Mrs Langtry&quot;, this &quot;dazzling Prince Charming, beautifully mannered, gracefully condescending, swept the young and beautiful island girl off her feet and away to his secret palace&quot; – not quite to live happily ever after, but nearly enough to satisfy romantic expectations.&#x27;

However, there are some doubts. Professor Jane Ridley has questioned the myth which Lillie Langtry created about herself and the role of King Edward VII inside that myth. In her biography &quot;Bertie&quot;, researched with (privileged) access to the Prince&#x27;s papers in the British Royal Archives, she is quite critical about Lillie Langtry. In her view Lillie&#x27;s narrative of herself as an innocent country girl to whom success just happened is disingenuous. Her assault on London society, though more spectacular than she could ever have dreamed, was carefully planned. Lillie Langtry admitted as much in an interview she gave to the &quot;New York Herald&quot; in 1882. Wearing a loose red robe and drying her waist-length hair before the fire, she told the reporter that the Le Breton family had a &#x27;prescriptive right&#x27; to the deanery of Jersey, which they had held for generations. &#x27;My pedigree was good and my person in Jersey society being assured, it was not surprising that I should be well-received.&#x27; She was introduced to London society, she claimed, by Lord Ranelagh, whose daughter had married her brother Clement. She was no adventuress. At the same time, Lillie Langtry denied she had ever set herself up as a beauty. &#x27;I never thought I was one, and I don&#x27;t think I am now. I am never in the least surprised when I hear people say they are very much disappointed about my beauty.&#x27; In Ridley&#x27;s view, Lillie Langtry was lucky: she arrived in the season of the Professional Beauties. &#x27;Do come, the P.B.&#x27;s will be there,&#x27; hostesses would scribble on their invitation cards. &#x27;PB&#x27;s were paraded as trophies at parties; like horseflesh their merits were compared and discussed. Artists in search of best-selling soft-porn pin-ups competed to paint them; their photograph were sold as postcards by the thousands; women stood on benches to spy them over the crowds in the park, and their dresses were instantly copied.&#x27;

1878 was the year of triumph. Lillie and her husband Edward (&quot;Ned&quot;) moved into a house at 17 Norfolk Street, off Park Lane. &quot;Cartes de visites&quot; of her photographs filled the window shops and the society papers were full of gossip about Lillie Langtry and her admirers within London society, including Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria. He had misread the signals. He had called often at Lillie&#x27;s Norfolk Street House, presumably under the impression that Mrs Langtry was a royal &quot;poule de luxe&quot;, but he was not welcome.

Jane Ridley expresses some doubts on the nature of the relationship with the Prince of Wales. The friendship between the &quot;Professional Beauty&quot; and the Prince of Wales has often been described as a domesticated love affair, but there is a hole – a silence – at the centre of the narrative. No letters from this time has survived. Many of the stories seem to be exaggerated or wrong. Jane Ridley reconstructs a few examples. Lillie is alleged to have consummated her relationship with Prince Edward when his wife, Alexandra (&quot;Alix&quot;), refused an invitation to accompany him to a royal house party at Crichel, Dorset, with Lord Arlington in January 1878. In fact, Alix &quot;was&quot; there. The princess even played a central role in the ball and festivities – which lasted a week. Lady Louise Manchester reported to Benjamin Disraeli (Lord Beaconsfield), the Prime Minister at the time, that Prince Edward was &#x27;very snappish&#x27; throughout the whole visit; the Langtry&#x27;s are not mentioned.

According to Jane Ridley, Lillie Langtry published a false story about her presentation at court. In her memoirs she described how she was presented to Queen Victoria. Her husband had been presented a few weeks earlier, and Lillie&#x27;s presentation validated her ambivalent social status. She was low down the list of ladies, but the Queen, who usually left her drawing rooms well before the end, stayed on purpose to see her, or so Lillie believed. Lillie describes in her memoirs: &#x27;Queen Victoria looked straight in front her and, I thought, extended her hand in rather a perfunctory manner. There was not even the flicker of a smile on her face, and she looked grave and tired. My ordeal was not yet finished, for I had to curtsey to a long row of royalties, though, having met them all elsewhere previously, the smiled and shook hands as I passed. My curtseys began with the Prince and Princess of Wales, but they grew less and less profound and more slurred as I remembered I had one more vital moment to face before I was finally &quot;out of the wood&quot;... On the way home from the Palace, Lady Romeny expressed some surprise at the presence of Her Majesty till the very end of this particularly long drawing room but, that evening, while dancing in the Royal Quadrille at a ball at Marlborough House, I was enlightened as to the cause of the Queen&#x27;s remaining. It seems that she had a great desire to see me, and had stayed on in order to satisfy herself as to my appearance. It was even added that she was annoyed because I was so late in passing. As to my appearance, I wondered what Her Majesty had thought of head-gear. I am afraid that waving ostrich plumes may have looked overdone, as the Prince of Wales that evening chaffed me good-humouredly on my conscientious observance of the Lord Chamberlain&#x27;s order. At all events, I meant well.&#x27; Jane Ridley states this anecdote seems to have been a make-believe on Lillie&#x27;s part. &#x27;Bertie was not present at Lillie&#x27;s drawing room. He was in Paris. So was Alix. Lillie&#x27;s presentation had been arranged in order to avoid embarrassment to the Princes of Wales.&#x27;

In Jane Ridley&#x27;s view, Lillie Langtry invented stories which implied she was, after the royal presentation and a meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli (Lord Beaconsfield) in the summer of 1878, recognized as royal mistress. &#x27;As her biographer has observed, however, her career was one invention. She excelled at self-fashioning, carefully constructing an image of herself as royal mistress to project to the world.&#x27;

There are more doubts. Biographers of Lillie Langtry have assumed the Prince of Wales gave orders to build a house for her in Bournemouth, so they could meet in anonymity. Langtry Manor Hotel in Bournemouth claims the villa was built in order to serve as a &quot;love nest&quot; for Edward and Lillie. A quite important statement because Lillie had no place where she could entertain the prince except her house at Eaton Place. This was small, which need not necessarily have mattered, but it was made oppressive by her husband&#x27;s constant and vigilant presence. He still had little to do during the day. He probably spent much of his time at home, either recovering from the hangover of the day before or preparing for the one to come. There was no question of him going tactfully to his club like many other husband before him, because he did not belong to one. However, the Bournemouth house was built for Emily Langton Langton. The widowed Emily Langton Langton turned to temperance work with the British Women&#x27;s Temperance Association, and in 1877 built the Red House at the junction of Knyveton Road and Derby Road, Bournemouth, including a large assembly room for her meetings.

On suggestion of his publisher, the royal biographer Theo Aronson wrote a study of the three so-called official mistresses of King Edward VII: Lillie Langtry, Daisy Warwick and Alice Keppel. &#x27;Fascinating stuff.&#x27; After publishing &quot;The King in Love&quot;, Aronson was addressed with a lot of letters and telephone calls from people claiming to be the illegitimate descendants of King Edward VII. &#x27;In spite of reading my book (or perhaps they haven&#x27;t) in which I make clear that Edward&#x27;s three-year-long liaison with Lillie Langtry was over by 1880, many of these correspondents claim descent from some child born to King Edward VII and Lillie in the early 1900s, when she was well past childbearing age... Other have stories about secret &quot;love nests&quot; or underground passages which the King would use when entertaining Lillie Langtry (it is always her, never the other mistresses) despite the fact that by the time he became King, the affair had been over for a couple of decades.&#x27; Jane Ridley draws a conclusion to this experience by Aronson. &#x27;By keeping Lillie in secret houses, Bertie hoped to live a double life and shield Alix from embarrassment. The tales are revealing too about Lillie&#x27;s ambivalent social status - in spite of her friendship with the prince, she was not considered a suitable house party guest.&#x27;

Jane Ridley couldn&#x27;t find evidence about the exact nature of the relationship between Lillie Langtry and the Prince of Wales. However, even without fire there was enough smoke to find. In the &quot;Royal Archives&quot; in &quot;Windsor Castle&quot; Ridley found correspondence exchanged between the Prince&#x27;s private secretary, Francis Knollys, and the Prince&#x27;s solicitor, George Lewis. It seems that Edward (&quot;Ned&quot;) Langtry used George Lewis as a broker, trading silence and cash in exchange for Bertie&#x27;s love letters. Lewis kept Knollys closely informed about the death of Edward Langtry – he died drunk in Chester Asylum in 1897. Lewis managed to stay upon friendly terms with Edward Langtry up to the last, so he wrote in November 1897 to Francis Knollys. The Prince of Wales, meanwhile, maintained a lifelong friendship with Lillie.

In July 1879, Langtry began an affair with Lord Shrewsbury; in January 1880, Langtry and the earl were planning to run away together. In the autumn of 1879, scandal-mongering journalist Adolphus Rosenberg wrote in &quot;Town Talk&quot; of rumours that her husband would divorce her and cite, among others, the Prince of Wales as co-respondent. Rosenberg also wrote about Patsy Cornwallis-West, whose husband sued him for libel. At this point, the Prince of Wales instructed his solicitor George Lewis to sue also. Rosenberg pleaded guilty to both charges and was sentenced to two years in prison.

In 1880 a lot of things came together: the Shrewsbury scandal, rumours of divorce and a secret pregnancy – not by her husband. Many doors were shut heartlessly in her face. With the withdrawal of royal favour, creditors closed in. The Langtrys&#x27; finances were not equal to their lifestyle. In October 1880, Langtry sold many of her possessions to meet her debts, allowing Edward Langtry to avoid a declaration of bankruptcy. Lillie went abroad to give life to a daughter. Afterwards, there was a necessity to rearrange her life. The Prince of Wales, staunch in friendship, procured an opening for her. He brought her in contact with the actor-manager Squire Bancroft, who controlled the Haymarket and the Prince of Wales’ theatres. Lillie Langtry used her fame and beauty to become a professional practice. The Prince of Wales encouraged her by visiting the theatre while she was on stage and did everything in his power to help the inexperienced actress.

Whatever it exactly was, Lillie&#x27;s liaison with the Prince lasted from late 1877 to June 1880.

===Daughter===
Lillie Langtry had a short affair with Prince Louis of Battenberg. However, the discovery of letters of Lillie Langtry to Arthur Clarence Jones (1854–1930), gives the impression she also had an affair or at least an intimate friendship with this childhood friend of her brothers who continued to live on Jersey. Arthur Jones was the brother of her sister-in-law; both were illegitimate children of Lord Ranelagh. 

In June 1880, Lillie became pregnant. Her husband was not the father. Edward Langtry had walked out after a libel case. The obvious candidate was Prince Louis of Battenburg. Jane Ridley compared the dates with the diary of the Prince of Wales: Prince Louis was staying at Marlborough House on June 27, the likely conception date. Anyway, Lillie led Prince Louis to believe that he was the father of her child. Lillie was lent 2000 pounds by the Prince of Wales to pay her debts. At the same time, Edward Langtry, who often visited her unannounced, was prevented from seeing her. Edward Langtry was constantly occupied with invitations to shoot or fish. Keeping him in ignorance of the pregnancy was vital: he was angry and resentful. The worry was that if Edward Langtry discovered that his wife was pregnant by another man, he might sue for divorce, dragging the Prince of Wales into the law courts. Lillie spent the summer holiday in Jersey. One Friday in October, by now four months pregnant, she visited London briefly and saw the Prince of Wales. On 17 October, the Prince of Wales held a meeting with his doctor, Oscar Clayton, and saw Louis Battenberg. The same day, Louis departed on a two-year voyage round the world on the aptly named warship . Lillie herself was spirited away to France. On 18 March 1881 she gave birth to a baby – a girl named Jeanne Marie. 

The discovery in 1978 of Langtry&#x27;s letters to Arthur Jones and publication of quotations from them by Laura Beatty in 1999 support the idea that Jones was the father of Langtry&#x27;s daughter. Possibly she told him &quot;he&quot; was the father of the child. Anyway, in a letter she pressed Jones to go a chemist to buy potions to make her miscarry. During her pregnancy she wrote him passionately written letters and assured him how much she needed him. Jones probably stayed with her in Paris after she wrote him a letter with the dates she would give birth – according to her doctor.

Prince Louis&#x27; son, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, however, had always maintained that his father was the father of Jeanne Marie.

Jeanne Marie was only told who her father was, by Margot Asquith, when she was twenty years old. A story around this discovery tells Jeanne Marie complained bitterly of her illegitimacy. She was asked sharply by her mother, &#x27;Who would you prefer to have as a father, a penniless drunken Irishman or a Royal Prince and the most handsome of all naval officers?&#x27;

==Descendants==
In 1902, Jeanne Marie Langtry married the Scottish politician Sir Ian Malcolm at St Margaret&#x27;s, Westminster. They had four children, three sons and a daughter. Jeanne Marie died in 1964. 

Her daughter Mary Malcolm was one of the first two female announcers on the BBC Television Service (now BBC One) from 1948 to 1956. She died on 13 October 2010, aged 92. &quot;The Guardian&quot; published an obituary mentioning Mary Malcolm was the granddaughter of King Edward VII. It was rectified: &#x27;This obituary of the postwar BBC television announcer Mary Malcolm said her mother, Jeanne-Marie, was the daughter of Lillie Langtry and Edward VII, the only one of his illegitimate children he acknowledged. Although Langtry was Edward VII&#x27;s mistress, the father of her daughter was acknowledged to be Prince Louis of Battenberg, grandfather of Prince Philip.&#x27; &quot;The Times&quot; published an obituary mentioning Jeanne Marie Langtry had grown-up believing she was the daughter of Edward VII: &#x27;Malcolm had an aristocratic pedigree. She was a granddaughter of Lillie Langtry, actress, beauty and mistress of the Prince of Wales, later Edward VII. Her mother, Jeanne Marie, was conceived and born out of wedlock, and [Lady] Malcolm grew up believing that she was the daughter of a king. Only later did she learn that her father was Prince Louis of Battenberg, whose legitimate children included the future Earl Mountbatten of Burma.&#x27; It wasn&#x27;t rectified. The prestigious Oxford Dictionary of National Biography also names Louis Mountbatten as grandfather of Mary Malcolm. &#x27;Her mother was frequently assumed to be the illegitimate offspring of Edward VII (when prince of Wales). She was not. Jeanne-Marie&#x27;s father was (or at least was acknowledged to be) German-born Prince Louis of Battenberg. He anglicized his name on settling in Britain and it was his grandson Philip Mountbatten who in due course would marry into royalty and become duke of Edinburgh and consort of Queen Elizabeth II.&#x27; Arthur Jones isn&#x27;t mentioned. The &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; did mention Lillie Langtry, but not the assumed (grand)father.

Jeanne Marie&#x27;s second son, Victor Neill Malcolm, married English actress Ann Todd. They divorced in the late 1930s. Victor Malcolm remarried in 1942, to an American, Mary Ellery Channing.

==Acting career and manager==
In 1881, Langtry was in need of money. Her close friend Oscar Wilde suggested she try the stage, and Langtry embarked upon a theatrical career. She first auditioned for an amateur production in the Twickenham Town Hall on 19 November 1881. It was a comedy two-hander called &quot;A Fair Encounter&quot;, with Henrietta Labouchère taking the other role and coaching Langtry in her acting. Labouchère had been a professional actress before she met and married Liberal MP Henry Labouchère.

Following favourable reviews of this first attempt at the stage, and with further coaching, Langtry made her debut before the London public, playing Kate Hardcastle in &quot;She Stoops to Conquer&quot; at the West End&#x27;s Haymarket Theatre in December 1881. Critical opinion was mixed, but she was a success with the public. She next performed in &quot;Ours&quot; at the same theatre. Although her affair with the Prince of Wales was over, he supported her new venture by attending several of her performances and helping attract an audience.

Early in 1882, Langtry quit the production at the Haymarket and started her own company, touring the UK with various plays. She was still under the tutelage of Henrietta Labouchère.&lt;ref name=&quot;Dudley 1958 Chapters 6/7/8&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; American impresario Henry Abbey arranged a tour in the United States for Langtry. She arrived in October 1882 to be met by the press and Oscar Wilde, who was in New York on a lecture tour. Her first appearance was eagerly anticipated, but the theatre burnt down the night before the opening. The show moved to another venue and opened the following week. Eventually, her production company started a coast-to-coast tour of the US, ending in May 1883 with a &quot;fat profit.&quot; Before leaving New York, she had an acrimonious break with Henrietta Labouchère over Langtry&#x27;s relationship with Frederick Gebhard, a wealthy young American. Her first tour of the US (accompanied by Gebhard) was an enormous success, which she repeated in subsequent years. While the critics generally condemned her interpretations of roles such as Pauline in &quot;The Lady of Lyons&quot; or Rosalind in &quot;As You Like It&quot;, the public loved her. After her return from New York in 1883, Langtry registered at the Conservatoire in Paris for six weeks&#x27; intensive training to improve her acting technique.

In 1889, she took on the part of Lady Macbeth in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth.&quot; In 1896 she played the role of Mrs Barry in &quot;Gossip&quot;, at the Comedy Theatre, London, the play written by Clyde Fitch and Leo Dietrichstein was based on &quot;suggestions found in a Novel&quot; by Jules Claretie, &#x27;Monsieur le ministre&#x27;. The New York Times thought that &quot;Mrs Langtry&#x27;s jewels were worth $100,000; her attire was so wonderful, so dazzling, so recklessly inappropriate -as it seemed- that a murmur of surprise ran through the auditorium&quot;. In 1903, she starred in the US in &quot;The Crossways&quot;, written by her in collaboration with J. Hartley Manners, husband of actress Laurette Taylor. She returned to the US for tours in 1906 and again in 1912, appearing in vaudeville. She last appeared on stage in America in 1917. Later that year, she made her final appearance in the theatre in London.

From 1900 to 1903, with financial support from Edgar Israel Cohen, Langtry became the lessee and manager of London&#x27;s Imperial Theatre. It opened on 21 April 1901, following an extensive refurbishment. On the site of the theatre is now the Westminster Central Hall. In a film released in 1913 directed by Edwin S. Porter, Langtry starred opposite Sidney Mason in the role of Mrs Norton in &quot;His Neighbor&#x27;s Wife&quot; in what would be her only film appearance.

==Thoroughbred racing==
For nearly a decade, from 1882 to 1891, Langtry had a relationship with an American, Frederick Gebhard, described as a young clubman, sportsman, horse owner, and admirer of feminine beauty, both on and off the stage. Gebhard&#x27;s wealth was inherited; his maternal grandfather Thomas E. Davis was one of the wealthiest New York real estate owners of the period. His paternal grandfather, Dutchman Frederick Gebhard, came to New York in 1800 and developed a mercantile business that expanded into banking and railroad stocks. Gebhard&#x27;s father died when he was 5 years old and his mother died when he was about 10. He and his sister, Isabelle, were raised by a guardian, paternal uncle William H Gebhard.

With Gebhard, Langtry became involved in horse racing. In 1885, she and Gebhard brought a stable of American horses to race in England. On 13 August 1888, Langtry and Gebhard travelled in her private carriage attached to an Erie Railroad express train bound for Chicago. Another railcar was transporting 17 of their horses when it derailed at Shohola, Pennsylvania, at 1:40 am. Rolling down an embankment, it burst into flames. One person died in the fire, along with Gebhard&#x27;s champion runner Eole and 14 racehorses belonging to him and Langtry. Two horses survived the wreck, including St Saviour, full brother to Eole. He was named for St Saviour&#x27;s Church in Jersey, where Langtry&#x27;s father had been rector and where she chose to be buried. Despite speculation, Langtry and Gebhard never married. In 1895, he married Lulu Morris of Baltimore; they divorced in 1901. In 1905 he married Marie Wilson; he died in 1910.


In 1889, Langtry met &quot;an eccentric young bachelor, with vast estates in Scotland, a large breeding stud, a racing stable, and more money than he knew what to do with&quot;: this was George Alexander Baird or Squire Abington, as he came to be known. He inherited wealth from his grandfather, who with seven of his sons, had developed and prospered from coal and iron workings. Baird&#x27;s father had died when he was a young boy, leaving him a fortune in trust. In addition, he inherited the estates of two wealthy uncles who had died childless.

Langtry and Baird met at a racecourse when he gave her a betting tip and the stake money to place on the horse. The horse won and, at a later luncheon party, Baird also offered her the gift of a horse named Milford. She at first demurred, but others at the table advised her to accept, as this horse was a very fine prospect. The horse won several races under Langtry&#x27;s colours; he was registered to &quot;Mr Jersey&quot; (women were excluded from registering horses at this time). Langtry became involved in a relationship with Baird, from 1891 until his death in March 1893.

When Baird died, Langtry purchased two of his horses, Lady Rosebery and Studley Royal, at the estate dispersal sale. She moved her training to Sam Pickering&#x27;s stables at Kentford House and took Regal Lodge as a residence in the village of Kentford, near Newmarket, Suffolk. The building is a short distance from Baird&#x27;s original racehorse breeding establishment, which has since been renamed Meddler Stud.

Langtry found mentors in Captain James Octavius Machell and Joe Thompson, who provided guidance on all matters related to the turf. When her trainer Pickering failed to deliver results, she moved her expanded string of 20 horses to Fred Webb at Exning. In 1899, James Machell sold his Newmarket stables to Colonel Harry Leslie Blundell McCalmont, a wealthy racehorse owner, who was Langtry&#x27;s brother-in-law, having married Hugo de Bathe&#x27;s sister Winifred in 1897. He was also related to Langtry&#x27;s first husband, Edward, whose ship-owning grandfather George had married into the County Antrim Callwell family, being related in marriage to the McCalmonts.

Told of a good horse for sale in Australia called Merman, she purchased it and had it shipped to England; such shipments were risky and she had a previous bad experience with a horse arriving injured (Maluma). Merman was regarded as one of the best stayers; he eventually went on to win the Lewes Handicap, the Cesarewitch, Jockey Club Cup, Goodwood Stakes, Goodwood Cup, and Ascot Gold Cup (with Tod Sloan up). Langtry later had a second Cesarewitch winner with Yentoi, and a third place with Raytoi. An imported horse from New Zealand called Uniform won the Lewes Handicap for her.

Other trainers used by Langtry were Jack Robinson, who trained at Foxhill in Wiltshire, and a very young Fred Darling, whose first big success was Yentoi&#x27;s 1908 Cesarewitch.

Langtry owned a stud at Gazely, Newmarket. This venture was not a success. After a few years, she gave up attempts to breed blood-stock. Langtry sold Regal Lodge and all her horse-racing interests in 1919 before she moved to Monaco. Regal Lodge had been her home for twenty-three years and received many celebrated guests, notably the Prince of Wales.

In honour of her contributions to thoroughbred racing, since 2014 the Glorious Goodwood meeting has held the Group 2 Lillie Langtry Stakes.

==William Ewart Gladstone - Prime Minister==
During her stage career, Lillie Langtry became friendly with William Ewart Gladstone (1809–1898), who was the Prime Minister on four occasions during the reign of Queen Victoria. In her memoirs, Langtry says that she first met Gladstone when she was posing for her portrait at Millais&#x27; studio. Later he became a mentor to her.

However, this was probably also a make-belief by Lillie Langtry herself. The biographers of William Ewart Gladstone think otherwise.They are also quite cynical about Lillie&#x27;s motives.

Lillie Langtry in &quot;The Days I Knew&quot;: &#x27;One of the most gratifying features of my debut was the concern in my new departure displayed by that gifted being, W.E.Gladstone. Although we had met casually at Millais&#x27;s studio I had not known him further. But now he came often to see me and would drop in (he was Prime Minister at the time) to find me eating my dinner before going to the theatre. How wonderful it seemed that this great and universally sought-after man should give me and my work even a passing thought. But he did more. His comprehensive mind and sweet nature grasped the difficult task that lay before me, the widely different orbit in which my life would henceforth move, and he knew how adrift I felt. And out of his vast knowledge of the public he realised how much he could help me - so the salmon advised the minnow. Never shall I forget the wisdom of Gladstone and the uplifting effects of his visits. Sometimes he read aloud his favourite passages from Shakespeare. Then, again, he would bring me books. He was truly religious, believing, he told me &quot;with the simple faith of a child&quot;. And one could not be in his company without feeling that goodness emanating from him... Among his many excellent admonitions I remember, and shall always remember, this sound piece of advice. He said. In &quot;In your professional career, you will receive attacks, personal and critical, just and unjust. Bear them, never reply, and, above all, never rush into print to explain or defend yourself. And I never have.&#x27;

However, it was not Gladstone who sought Lillie out; the approach came from Lillie. Abraham Hayward, an influential journalist, wrote Gladstone a letter, dated 8 January 1882: &#x27;Mrs Langtry, who is an enthusiastic admirer of yours, told me this afternoon that she should be feel highly flattered if you would call on her, and I tell you this, although I fear you have other more pressing overtures just at present. Her address is 18 Albert Mansions, Victoria Street, and she is generally at home about six.&#x27;

The published diaries of Gladstone show there were indeed contacts between Lillie Langtry and one of the most important British statesmen. However, the editor of Gladstone diaries doubts the friendship was, from Gladstone&#x27;s point of view, important. Gladstone was a regular theatre-goer and moved enthusiastically among some theatre-sets. He frequently visited performances of drawing-room comedies and drama. Rumours were not surprising given Lillie&#x27;s reputation and the gossip about Gladstone&#x27;s nocturnal activities which circulated in London clubs. Gladstone was in the habit of wanting to &quot;rescue&quot; prostitutes by trying to convince them it was best not to live in sin and to find a decent job. Gladstone noted on 3 April 1882 in his diary: &#x27;I hardly know what estimate to form of her. Her manners are very pleasing, &amp; she has a working spirit in her&#x27;. On 16 February 1885 he wrote: &#x27;Saw Mrs Langtry: probably for the last time.&#x27; Gladstone&#x27;s private secretary was worried about the contacts between Lillie Langtry and Gladstone: he was afraid she tried to make social capital out of their contacts. &#x27;Last week Mr. G. received an invitation to a Sunday &quot;at home&quot; from Mrs Langtry. He did not avail himself of it, but he went and called at her house. He did not even see her, but all kinds of rumours are already abroad about his intimacy with the &quot;professional beauty&quot;. These rumours would have had much greater currency and better foundation, had he gone to the evening party, out of which I think we managed to frighten him and the card for which I first thought of hiding and saying nothing about. Certainly Rosebery spoke not a day too early about the night walks, which are now openly talked of in Society.&#x27; Things even became worse. Gladstone presented Lillie Langry a copy of his favourite book, &quot;Sister Dora&quot; - a biography of a high-born woman who worked as a nurse among the poor. Hamilton:&#x27;She is evidently trying to make social capital out the acquaintance which scraped with him. Most disagreeable things with all kinds of exaggeration are being said. I took the occasion of putting a word and cautioning him against the wiles of the woman, whose reputation is in such bad odour that, despite all the endeavours of H.R.H., nobody will receive in their houses.&#x27; It seems Lillie Langtry had become by April 1882 a social outcast, with two important men who tried to help her: the Prince of Wales and the Prime Minister. Hamilton tried to protect his boss, but had a shrewd woman against him. &#x27;She had evidently been told to resort to the double-envelope system which secures respect from our rude hand; and she is now making pretty constant use of this privilege and boasting in proportion.&#x27; Hamilton could do nothing: the letters became more frequently, but he couldn&#x27;t read them. However, the much later published diaries of Gladstone himself show Hamilton had little to fear: there were little personal contacts with Lillie Langtry. Gladstone wrote her exactly one letter in the short period after Lillie tried to (re)make contact with him while Gladstone didn&#x27;t know well how to deal with the situation.

In 1925, Captain Peter Emmanuel Wright published a book called &quot;Portraits and Criticisms&quot;. In it, he claimed that Gladstone had numerous extramarital affairs, including one with Langtry. Gladstone&#x27;s son Herbert Gladstone wrote a letter calling Wright a liar, a coward and a fool; Wright sued him. During the trial, a telegram, sent by Langtry from Monte Carlo, was read out in court saying, &quot;I strongly repudiate the slanderous accusations of Peter Wright.&quot; The jury found against Wright, saying that the &quot;gist of the defendant&#x27;s letter of 27 July was true&quot; and that the evidence vindicated the high moral standards of the late Gladstone.

==American citizenship and divorce==
In 1888, Langtry became a property owner in the United States when she and Frederick Gebhard purchased adjoining ranches in Lake County, California. She established a winery with an area of in Guenoc Valley, producing red wine. She sold it in 1906. Bearing the Langtry Farms name, the winery and vineyard are still in operation in Middletown, California.

During her travels in the United States, Langtry became an American citizen and on 13 May 1897, divorced her husband Edward in Lakeport, California. Her ownership of land in America was introduced in evidence at her divorce to help demonstrate to the judge that she was a citizen of the country. In June of that year Edward Langtry issued a statement giving his side of the story, which was published in the &quot;New York Journal.&quot;

Edward died a few months later in Chester Asylum, after being found by police in a demented condition at Crewe railway station. His death was probably the result of a brain haemorrhage after a fall during a steamer crossing from Belfast to Liverpool. He was buried in Overleigh Cemetery; a verdict of accidental death was returned at the inquest. A letter of condolence later written by Langtry to another widow reads in part, &quot;I too have lost a husband, but alas! it was no great loss.&quot;

Langtry continued to have involvement with her husband&#x27;s Irish properties after his death. These were compulsorily purchased from her in 1928 under the Northern Ireland Land Act, 1925. This was passed after the Partition of Ireland, with the purpose of transferring certain lands from owners to tenants.

==Hugo Gerald de Bathe==
After the divorce from her husband, Langtry was linked in the popular press to , an Austro-Hungarian diplomat. They shared time together and both had an interest in horse-racing. However, in 1899, she married 28-year-old Hugo Gerald de Bathe (1871–1940), son of Sir Henry de Bathe, 4th Baronet, and Charlotte Clare. Hugo&#x27;s parents had initially not married, because of objections from the de Bathe family. They lived together and seven of their children were born out of wedlock. They married after the death of Sir Henry&#x27;s father in 1870. Hugo was their first son to be born in wedlock – making him heir to the baronetcy.
The wedding between Langtry and de Bathe took place in St Saviour&#x27;s Church, Jersey, on 27 July 1899, with her daughter Jeanne Marie Langtry being the only other person present, apart from the officials. This was the same day that Langtry&#x27;s horse Merman won the Goodwood Cup. In December 1899, de Bathe volunteered to join the British forces in the Boer War. He was assigned to the Robert&#x27;s Horse Mounted brigade as a lieutenant. In 1907, Hugo&#x27;s father died; he became the 5th Baronet, and Langtry became Lady de Bathe.
When Hugo de Bathe became the 5th Baronet, he inherited properties in Sussex, Devon and Ireland; those in Sussex were in the hamlet of West Stoke near Chichester. These were Woodend, with 17 bedrooms and set in 71 acres; Hollandsfield, with 10 bedrooms and set in 52 acres; and Balsom&#x27;s Farm of 206 acres. Woodend was retained as the de Bathe residence whilst the smaller Hollandsfield was let. Today the buildings retain their period appearance. Modifications and additions have been made, and the complex is now multi-occupancy. One of the houses on the site is named Langtry and another Hardy. The de Bathe properties were all sold in 1919, the same year Lady de Bathe sold Regal Lodge.

==Final days==
During her final years, Langtry, as Lady de Bathe, resided in Monaco whilst her husband, Sir Hugo de Bathe, lived in Vence, Alpes Maritimes. The two saw one another at social gatherings or in brief private encounters. During World War I, Hugo de Bathe was an ambulance driver for the French Red Cross.
Langtry&#x27;s closest companion during her time in Monaco was her friend Mathilde Marie Peat. Peat was at Langtry&#x27;s side during the final days of her life as she was dying of pneumonia in Monte Carlo. Langtry left Peat £10,000, the Monaco property known as Villa le Lys, clothes, and her motor car.

Langtry died in Monaco at dawn on 12 February 1929. She had asked to be buried in her parents&#x27; tomb at St Saviour&#x27;s Church in Jersey. Blizzards delayed the journey, but her body was taken to St Malo and across to Jersey on 22 February aboard the steamer &quot;Saint Brieuc&quot;. Her coffin lay in St Saviour&#x27;s overnight surrounded by flowers, and she was buried on the afternoon of 23 February.

The death of the famous Lillie Langtry made headlines in British newspapers.

The &quot;Daily Mail&quot; remembered Lillie Langtry as one of the most famous beauties of the closed century. &#x27;In more modern times it was her acting that brought her renown, but in her youth she took London by storm on account of her dazzling loveliness, and it was indeed her good looks and her wit that enabled her to go on the stage when her first husband lost his fortune.&#x27; In the following weeks the popular newspaper reported about her estate, her funeral and a memorial service.

The &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; published both a news article and an obituary full of memories of a contemporary of Lillie Langtry who had known her in society years and had followed her acting career. &#x27;Never a real actress&#x27; was the verdict, but Lillie Langtry had made the wise and honourable decision to use her celebrity to find a career and her living in her own way and by her own resources instead of becoming dependent on offers of aristocratic male friends after her separation from her husband. ‘She was one of the first and probably the most popular of the ladies who were universally known at that time as &quot;Society beauties” … Eventually she resolved to go on the stage, and she did an immense amount of work in America as well as in England during a period of about 35 years. She overcame many obstacles, and, although she was never a great actress, her beauty and her charm of manner brought her a large measure of success.’ 

&quot;The Times&quot; published on three different pages a news alert from the correspondent in Paris, a photograph and an obituary. In the obituary the newspaper looked back at the start and the development of Langtry&#x27;s career. On her first appearance at December 15, 1881 - as Kate Hardcastle, in She Stoops to Conquer - all sections of society had fought for highly priced seats in the theatre. ‘The audience, which included the Prince and Princess of Wales, and representatives of eminence in fashion, art, and literature, received Mrs. Langtry very quietly, but the debutante soon overcame the feeling of prejudice…. Mrs. Langtry became so popular in America that she paid many visits to that country, her last being in 1915. Her personality counted for much, and she gradually acquired the technique of the stage. But she never succeeded in touching the emotions, the common chord of humanity….’ 

The &quot;Manchester Guardian&quot; remembered Lillie Langtry mainly as a &quot;reigning beauty&quot;. &#x27;The London of the eighties and nineties, when the &quot;Jersey Lily,&quot; whose death is announced, had her heyday, seems even more remote than the passage of years warrants. To a generation whose manifold interests in life have enormously increased in comparison with their fathers&#x27; it seems incredible that barely a generation ago crowds should have assembled in thousands to stare at or cheer a &quot;reigning beauty.&quot; Yet Mrs. Langtry, though the most famous of her kind, was no exception as a social institution...A world with the &quot;movies&quot; and the wireless to amuse it, a world, moreover, in which the sexes meet on more practical terms than in the past, has more to do than mob a handsome woman for the sake of her looks. But it can at least admire the &quot;Jersey Lily&quot; for one fact in her curious career - that when hard times came she turned to hard work for the theatre. That work was seldom artistically notable but it revealed a force of character on which those who reckoned her by looks alone had hardly counted.&#x27; The famous Victorian beauty did have qualities and made some inventions.&#x27;Mrs. Langtry was not perhaps a great actress, but her beauty carried everything before it. She was a woman who knew how to make the most of her graces. As she said long afterwards, &quot;I was the first woman in England to have my hands manicured.&quot; She knew all the niceties of artistic dressing. It was one of her plaints that &quot;to-day women are becoming so standardised in figure and dress that they all seem to look like each other.&quot; Her own grace and graciousness and her ability to please her fellow-creatures she retained to the end. She danced with the vitality of a young woman when she was seventy she wrote a book of reminiscences a year later, and even after a severe illness the beauty of her complexion and of her eyes still remained.&#x27; 

In the United States the death of Lillie Langtry was front page news for the &quot;New York Times&quot;. &#x27;Actress, Once called World&#x27;s Greatest Beauty succumbs to Heart Disease and Influenza.&#x27; The article, with the streamer &#x27;was idolized by society&#x27;, was continued with a large obituary at page 12.

The &quot;Washington Post&quot; reported the news on page 13, but still in a prominent way: a friend of King of Edward VII and one of the most popular women of stage had died. On 17 February 1929 the &quot;Washington Post&quot; continued: especially in New York the former actress was adored, but this didn&#x27;t spoil the famous English beauty. 

The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; paid tribute to the former actress and her &#x27;notable career&#x27; on page 1.

===Bequests===
Immediately after her death, the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;, published exclusive news: ‘The Daily Mail understands that Lady de Bathe , (Mrs. Langtry, &quot; the Jersey Lily &quot;), who died at Monte Carlo on February 12, has made a number of personal bequests in her trill. The famous actress has (left £10,000, her jewellery, and her villa, Le Lys, Monte Carlo, to Mrs. Peat, who was with her during her last illness and for 16 years her constant friend and companion. To her daughter, Lady (Ian) Malcolm, Lady de Bathe left the family old silver from Jersey. To the two daughters of Lady (Ian) Malcolm she left £5,000 each. Lady de Bathe left her motorcar to her maid Mathilde, who was with her for 15 years. The daughter of the Very Rev. W. C. E. le Breton, Dean of Jersey, Lady de Bathe offered to the museum at St. Helier, Jersey, antique furniture, with the proviso that should the museum authorities not want the furniture it is to revert to the maid Mathilde. Mrs. Peat, a pale, middle-aged woman wearing a black fur coat over a black gown, left Paddington for Jersey last night. She was accompanied by Lady Malcolm and the solicitor to the estate.’

In 1928 the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; reported an Italian man was arrested charged with the theft of nearly £1,000 worth of jewellery from Lady de Bathe at her villa, Le Lys. Only one of the missing jewels, a ring, had been recovered.

In her will, Langtry left £2,000 to a young man of whom she had become fond in later life, named Charles Louis D&#x27;Albani; the son of a Newmarket solicitor, he was born in about 1891. She also left £1,000 to A. T. Bulkeley Gavin of 5 Berkeley Square, London, a physician and surgeon who treated wealthy patients. In 1911 he had been engaged to author Katherine Cecil Thurston, who died before they could marry; she had already changed her will in favour of Bulkeley Gavin.

==Cultural influence and portrayals==

One of the most glamorous British women of her era, Langtry used her high public profile to endorse commercial products such as cosmetics and soap—an early example of celebrity endorsement. She used her famous ivory complexion to generate income, being the first woman to endorse a commercial product when she began advertising Pears soap in 1882. The aesthetic movement in England became directly involved in advertising, and Pears (under advertising pioneer Thomas J. Barratt) recruited Langtry—who had been painted by aesthete artists—to promote their products, which included putting her &quot;signature&quot; on the advertisements.

In the 1944 Universal film &quot;The Scarlet Claw&quot;, Lillian Gentry, the first murder victim, wife of Lord William Penrose and former actress, is an oblique reference to Langtry.

Langtry has been portrayed in two films. Lilian Bond played her in &quot;The Westerner&quot; (1940), and Ava Gardner in &quot;The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean&quot; (1972). Bean was played by Walter Brennan in the former, and by Paul Newman in the latter film.

In 1978, Langtry&#x27;s story was dramatised by London Weekend Television and produced as &quot;Lillie&quot;, starring Francesca Annis in the title role (Annis received the British Academy Television Award for Best Actress). Annis previously played Langtry in two episodes of ATV&#x27;s &quot;Edward the Seventh&quot;. Jenny Seagrove played her in the 1991 television film &quot;Incident at Victoria Falls&quot;.

Langtry is a featured character in the fictional &quot;The Flashman Papers&quot; novels of George MacDonald Fraser, in which she is noted as a former lover of arch-cad Harry Flashman, who, nonetheless, describes her as one of his few true loves.

Langtry is suggested as an inspiration for Irene Adler, a character in the Sherlock Holmes fiction of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. In &quot;A Scandal in Bohemia&quot;, Adler bests Holmes, perhaps the only woman to do so.

Langtry is used as a touchstone for old-fashioned manners in Preston Sturges&#x27;s comedy &quot;The Lady Eve&quot; (1941), in a scene where a corpulent woman drops a handkerchief on the floor and the hero ignores it. Jean (Barbara Stanwyck) begins to describe, comment, and anticipate the events that we see reflected in her hand mirror: &quot;The dropped kerchief! That hasn&#x27;t been used since Lillie Langtry ... you&#x27;ll have to pick it up yourself, madam ... it&#x27;s a shame, but he doesn&#x27;t care for the flesh, he&#x27;ll never see it.&quot;

Lillie Langtry is the inspiration for The Who&#x27;s 1967 hit single &quot;Pictures of Lily&quot;, as mentioned in Pete Townshend&#x27;s 2012 memoir &quot;Who I Am&quot;. Dixie Carter portrays Langtry as a &quot;songbird&quot; and Brady Hawkes&#x27; love interest in Kenny Rogers&#x27; 1994 &quot;Gambler V: Playing for Keeps&quot;, the last of the Gambler series for CBS that started in 1980. Langtry is depicted as a singer, not an actress, and Dixie Carter&#x27;s costuming appears closer to Mae West than anything Langtry ever wore.

In &quot;The Simpsons&quot; 1994 episode &quot;Burns&#x27; Heir&quot;, the auditions are held in the Lillie Langtry Theater on Burns&#x27; estate.

Langtry is a featured character in the play &quot;Sherlock Holmes and the Case of the Jersey Lily&quot; by Katie Forgette. In this work, she is blackmailed over her past relationship with the Prince of Wales, with intimate letters as proof. She and Oscar Wilde employ Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson to investigate the matter.

==Places connected with Lillie Langtry==
===Residences and historical namesakes===
When first married (1874), Edward and Lillie Langtry had a property called Cliffe Lodge in Southampton, Hampshire. In 1876 they rented an apartment in Eaton Place, Belgravia, London. From early 1878 they lived at 17 Norfolk Street (now 19 Dunraven Street) in Mayfair, London. Langtry lived at 21 Pont Street, London, from 1890 to 1897, and had with her eight servants at the 1891 census. Although from 1895 the building was operated as the Cadogan Hotel, she would stay in her former bedroom there. A blue plaque (which erroneously states that she was born in 1852) on the hotel commemorates this, and the hotel&#x27;s restaurant is named &#x27;Langtry&#x27;s&#x27; in her honour.

A short walk from Pont Street was a house at number 2 Cadogan Place where she lived in 1899. From 1886 to 1894, she owned a house in Manhattan at 362 West 23rd Street, a gift from Frederick Gebhard.

Langtry&#x27;s London address from 1916 until at least 1920 was Cornwall Lodge, Allsop Place, Regent&#x27;s Park. She gave this address when sailing on the liner &quot;St Paul&quot; across the Atlantic in August 1916, and the 1920 London electoral register has de Bathe, Emilie Charlotte (Lady), listed at the same address. A letter sold at auction in 2014 from Langtry to Dr. Harvey dated 1918 is also headed with this address. Langtry was a cousin of local politician Philip Le Breton, pioneer for the preservation of Hampstead Heath, whose wife was Anna Letitia Aikin.

There are two bars in New York City devoted to the memory of Lillie Langtry, operating under the title Lillie&#x27;s Victorian Establishment. 
Judge Roy Bean named the saloon, in Pecos, Texas, The Jersey Lily, which also served as the judge&#x27;s courthouse, for her, in Langtry, Texas (named after the unrelated engineer George Langtry).

===Spurious associations===
====Bournemouth====
In 1938 the new owners of the Red House at 26 Derby Road, Bournemouth, which had been built in 1877 by the widowed women&#x27;s rights campaigner and temperance activist Emily Langton Langton, converted the large house into a hotel, the Manor Heath Hotel, and advertised it as having been built for Lillie Langtry by the Prince of Wales, believing that the inscription &#x27;E.L.L. 1877&#x27; in one of the rooms related to Lillie Langtry. A plaque was later placed on the hotel by Bournemouth Council repeating the assertion, and in the late 1970s the hotel was renamed Langtry Manor. However, despite the hotel&#x27;s claims and local legend, no actual association between Langtry and the house ever existed and the Prince never visited it.

====South Hampstead====
On 2 April 1965 the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; reported an interview with Electra Yaras (born c. 1922), leaseholder and resident of Leighton House, 103 Alexandra Road, South Hampstead, who claimed in the interview that Langtry had lived in the house and regularly entertained the Prince of Wales there. Yaras claimed that she herself had been visited in the house several times by Langtry&#x27;s ghost.

On 11 April 1971 &quot;The Hampstead News&quot; said that the house had been built for Langtry by Lord Leighton. These claims by Yaras and later by &quot;The Hampstead News&quot; were made in order to suggest an historical importance for the house and support its preservation from the demolition which had been originally ordered in 1965 and revived in 1971. The claims were supported in 1971 by actress Adrienne Corri, who lived nearby and signed a petition, and were publicised in &quot;The Times&quot; on 8 October 1971 and &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; on 9 October 1971. They were given further publicity by Anita Leslie in 1973 in a book on the Marlborough House set.

The house was nevertheless demolished in 1971 to make way for the Alexandra Road Estate.

In 2021, published research revealed that the house had been built in the 1860s by Samuel Litchfield and was likely named after his wife&#x27;s birthplace of Leighton Buzzard. Lengthy research into local records by Dick Weindling and Marianne Colloms revealed no connection whatever with Langtry.

The persistence of the myth, propounded in a time when stories about the royal family were easy to publicise and received no critical or substantiating research, resulted in Langtry&#x27;s name still being in use in some place names and locales in the South Hampstead area. These include Langtry Road off Kilburn Priory; Langtry Walk in the Alexandra Road Estate; and the Lillie Langtry pub at 121 Abbey Road (defunct since late 2022), built in 1969 to replace The Princess of Wales hotel, and briefly called The Cricketers from 2007 to 2011. The mythologising also includes The Lillie Langtry pub at 19 Lillie Road in Fulham – the road actually took its name from local landowner John Scott Lillie.

==Steam yacht &quot;White Ladye&quot;==
Langtry owned a luxury steam auxiliary yacht called &quot;White Ladye&quot; from 1891 to 1897. The yacht was built in 1891 for Lord Asburton by Ramage &amp; Ferguson of Leith, Scotland, from a design by W. C. Storey. She had three masts, was 204 feet in length and 27 feet in breadth and was powered by a 142 hp steam engine. She had originally been named &quot;Ladye Mabel&quot;.

In 1893, Ogden Goelet leased the vessel from Langtry and used it until his death in 1897. Langtry put the &quot;White Ladye&quot; up for auction in November 1897 at the Mart, Tokenhouse Yard, London. It was sold to Scottish entrepreneur John Lawson Johnston, the creator of Bovril. He owned it until his death on board in 1900. From 1902 to 1903, the yacht was recorded in the Lloyd&#x27;s Yacht Register as being owned by shipbuilder William Cresswell Gray, Tunstall Manor, West Hartlepool, and remained so until 1915. Following this the Lloyd&#x27;s Register records that she became adapted as French trawler &quot;La Champagne&quot; based in Fécamp, northwest France; she was broken up in 1935.

==Bibliography==
* Langtry, Lillie, &quot;The Days I Knew&quot;, 1925 autobiography). 
* Langtry, Emilie Charlotte. &quot;The life of Mrs. Langtry, the Jersey Lily, and queen of the stage&quot;, 1882. Pinder &amp; Howes Leeds
* Langtry, Lillie. &quot;All at Sea&quot; (novel) 1909.

==See also==
* Academy of Music/Riviera Theatre
* English royal mistress

==References==

==External links==

* Lillie Langtry Museum on the Internet
* Lillie Langtry biography
* 
* History of East Cliff
* Article on Professional Beauties of the Victorian era</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="0" end="31" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Emilie Charlotte, Lady de Bathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="37" end="46" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Le Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="57" end="64" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="112" end="118" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="123" end="127" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="129" end="136" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="194" end="203" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="256" end="262" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="410" end="425" title="society hostess" label="society hostess"/>
<link wikidata="Q256922" start="507" end="525" title="Aestheticism" label="aesthetic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046564" start="615" end="625" title="Pears (soap)" label="Pears soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="738" end="746" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324782" start="773" end="794" title="She Stoops to Conquer" label="She Stoops to Conquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745183" start="976" end="993" title="The Lady of Lyons" label="The Lady of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="1030" end="1044" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="1166" end="1176" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382713" start="1241" end="1250" title="Newmarket, Suffolk" label="Newmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548265" start="1331" end="1352" title="Lillie Langtry Stakes" label="Lillie Langtry Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="1539" end="1550" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="1688" end="1698" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076223" start="1700" end="1715" title="Charles Chetwynd-Talbot, 20th Earl of Shrewsbury" label="Lord Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q57468" start="1721" end="1747" title="Prince Louis of Battenberg" label="Prince Louis of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026315" start="2595" end="2607" title="Gretna Green" label="Gretna Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594042" start="2646" end="2676" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Chelsea" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="2706" end="2715" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="2764" end="2770" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038358" start="2775" end="2789" title="dean of Jersey" label="dean of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808243" start="2846" end="2856" title="Saint Saviour, Jersey" label="St Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="2861" end="2867" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438073" start="3287" end="3304" title="Richard le Breton" label="Richard le Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="3348" end="3361" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="3781" end="3790" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q63196804" start="4359" end="4373" title="Edward Langtry" label="Edward Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="5300" end="5309" title="St Helier" label="St Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="5459" end="5474" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123024" start="5525" end="5534" title="Belgravia" label="Belgravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803208" start="5602" end="5617" title="Dunraven Street" label="Dunraven Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q378991" start="5623" end="5632" title="Park Lane" label="Park Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791366" start="5841" end="5855" title="Thomas Heron Jones, 7th Viscount Ranelagh" label="Lord Raneleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751879" start="5872" end="5883" title="Frank Miles" label="Frank Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q159606" start="6643" end="6650" title="John Everett Millais" label="Millais"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="6655" end="6666" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q955750" start="6675" end="6680" title="William Powell Frith" label="Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791366" start="6821" end="6862" title="Thomas Heron Jones, 7th Viscount Ranelagh" label="Thomas Heron Jones, 7th Viscount Ranelagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26328" start="7082" end="7095" title="Knightsbridge" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751879" start="7458" end="7469" title="Frank Miles" label="Frank Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q159606" start="7567" end="7587" title="John Everett Millais" label="John Everett Millais"/>
<link wikidata="Q161577" start="7743" end="7752" title="Amaryllis" label="Amaryllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="7784" end="7790" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="7938" end="7946" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="8043" end="8056" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156834" start="8144" end="8157" title="Nerine sarniensis" label="Guernsey lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="8336" end="8350" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q465163" start="8487" end="8501" title="Edward Poynter" label="Edward Poynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="8534" end="8552" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Edward Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q461429" start="10876" end="10911" title="Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick" label="Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751879" start="11034" end="11045" title="Frank Miles" label="Frank Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185549" start="20361" end="20372" title="Jane Ridley" label="Jane Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486604" start="26678" end="26691" title="Langtry Manor" label="Langtry Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781422" start="27754" end="27766" title="Theo Aronson" label="Theo Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265937" start="27878" end="27890" title="Alice Keppel" label="Alice Keppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076223" start="29989" end="30004" title="Charles Chetwynd-Talbot, 20th Earl of Shrewsbury" label="Lord Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779251" start="30317" end="30338" title="Patsy Cornwallis-West" label="Patsy Cornwallis-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="30367" end="30372" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507758" start="30434" end="30446" title="Sir George Lewis, 1st Baronet" label="George Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57468" start="31659" end="31685" title="Prince Louis of Battenberg" label="Prince Louis of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498674" start="33514" end="33526" title="Laura Beatty" label="Laura Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="34025" end="34050" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Earl Mountbatten of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396333" start="34182" end="34196" title="Margot Asquith" label="Margot Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147302" start="34585" end="34596" title="Ian Malcolm (politician)" label="Ian Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q823412" start="34600" end="34631" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018831" start="34726" end="34738" title="Mary Malcolm" label="Mary Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="34789" end="34811" title="BBC One" label="BBC Television Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="36017" end="36056" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q434324" start="36761" end="36769" title="Ann Todd" label="Ann Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="36963" end="36974" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143278" start="37105" end="37115" title="Twickenham" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485487" start="37216" end="37236" title="Henrietta Labouchère" label="Henrietta Labouchère"/>
<link wikidata="Q334396" start="37376" end="37392" title="Henry Labouchère" label="Henry Labouchère"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324782" start="37569" end="37590" title="She Stoops to Conquer" label="She Stoops to Conquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="37604" end="37612" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="37620" end="37637" title="Haymarket Theatre" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784900" start="38211" end="38222" title="Henry Eugene Abbey" label="Henry Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421377" start="38790" end="38807" title="Frederick Gebhard" label="Frederick Gebhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745183" start="39042" end="39059" title="The Lady of Lyons" label="The Lady of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q60834955" start="39069" end="39077" title="Rosalind (As You Like It)" label="Rosalind"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="39087" end="39101" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q463055" start="39197" end="39210" title="Conservatoire de Paris" label="Conservatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="39326" end="39338" title="Lady Macbeth" label="Lady Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="39367" end="39374" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105956" start="39966" end="39984" title="J. Hartley Manners" label="J. Hartley Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406954" start="40005" end="40020" title="Laurette Taylor" label="Laurette Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="40095" end="40105" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662014" start="40275" end="40293" title="Edgar Israel Cohen" label="Edgar Israel Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373667" start="40350" end="40366" title="Imperial Theatre, London" label="Imperial Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="40472" end="40496" title="Westminster Central Hall" label="Westminster Central Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q347864" start="40537" end="40552" title="Edwin S. Porter" label="Edwin S. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483334" start="40579" end="40591" title="Sidney Mason" label="Sidney Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q15865203" start="40627" end="40651" title="His Neighbor&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="His Neighbor&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063599" start="41005" end="41020" title="Thomas E. Davis" label="Thomas E. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="41478" end="41490" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="41661" end="41674" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500137" start="41780" end="41801" title="Shohola Township, Pennsylvania" label="Shohola, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381761" start="41936" end="41940" title="Eole (horse)" label="Eole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="42154" end="42160" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="42286" end="42295" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227716" start="42559" end="42581" title="George Alexander Baird" label="George Alexander Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392024" start="43751" end="43759" title="Kentford" label="Kentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382713" start="43766" end="43784" title="Newmarket, Suffolk" label="Newmarket, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805193" start="43909" end="43921" title="Meddler (horse)" label="Meddler Stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040071" start="43957" end="43979" title="James Octavius Machell" label="James Octavius Machell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437858" start="44169" end="44175" title="Exning" label="Exning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061532" start="44230" end="44269" title="Harry McCalmont" label="Colonel Harry Leslie Blundell McCalmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="44517" end="44530" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25171953" start="44644" end="44650" title="Merman (horse)" label="Merman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605119" start="44843" end="44850" title="Stayer (horse)" label="stayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065518" start="44905" end="44916" title="Cesarewitch Handicap" label="Cesarewitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969633" start="44918" end="44933" title="British Champions Long Distance Cup" label="Jockey Club Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583715" start="44952" end="44964" title="Goodwood Cup" label="Goodwood Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742441" start="44970" end="44984" title="Ascot Gold Cup" label="Ascot Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812099" start="44991" end="45000" title="Tod Sloan (jockey)" label="Tod Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494956" start="45284" end="45296" title="Fred Darling" label="Fred Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="45584" end="45590" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583722" start="45791" end="45799" title="Goodwood Racecourse" label="Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834913" start="45821" end="45828" title="Group races" label="Group 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548265" start="45829" end="45850" title="Lillie Langtry Stakes" label="Lillie Langtry Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="45959" end="45982" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="46008" end="46022" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q92360189" start="51759" end="51780" title="Peter Wright (writer)" label="Peter Emmanuel Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347324" start="51960" end="51977" title="Herbert Gladstone" label="Herbert Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156361" start="52583" end="52606" title="Lake County, California" label="Lake County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q156362" start="52626" end="52632" title="winery" label="winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614823" start="52652" end="52665" title="Guenoc Valley AVA" label="Guenoc Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625116" start="52790" end="52812" title="Middletown, California" label="Middletown, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="52874" end="52890" title="US citizenship" label="American citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960647" start="52942" end="52962" title="Lakeport, California" label="Lakeport, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177080" start="53288" end="53302" title="Countess of Chester Hospital" label="Chester Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397336" start="53359" end="53380" title="Crewe railway station" label="Crewe railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113781" start="53522" end="53540" title="Overleigh Cemetery" label="Overleigh Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53910" end="53935" title="Irish Land Commission#Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland Land Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="53969" end="53989" title="Partition of Ireland" label="Partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527241" start="54350" end="54381" title="Sir Henry de Bathe, 4th Baronet" label="Sir Henry de Bathe, 4th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583715" start="54992" end="55004" title="Goodwood Cup" label="Goodwood Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="55079" end="55087" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="56033" end="56039" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192368" start="56088" end="56093" title="Vence" label="Vence"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="56196" end="56207" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="56454" end="56463" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="57079" end="57089" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="58529" end="58538" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="62293" end="62303" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376559" start="63998" end="64022" title="Katherine Thurston" label="Katherine Cecil Thurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057785" start="64327" end="64348" title="celebrity endorsement" label="celebrity endorsement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046564" start="64488" end="64498" title="Pears (soap)" label="Pears soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q256922" start="64512" end="64530" title="Aestheticism" label="aesthetic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791017" start="64620" end="64637" title="Thomas J. Barratt" label="Thomas J. Barratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214031" start="64831" end="64847" title="The Scarlet Claw" label="The Scarlet Claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q450862" start="65023" end="65034" title="Lilian Bond" label="Lilian Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150612" start="65055" end="65068" title="The Westerner (1940 film)" label="The Westerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="65087" end="65098" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171727" start="65108" end="65144" title="The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean" label="The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q219521" start="65178" end="65192" title="Walter Brennan" label="Walter Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="65215" end="65226" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="65296" end="65321" title="London Weekend Television" label="London Weekend Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548246" start="65344" end="65350" title="Lillie (TV series)" label="Lillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q436769" start="65367" end="65382" title="Francesca Annis" label="Francesca Annis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925697" start="65421" end="65470" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actress" label="British Academy Television Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="65524" end="65527" title="Associated TeleVision" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048737" start="65541" end="65559" title="Edward the Seventh" label="Edward the Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q536552" start="65567" end="65581" title="Jenny Seagrove" label="Jenny Seagrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380266" start="65627" end="65653" title="Incident at Victoria Falls" label="Incident at Victoria Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178410" start="65717" end="65736" title="The Flashman Papers" label="The Flashman Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q965456" start="65753" end="65776" title="George MacDonald Fraser" label="George MacDonald Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132332" start="65830" end="65844" title="Harry Flashman" label="Harry Flashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779558" start="65952" end="65963" title="Irene Adler" label="Irene Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="65984" end="65999" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="66011" end="66033" title="Sir Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Sir Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q265546" start="66044" end="66064" title="A Scandal in Bohemia" label="A Scandal in Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212344" start="66223" end="66235" title="The Lady Eve" label="The Lady Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="66350" end="66366" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="66725" end="66732" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488708" start="66762" end="66778" title="Pictures of Lily" label="Pictures of Lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="66802" end="66816" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997259" start="66842" end="66850" title="Who I Am (book)" label="Who I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q240360" start="66858" end="66870" title="Dixie Carter" label="Dixie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="66954" end="66966" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66984" end="67012" title="Gambler V: Playing for Keeps" label="Gambler V: Playing for Keeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="67234" end="67246" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203942" start="67272" end="67288" title="Burns&amp;#x27; Heir" label="Burns&amp;#x27; Heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="67641" end="67656" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="67874" end="67885" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228016" start="68079" end="68090" title="Pont Street" label="Pont Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="68284" end="68295" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q739341" start="68759" end="68777" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062947" start="69217" end="69235" title="Anna Letitia Le Breton" label="Anna Letitia Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344408" start="69381" end="69395" title="Judge Roy Bean" label="Judge Roy Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217298" start="69510" end="69524" title="Langtry, Texas" label="Langtry, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486604" start="69657" end="69666" title="Langtry Manor" label="Red House"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="69685" end="69696" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372254" start="69797" end="69818" title="Emily Langton Langton" label="Emily Langton Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486604" start="70198" end="70211" title="Langtry Manor" label="Langtry Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="70421" end="70437" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q149478" start="70565" end="70580" title="South Hampstead" label="South Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q160252" start="70899" end="70912" title="Lord Leighton" label="Lord Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q377450" start="71206" end="71220" title="Adrienne Corri" label="Adrienne Corri"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="71291" end="71300" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="71335" end="71354" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765648" start="71417" end="71429" title="Anita Leslie" label="Anita Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q117032904" start="71455" end="71476" title="Marlborough House set" label="Marlborough House set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720740" start="71545" end="71566" title="Alexandra Road Estate" label="Alexandra Road Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462645" start="71727" end="71743" title="Leighton Buzzard" label="Leighton Buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q149478" start="72119" end="72134" title="South Hampstead" label="South Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406616" start="72172" end="72186" title="Kilburn Priory" label="Kilburn Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q479469" start="72265" end="72275" title="Abbey Road, London" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404202" start="72471" end="72482" title="Lillie Road" label="Lillie Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="72486" end="72492" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838279" start="72548" end="72565" title="John Scott Lillie" label="John Scott Lillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020374" start="72666" end="72677" title="White Ladye" label="White Ladye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="72777" end="72782" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q27926012" start="72999" end="73011" title="Ogden Goelet" label="Ogden Goelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244225" start="73227" end="73247" title="John Lawson Johnston" label="John Lawson Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441410" start="73264" end="73270" title="Bovril" label="Bovril"/>
<link wikidata="Q926030" start="73367" end="73394" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Register" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s Yacht Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579015" start="73425" end="73447" title="William Gray &amp;amp; Company" label="William Cresswell Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q269732" start="73635" end="73641" title="Fécamp" label="Fécamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73987" end="74019" title="John Henry Devereux#225–227 King St. Academy of Music/Riviera Theatre" label="Academy of Music/Riviera Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847337" start="74022" end="74044" title="English royal mistress" label="English royal mistress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69813" wikidata="Q640228" url="?curid=69813" title="Houtman Abrolhos">
<text>The Houtman Abrolhos (often called the Abrolhos Islands) is a chain of 122 islands and associated coral reefs in the Indian Ocean off the west coast of Australia about west of Geraldton, Western Australia. It is the southernmost true coral reef in the Indian Ocean, and one of the highest latitude reef systems in the world.

It is one of the world&#x27;s most important seabird breeding sites, and the centre of Western Australia&#x27;s largest single-species fishery, the western rock lobster fishery. It has a small seasonal population of fishermen, and a limited number of tourists are permitted for day trips, but most of the land area is off-limits as a conservation habitat. It is the site of numerous shipwrecks, the most famous being two Dutch ships: , which was wrecked in 1629 (followed by massacre of over 100 survivors by mutineers), and , wrecked in 1727.

The islands are an unincorporated area with no municipal government, subject to direct administration of the Government of Western Australia. In July 2019, the Houtman Abrolhos was declared a national park by the state government.

==Geography==
The Houtman Abrolhos archipelago is in the Indian Ocean off the west coast of Australia, about west of Geraldton in the state of Western Australia. Its 122 islands and associated coral reefs comprise three island groups, the Wallabi Group, Easter Group and Pelsaert Group.

The most northerly group, the Wallabi Group, consists of an island clump about by , and also takes in the outlying North Island to the north-west. The main islands of the Wallabi Group are North Island, West Wallabi Island, East Wallabi Island and Beacon Island. The group is best known for the shipwreck of &quot;Batavia&quot; on Morning Reef near Beacon Island in 1629, and the subsequent mutiny and massacre that took place among the survivors.

The Easter Group lies to the southeast of the Wallabi Group, from which it is separated by a channel named Middle Channel. It is about , and consists of a number of islands, including Rat Island, Wooded Island, Morley Island, Suomi Island and Alexander Island.

Further to the southeast, across Zeewijk Channel, lies the Pelsaert Group, the most southerly true coral reef in the Indian Ocean. The main islands of this group are Middle Island, Square Island, Long Island, Pelsaert Island, Basile Island and the Mangrove Group. A great many ships have been wrecked in the Pelsaert Group, most notably &quot;Zeewijk&quot;, which was wrecked on the Half Moon Reef in 1727, the survivors staying on Gun Island for some time afterwards. Other wrecks include &quot;Ocean Queen&quot;, wrecked on the Half Moon Reef in 1842; &quot;Ben Ledi&quot;, wrecked off Pelsaert Island in 1879; &quot;Windsor&quot;, wrecked on the Half Moon Reef in 1908.; and possibly &quot;Ridderschap van Holland&quot; in 1694 and &quot;Aagtekerke&quot; in 1727.

==Governance==
The islands are a part of Western Australia. They are part of the Electoral district of Geraldton, and the City of Greater Geraldton. In July 2019, the Houtman Abrolhos was declared a national park by the Western Australian Government.

In early November 2022, the government published its three-part plan to manage the site in the following 10 years, based on research and community consultation carried out after the preceding two years. Some critics thought that the plan did not encourage land-based tourism to the archipelago enough. A spokesperson for Western Australia&#x27;s Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development said that their top priority is preservation of the wildlife on the islands.

==History==
Aboriginal people visited the islands during the Holocene, as indicated by the discovery on Beacon Island of a flaked stone artefact made from Eocene fossiliferous chert.

===Discovery by Europeans===

According to the surviving historical record, the first sighting of the Houtman Abrolhos by Europeans was in 1619, sailing the Dutch VOC ships &quot;Dordrecht&quot; and &quot;Amsterdam&quot;, only three years after Dirk Hartog made the first authenticated sighting of what is now Western Australia, and only 13 years after the first authenticated European voyage to Australia by the &quot;Duyfken&quot;, in 1606. Discovery of the islands was credited to Frederick de Houtman, Captain-General of &quot;Dordrecht&quot;, as it was Houtman who later wrote about the discovery in a letter to the directors of the Dutch East India Company:
The word &quot;&quot; is Portuguese, making the Houtman Abrolhos one of only two Australian places with a Portuguese name, the other being Pedra Branca in Tasmania. The noun &quot;abrolhos&quot; means &#x27;thorn&#x27;, and originally designated the spiny fruit of the bindii plant (&quot;Tribulus terrestris&quot;). Etymologically it is a contraction of the Portuguese expression &quot;abre os olhos&quot; (&quot;open your eyes&quot;, i.e. to protect yourself). As a technical term this phytonym was later applied to caltrops (chevaux de frise), i.e. &quot;spiked obstructions&quot;, and Portuguese sailors used the word to refer to offshore reefs.

Houtman thus named the islands using a Portuguese loanword that was current in the Dutch marine terminology of the time. John Forsyth states that the islands are named after the Abrolhos Archipelago off the east coast of Brazil, which was discovered and named by Portuguese navigators early in the 16th century. That position is supported by the fact that Houtman was familiar with the Abrolhos Archipelago, having sailed through it in 1598. Others assert that &quot;abrolhos&quot; was a Portuguese lookout&#x27;s cry which, like many other Portuguese maritime terms, was taken up by sailors of other nationalities, becoming, by Houtman&#x27;s time, a Dutch loan word for offshore reefs. Additionally, Frederick De Houtman had at least some grasp of Portuguese, having been sent by Amsterdam merchants to Lisbon from 15921594 with his brother Cornelis to learn about the Portuguese route to the Indies. Frederick also appears to have been a keen linguist, having published the first-known Dutch-Malay and Dutch-Malagasy dictionaries in 1603. He appears to have been fluent-enough in Portuguese that he might have used an evocative Portuguese word if it described the area better than any Dutch word did.

It has been argued by proponents of the theory of Portuguese discovery of Australia that the Portuguese name is evidence that the islands were charted by Portuguese navigators in the 16th century. Kenneth McIntyre, for example, claimed that Houtman was in possession of Portuguese maps of the west coast of Australia, and that he named the islands &quot;abrolhos&quot; in accordance with the name on those maps. Charting of the islands was previously credited to Jorge de Menezes, but the notion that Menezes visited Australia is now thoroughly discredited, and no other candidate has been proffered.

The primary piece of evidence used to support the claim of Portuguese priority is the 16th century Dieppe maps, some of which are alleged to show the west coast of Australia, including an island at the position of the Houtman Abrolhos. That island is unlabelled on most of the Dieppe maps but, on Pierre Desceliers&#x27; 1550 map, it is labelled &quot;Arenes&quot;. In 1895, George Collingridge suggested that &quot;Arenes&quot; was a corruption of &quot;Abrolhos&quot;, but that was mocked by Heeres in 1898, and, according to Battye, &quot;this suggestion can scarcely be regarded seriously. It certainly does not in any way add to the merit of the Portuguese claim&quot;.

Setting aside the Portuguese claims, the Houtman Abrolhos first appear on a map in 1622, on a little-known portolan by Hessel Gerritsz. They are unlabelled, marked merely as a group of small circles. They are first named in print in Gerritsz&#x27; 1627 map &quot;Caert van&#x27;t Landt van d&#x27;Eendracht&quot;, where they bear the label &quot;Fr. Houtman&#x27;s abrolhos&quot;. On a map produced by Gerritsz the following year, they are labelled &quot;Houtman&#x27;s Abrolhos&quot;.

On British Admiralty charts, the islands are labelled &quot;Houtman&#x27;s Rocks&quot;.

===Wreck of &quot;Batavia&quot;===

In 1629, some of the islands were the scene of an infamous shipwreck and mutiny. The Dutch ship , under the command of Francisco Pelsaert, ran aground on her maiden voyage to the port of Batavia, the capital of the Dutch East Indies. Pelsaert and some of his crew set off in an open boat to Batavia (now Jakarta) to get help. A group of the crew who remained on some of the islets terrorised and killed many of the other crew and passengers, including women and children. When Pelsaert returned, a number of the culprits were executed.

===Wreck of &quot;Zeewijk&quot;===

The was the last of the four Dutch East Indiamen to be wrecked on the west coast of Australia. Due to the Ship&#x27;s Council having made the inexplicable decision to disregard sailing orders and actually seek out the west coast of Australia, the ship ran onto the Half Moon Reef at about 7:30 pm on 9 June 1727. It did not break up immediately, and the heavy swell made evacuation impossible until 18 June. The longboat was launched on that day, and the crew and stores were thereafter gradually transferred to nearby Gun Island. Later, the men landed ten chests of money, containing 315,836 guilders and weighing a total of .

The crew of &quot;Zeewijk&quot; were stranded in the Pelsaert Group for ten months, during which time they lived off seals, seabirds, eggs, and victuals salvaged from the wreck. They obtained some water from rainfall, but were forced to explore throughout the group in search of further supplies. A great many men died on the islands, including two boys who were accused of sodomy and marooned on separate islands of the Mangrove Group.

On 10 July the longboat, fitted for a voyage and crewed with eleven men, was sent to Batavia to obtain help. It never arrived there, and nothing is known of its fate. Four months later the castaways began building a boat, sufficient to carry all the men and the money chests. Completed in March 1728 and affectionately named &quot;Sloepie&quot; (&quot;little sloop&quot;), it was the first ocean-going vessel built in Australian history. On 26 March 1728, the surviving men set sail for Batavia, arriving in Sunda Strait late the following month.

===Gun Island and phosphate mining===
During Admiralty surveys of the north west coast in 1840, crew from discovered a brass gun of about three pounds calibre, an iron swivel on which paint still adhered as well as numerous other artefacts signifying European occupation, on the largest island in the Pelsart Group. The commander, John Clements Wickham, named the place Gun Island and the passage between the Easter and Pelsart Groups, Zeewijk Channel. Later during the 19th century many islets were used by men collecting guano.

A lease to mine rock phosphate on the islands was obtained by Charles Broadhurst in 1884. After surveying the area he constructed a plant, stone jetty and tramways on Rat Island, a number of buildings on Rat, Gun and Pelsaert islands and had over 40 Malay workers mining and processing the phosphate for export. Over was shipped between 1884 and 1896.

==Tenure, governance and management==
The islands are a part of the Division of Durack in the federal House of Representatives and the electoral district of Geraldton in the Western Australian Legislative Council. Management is vested in the Department of Fisheries.

==Geology==
Some of the islands are considered to be remnants of the mainland isolated by rising sea level during the last 8,000 to 10,000 years. Others were more recently formed from coral rubble.

==Oceanography==

===Bathymetry===
The Houtman Abrolhos lies in the Indian Ocean about 60 kilometres (40 mi) off the coast of Western Australia, near the edge of Australia&#x27;s continental shelf. At less than 50 metres (160 ft) deep, the shelf is quite shallow. It is also fairly level, the depth increasing to the west at a modest gradient of about 1.3 metres per kilometre (7 ft/mi). About five kilometres (3 mi) to the west of the Houtman Abrolhos lies the shelf break, beyond which the seabed falls away much more steeply, averaging around 50 metres per kilometre (260 ft/mi).

The islands of each island group arise from a single carbonate platform, so the waters within an island group are mostly shallow. The channels between groups are deep, so no impediment to the exchange of offshore and inshore waters.

===Currents===
The Houtman Abrolhos lies almost directly in the path of the Leeuwin Current, which draws warm, low-saline water of tropical origin southwards along the coast of Western Australia. This current flows all year round, but is strongest during southern hemisphere winter months. In general the Leeuwin Current runs along the shelf break, and thus passes close by the western edge of the Abrolhos. It meanders, sometimes passing well out to sea and sometimes directly through the island chain, bathing it in warm tropical water; Although the direction of the Leeuwin Current is predominantly southerly, Shark Bay and the Houtman Abrolhos together act as a topographical trigger for the forming of eddies, so the Abrolhos can experience currents from any direction, even when the Leeuwin Current is flowing strongly.

Unlike most other major ocean currents, there is no large-scale coastal upwelling associated with the Leeuwin Current. There is limited evidence for some sporadic, localised upwelling in the vicinity of the Abrolhos, but if so it appears to have little effect on the extremely low levels of nutrients in the water.

===Temperature and salinity===
Sea temperature at the islands varies according to a diurnal cycle, with the water at its coldest between six and eight in the morning, and at its warmest between three and four in the afternoon. In summer the daily temperature range is around 1 °C (2 °F); in winter it is about half that.

There is also an annual cycle, with sea temperature varying by a little less than 4 °C (7 °F) over the year, peaking at nearly 24 °C (75 °F) in March, and falling to around 20 °C (68 °F) in September. This variability is much less than in nearby coastal waters, which reaches a similar peak in summer but drops as low as 18 °C (64 °F) in winter. The relatively low variability in sea temperatures at the Abrolhos is largely attributable to the Leeuwin Current, which bathes the islands in warm tropical water during winter months.

A similar annual pattern occurs in salinity. There is a clear seasonal variation, with values ranging from a summer high of around 35.7 ppt, to a winter low of around 35.4 ppt. As with water temperatures, the variability in salinity is much smaller than in coastal waters, where summer salinity reaches 36.4 ppt. This difference is partly due to the low-salinity waters of the Leeuwin Current, but there are a number of other factors involved, including high evaporation of coastal waters in summer.

Temperatures can also vary substantially from year to year. Annual mean temperatures vary by as much as 1 °C (2 °F); with cooler years usually cooler throughout the year. There is evidence that annual mean temperatures are related to El Niño-Southern Oscillation events.

The water column is generally well-mixed, with no evidence of a significant halocline or thermocline. Mean differences in water temperature between sea surface and sea bed range from only half a degree (Celsius; 1 °F) in summer to almost zero in winter, and differences in salinity are very small even when the Leeuwin Current is at its strongest.

===Sea levels===
As with the rest of southwestern Australia, tides at the Houtman Abrolhos are small and irregular. There is little tidal data available for the islands, but what there is accords very closely with the data for Geraldton. Geraldton tides follow a diurnal pattern, with maximum tidal ranges of around 1 metre (3 ft).

Mean sea levels at Geraldton show seasonal fluctuations, being higher in winter when the Leeuwin Current is at its peak. There are also variations from year to year, which are strongly associated with the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle. Apparently, ENSO events induce a weaker Leeuwin Current, which results in lower sea levels.

There is no published information on wave heights in the Abrolhos. In the open ocean, waves are typically a little over two metres high all year round. Nearer the mainland, they are usually less than , with a calmer period in March and April, and another in October and November.

==Climate==
, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology has not published climatic data for the Houtman Abrolhos. An automatic weather station has been installed on North Island since 1990, and hourly measures of precipitation, air temperature, wind speed, wind direction, relative humidity and atmospheric pressure have been publicly available since then. Based on this and other data, researchers have put together a picture of the Abrolhos&#x27; climate.

The islands have a Mediterranean climate (semi-arid climate, or BSh, under Köppen climate classification) with warm dry summers and cooler, wet winters. Mean temperatures range from in July, and from in February. These temperatures have a substantially smaller range than on the mainland: the summer temperature is typically a degree cooler, while winter temperatures are a good deal warmer. This is due to the influence of the ocean, and to the Leeuwin Current.

86% of the rain falls between April and September; on average there are 89 raindays, resulting in of rain. The wettest month is June, when over typically falls. In contrast, only about can be expected to fall between October and March.

It is nearly always windy. During summer a high pressure ridge lies to the south, causing persistent winds from the southeast or southwest, at speeds exceeding almost half the time. During autumn and winter, the ridge moves northwards, increasing the atmospheric pressure over the islands, resulting in highly variable winds. Winter tends to produce both the strongest gales and the most frequent periods of calm.

In addition to these winds, there is daily pattern of land breezes in the morning, followed by the onset of south-westerly sea breezes in the afternoon. This pattern is caused by temperature differences between the land and the ocean, and is not as strong in the Houtman Abrolhos as on the mainland, but is present nonetheless.

Three classes of storm have been identified for the region. Brief squalls may occur between December and April. A tropical cyclone occurs in the area about once in three years, between January and April; these may generate extremely high wind speeds that are potentially destructive. During winter, extra-tropical cyclones sometimes pass south of Geraldton, generating winter gales with gusts of up to 35 metres per second, the wind direction from the northwest initially, then gradually moving around to southerly.

==Biogeography==
Under the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA), the islands of the Houtman Abrolhos fall within the Geraldton Hills subregion of the Geraldton Sandplains region. The main biogeographic significance of the islands is their isolation, allowing them to provide refugia for such threatened fauna as tammar wallabies (&quot;Macropus eugenii&quot;), Australian sea lions (&quot;Neophoca cinerea&quot;) and rare breeding seabirds.

In marine terms, the Houtman Abrolhos is located within the Southwest Shelf Transition, an Integrated Marine and Coastal Regionalisation of Australia (IMCRA) biotone that takes in the continental shelf from Perth to Geraldton. This province is defined as the area of shelf where tropical waters intergrade into temperate, thus supporting both tropical and temperate biota. In addition, this area contains the highest concentration of west coast endemics.

Consistent with this, the Houtman Abrolhos contains a mix of tropical, temperate and west coast endemic fauna, resulting in unusual associations such as the occurrence of tropical corals in close association with temperate macro-algae. The proportions of tropical, temperate and west coast endemic biota vary from taxonomic group to group, but in general the biota is dominated by tropical species. This is attributable to the location of the Houtman Abrolhos at the northern limit of the Southwest Shelf Transition, together with the warming influence of the Leeuwin Current.

Under IMCRA, the Southwest Shelf Transition divides into two meso-scale bioregions. One is named &quot;Abrolhos Islands&quot;, and covers the shelf waters surrounding the Houtman Abrolhos, with an area of . The other bioregion, Central West Coast, covers the remaining area.

==Terrestrial flora==
The vegetation of the Houtman Abrolhos islands is dominated by chenopod shrubs. The flora is generally the same as the coastal flora of the adjacent mainland, with the exception of the islands&#x27; mangrove, saltbush and salt lake vegetation.

===Flora===

The vascular flora of the Houtman Abrolhos has been thoroughly surveyed, and species lists have been published for 119 islands. As of 2001, these lists totalled 239 species from 68 families. A further six species have been collected in the Houtman Abrolhos, but cannot be allocated to islands because insufficient location information was recorded. There have also been collections of mosses, liverworts and lichens, but no information has been published on these non-vascular groups.

The islands with the greatest floristic diversity are East and West Wallabi Islands, with 124 and 97 species respectively. 54 species occur in all three island groups. The most widely distributed species are &quot;Nitraria billardierei&quot; (nitre bush), which has been recorded on 106 islands; the exotic &quot;Mesembryanthemum crystallinum&quot; (iceplant), on 88 islands; &quot;Threlkeldia diffusa&quot; (coast bonefruit), on 72 islands; and &quot;Atriplex cinerea&quot; (grey saltbush), on 70 islands. On the other hand, &quot;Eucalyptus oraria&quot; (ooragmandee) and &quot;Acacia didyma&quot; occur only on East Wallabi Island.

As of 2001, five species of priority flora occurred on the islands. One, &quot;Acacia didyma&quot;, is no longer considered a priority species. The remaining priority species are &quot;Chthonocephalus tomentellus&quot;, which is rated Priority Two under the Department of Environment and Conservation&#x27;s Declared Rare and Priority Flora List; &quot;Calocephalus aervoides&quot; and &quot;Galium migrans&quot;, both Priority Three; and &quot;Lepidium puberulum&quot;, Priority Four.

Ninety-five exotic species from 29 families have been recorded. In general, islands that have or had human settlements are the weediest. Of greatest concern is the noxious weed &quot;Lycium ferocissimum&quot; (African boxthorn), which has long spines that can trap birds. This weed was recorded on the islands as early as 1970. Efforts to eradicate it began in 1990; there was a lull in eradication in the late 1990s, but the program was later reinstated, and in July 2007, the Department of Environment and Conservation reported that the species had been eradicated from 14 of the 18 islands on which it had been recorded. Other noxious weeds include &quot;Opuntia stricta&quot; (prickly pear), &quot;Verbesina encelioides&quot; and &quot;Echium plantagineum&quot; (Paterson&#x27;s curse).

==Terrestrial fauna==

===Birds===
The Houtman Abrolhos is home to around 100 species of bird; for a complete list, see list of birds of the Houtman Abrolhos. Six species are land birds, and three are shore birds. The remainder, the vast majority, are seabirds. Most seabird species have a tropical distribution, but some occur in both tropical and warm-temperate seas, and a small number are warm-temperate only.

When numbers of individuals are taken into account, the tropical birds overwhelmingly dominate. The islands are one of the most important breeding sites for tropical seabirds in Australia and have been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area (IBA). They contain by far the largest colonies of wedge-tailed shearwater in the eastern Indian Ocean, with over a million breeding pairs recorded there in 1994. They also contain Western Australia&#x27;s only breeding colonies of the lesser noddy, and the largest colonies in Western Australia of the little shearwater, white-faced storm petrel, common noddy, Caspian tern, crested tern, roseate tern and fairy tern. In addition, they contain important breeding areas for the Pacific reef heron, Pacific gull, bridled tern, white-bellied sea eagle and osprey.

There are two subspecies of bird endemic to the islands. The Abrolhos painted button-quail occurs only on five islands in the Wallabi Group, and is protected as rare under the &quot;Wildlife Conservation Act 1950&quot;. Also gazetted as rare, the Australasian subspecies of the lesser noddy, &quot;Anous tenuirostris melanops&quot;, breeds only on Wooded Island, Morley Island and Pelsaert Island.

===Mammals===
Only two species of land mammal are indigenous to the Houtman Abrolhos, the tammar wallaby (&quot;Macropus eugenii&quot;) and the bush rat (&quot;Rattus fuscipes&quot;). Both are native only to West and East Wallabi Islands, although &quot;R. fuscipes&quot; has not been collected on East Wallabi Island since August 1967, and is probably extinct there. The tammar wallaby was seen on West Wallabi Island by survivors of the &quot;Batavia&quot; shipwreck, and recorded by Francisco Pelsart in his 1629 &quot;Ongeluckige Voyagie&quot;. This represents the first recorded sighting of a macropod by Europeans, and probably also the first sighting of an Australian mammal. Tammar wallabies were introduced to North Island from East Wallabi Island by fishermen, probably in the 1950s, but failed to establish themselves. In 1987 they were reintroduced again, this time successfully. By the 2000s, there were over 400 wallabies on the island, resulting in overgrazing of native vegetation and increased erosion. Research into the effectiveness of controlling population levels by the use of implanted contraceptives was begun in 2005, but in July 2007 the research was discontinued and the population culled instead.

Two introduced mammals are established on the islands. The domestic cat (&quot;Felis silvestris catus&quot;) was introduced to Rat Island around 1900, and the house mouse (&quot;Mus musculus&quot;) was introduced onto North Island in the 1970s, presumably with food. In 1995 the house mouse was reported as also present on Rat Island for many years before 1987, but a recent report makes no mention of this. In addition, three introduced mammals were previously established in the Houtman Abrolhos, but have since been eradicated. The black rat (&quot;Rattus rattus&quot;) was established on Pigeon and Rat Islands, but has been eradicated by poisoning. The European rabbit (&quot;Oryctolagus cuniculus&quot;) has been introduced at various times onto Leo Island, Middle Island, Morley Island, Pelsaert Island and Wooded Island. In the case of Pelsaert Island, it is not clear whether it ever established; in all other cases, established populations have been eradicated by poisoning. The domestic goat (&quot;Capra aegagrus hircus&quot;) is also reported to have been present on East Wallabi Island, but is no longer.

===Reptiles===
23 terrestrial reptile species are known to occur on the islands of the Houtman Abrolhos. This relatively low biodiversity is apparently due to the homogeneity of habitat on the islands, which provide few distinct ecological niches. The most significant terrestrial reptile species are the spiny-tailed skink (&quot;Egernia stokesii stokesii&quot;) and the carpet python (&quot;Morelia spilota imbricata&quot;), both of which are listed as rare and therefore afforded special protection under the &quot;Wildlife Conservation Act 1950&quot;; and the Abrolhos dwarf bearded dragon (&quot;Pogona minor minima&quot;), a Houtman Abrolhos endemic that is listed as a Priority 4 species by the Department of Environment and Conservation. For a full list of species, see list of reptiles of the Houtman Abrolhos.

===Amphibians===
Specimens of the pobblebonk (&quot;Limnodynastes dorsalis&quot;) and the turtle frog (&quot;Myobatrachus gouldii&quot;) were collected from the Houtman Abrolhos during the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition of 1913 and 1915, but no amphibians have been recorded on the islands since that time.

==Marine flora==

===Algae===
260 species of benthic algae have been recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos. This figure comprises 178 species of red algae (Rhodophyta), 50 species of brown algae (Phaeophyta) and 32 species of green algae (Chlorophyta). Both temperate and tropical species are present, in many cases near the northern or southern extent of their range. For a full list, see list of algae of the Houtman Abrolhos.

===Seagrass===
Only ten species of seagrass have been recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos. Seven of these are temperate species at or near the northern limit of their range; the other three have a tropical distribution. That there are so few tropical species may be due to periods of low sea temperatures, or the small areas of suitable habitat at the Abrolhos; alternatively it may be that more collecting effort is needed in habitats that suit tropical species. The seagrass species recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos islands are:
==Marine fauna==

===Fish===
At last count, a total of 389 species of fish have been recorded from the Houtman Abrolhos. 16 species occur in very large numbers; in decreasing order of abundance, these are:
* &quot;Pomacentrus milleri&quot; (Miller&#x27;s damsel)
* &quot;Scarus schlegeli&quot; (Schlegel&#x27;s parrotfish)
* &quot;Stethojulis strigiventer&quot; (stripebelly wrasse)
* &quot;Coris auricularis&quot; (western king wrasse)
* &quot;Kyphosus cornelii&quot; (western buffalo bream)
* &quot;Choerodon rubescens&quot; (baldchin groper)
* &quot;Chromis westaustralis&quot; (West Australian puller)
* &quot;Thalassoma lutescens&quot; (green moon wrasse)
* &quot;Scarus ghobban&quot; (blue-barred orange parrotfish)
* &quot;Abudefduf sexfasciatus&quot; (scissortail sergeant)
* &quot;Thalassoma lunare&quot; (moon wrasse)
* &quot;Stegastes obreptus&quot; (western gregory)
* &quot;Halichoeres brownfieldi&quot; (Brownfield&#x27;s wrasse)
* &quot;Amblygobius phalaena&quot; (white-barred goby)
* &quot;Asterropteryx semipunctatus&quot; (starry goby)
* &quot;Anampses geographicus&quot; (scribbled wrasse)
Commercially important species include &quot;Pagrus auratus&quot; (pink snapper), &quot;Choerodon rubescens&quot; (baldchin groper), &quot;Glaucosoma hebraicum&quot; (westralian dhufish) and &quot;Plectropomus leopardus&quot; (coral trout). For a complete list of fish species recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos, see List of fishes of the Houtman Abrolhos.

About two-thirds of the total number of species are tropical in distribution, the remainder being subtropical or warm-temperate. This ratio also holds for the most abundant species, eleven of the sixteen species being tropical. On the other hand, over 70% of tropical species occur in extremely low numbers, so low in fact that they are thought not to maintain breeding populations at the Abrolhos; rather, populations are maintained by larvae carried to the islands by the Leeuwin Current from populations further north.

===Marine mammals===
The Houtman Abrolhos maintains a breeding population of Australian sea lions (&quot;Neophoca cinerea&quot;), probably numbering between 75 and 100. Historical data suggests numbers were previously much higher; for example, in 1727, survivors of the &quot;Zeewyk&quot; shipwreck killed over 150 sea lions in the Southern Group alone. This has led to a 1727 population estimate of between 290 and 580 animals for the entire Houtman Abrolhos. Populations apparently fell dramatically between the 1840s and the 1880s, largely due to extensive commercial sealing in the area. In addition to direct killing of the animals, it is likely that much of the mangrove habitat on the islands was cleared as fuel for trypots, and this may have affected the survival of young pups. Populations are thought to have been fairly stable for the last fifty years, although the lack of genetic diversity in the smaller population remains of concern, as does climate change.

Sea lions come ashore to rest on leeward beaches throughout the island chain, but only a small number of these &quot;haulout sites&quot; are used for breeding. Breeding has been observed on Serventy Island, Gilbert Island, Alexander Island, Suomi Island, Keru Island, Square Island, Stick Island, Gibson Island, Gun Island, Morley Island and Wooded Island. All but the last three of these are considered current breeding sites, and are therefore considered by the Department of Fisheries to have a high conservation value.

Little information is available on other marine mammals at the Abrolhos, as no direct research on this subject has been undertaken. Sightings of the humpback whale (&quot;Megaptera novaeangliae&quot;), followed by southern rights (&quot;Eubalaena australis&quot;), are common between April and October, when the whales are migrating. Other marine mammals sometimes sighted at the islands include pygmy Bryde&#x27;s whale (&quot;Balaenoptera edeni&quot;), orca (&quot;Orcinus orca&quot;), bottlenose dolphin (&quot;Tursiops aduncus&quot;), common dolphin (&quot;Delphinus delphis&quot;), and striped dolphin (&quot;Stenella coeruleoalba&quot;).

===Marine reptiles===
The green turtle (&quot;Chelonia mydas&quot;) and the loggerhead turtle (&quot;Caretta caretta&quot;) both live in the waters off the Houtman Abrolhos, albeit in low numbers. Neither species breeds in the area, as water temperatures are too low.

===Coral===
The Houtman Abrolhos is unusual in having a luxuriant and diverse living coral reef at such a high latitude. 194 species in 50 genera have been recorded there, all but two of which are tropical. This is a surprisingly high coral diversity, considering the high latitude of the reef, and the relatively low diversity of other biota. For a full list, see list of corals of the Houtman Abrolhos.

The coral reef community at the Houtman Abrolhos is unusual in having tropical coral growing alongside and in direct competition with, temperate seaweed. As a result of this competition for light, space and nutrients, coral at the Houtman Abrolhos tends to grow more slowly and die younger than is usual. Reef production is to a large extent due to the production of carbon by coralline algae rather than by coral.

===Crustaceans===
The most notable species of crustacean at the Houtman Abrolhos is the western rock lobster (&quot;Panulirus cygnus&quot;). 44 species of crab and 9 species of amphipod were recorded there by the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition of 1916.

===Molluscs===
492 species of marine mollusc have been recorded from the shallow waters of the Houtman Abrolhos. These are predominantly gastropods (346 species, 70%) and bivalves (124, 25%); the remaining 5% of species consist of cephalopods (14 species), chitons (5 species) and scaphopods (3 species). About two-thirds of the species have a tropical distribution, temperate species account for 20%, and the remaining 11% are endemic to Western Australia. For a full list, see List of molluscs of the Houtman Abrolhos.

The southern saucer scallop (&quot;Amusium balloti&quot;) is the only commercially important species. This occurs in sheltered areas of medium-fine sand in deep water to the north-east of the reefs; it is usually the dominant species there.

===Echinoderms===
Houtman Abrolhos has an extremely high diversity of echinoderms, with 172 species having been recorded there. 63% of these are tropical species, 14% are temperate, and 22% are endemic to Western Australia. None is endemic to the Houtman Abrolhos. Published surveys have not included observations of the crown-of-thorns starfish (&quot;Ananthaster planci&quot;), but individuals have occasionally been observed there. For a complete list of species, see list of echinoderms of the Houtman Abrolhos.

===Sponges, worms and hydroids===
The sponges of the Houtman Abrolhos are poorly studied, although 109 species of demosponge have been collected there. In the most recent survey, 77 species were collected, of which around half are probably new to science. Only two locations were surveyed in this study, so this figure is likely to represent only a small proportion of the total sponge fauna of the Houtman Abrolhos; the islands are therefore thought to harbour an extremely rich diversity of sponges. A preliminary assessment suggested that there were more temperate species than tropical, which stands in marked contrast to most other groups.

The marine worms identified at the Houtman Abrolhos include 22 species of the polychaete family Terebellidae, and 16 species of the family oligochaete family Tubificidae. For a list of species, see list of worms of the Houtman Abrolhos.

A total of 38 hydroid species have been collected at the Houtman Abrolhos. 34 of these are leptothecates, the remainder being anthoathecates. 92% of the species attach to temperate algae, the others to coral rubble. For a list of species, see list of hydroids of the Houtman Abrolhos.

==Human uses==

===Fishing and tourism===
Fresh water has always been a significant constraint on any permanent settlement. Aside from the early castaways noted above, the Islands have only had a small seasonal population of fishermen. The present fishermen all have permanent residence elsewhere, mainly in Geraldton, but their island shacks are used as a base during the season. For example, North Island has a seasonal camp for western rock lobster fishers, with individual moorings and simple dwellings. During lobster season, which runs from 15 March to 30 June, the island hosts up to 130 people. The camp is serviced by a carrier boat, the North Islander, which visits the island every three days, bringing supplies and taking out the catch and any domestic waste.

Tourists are not allowed to camp, and the conservation designation of the Island group forbids any real expansion in human occupation.

====Western rock lobster====
The islands are the centre of the western rock lobster fishery, the largest single-species fishery in Western Australia.

====Saucer scallops====
After Shark Bay, the Houtman Abrolhos supports Western Australia&#x27;s second largest saucer scallop fishery. This fishery is managed under the &quot;Abrolhos Islands and Mid West Trawl Limited Entry Fishery Notice 1993&quot;. Only 17 licences have been issued, and no more will be made available, as the saucer scallop is considered fully exploited. Licensees are constrained to operate only during scallop season, which generally runs from 1 April to 30 June, and are also subject to restrictions on gear design, boat size and crew numbers.

Scallop fishers mainly operate east of the Houtman Abrolhos and between the island groups, in waters deeper than . Activity is targeted at sheltered areas of bare sand, where scallops tend to settle. Catches vary greatly from year to year; from 2001 to 2003, for example, the total annual catch totalled (whole weight) respectively. This variability is apparently related to the strength of the Leeuwin Current, as strong current is correlated with low scallop recruitment.

The total value of the fishery in 2003 was A$19.6 million, although this figure includes a small prawn fishery operating out of Port Gregory. Most of the catch is frozen and exported to Asia.

====Finfish====
The Houtman Abrolhos is the site of some wetlining activity.

===Aquaculture===
The Department of Fisheries have issued a number of licences to cultivate black-lip pearl oysters in the Abrolhos. The first recipient of a license was Abrolhos Pearls in 1996. By 2000, another license had been issued and four more applications had been received. A year later, there were licensed for the culture of pearl oysters in the Abrolhos, of which about 21% was actually in use, carrying over 210,000 shell. Six licences had been issued by 2002, and by 2007 that number had grown to eight.

95% of the pearl aquaculture is carried out in the Pelsaert Group. Most licenses are over areas of sand, but some areas contain small amounts of coral reef. The colour of the pearls produced is quite different from that of Pacific black pearls, and this is considered a potential marketing tool.

In addition to pearl aquaculture, a pilot sea cage finfish farm was licensed in 2004, although the license had not been exercised. Interest has also been expressed in the culture of live rock and coral for the aquarium industry. The Department of Fisheries has identified a number of species as having potential for aquaculture in the Abrolhos, including the Shark Bay pearl oyster (&quot;Pinctada albina&quot;), the maxima clam (&quot;Tridacna maxima&quot;), rock oysters (&quot;Saccostrea&quot; sp.), the saucer scallop (&quot;Amusium balloti&quot;), the western rock lobster, and a number of species of finfish, most of which are filter feeders.

===Mineral exploration===
Petroleum exploration wells were drilled in Abrolhos waters in the 1960s and 1970s, but were capped and abandoned. The Abrolhos was amongst the areas released for further exploration in 2002.

===Recreation===
The Abrolhos provides some of the best snorkelling, diving and deep sea fishing in the world, along with some of Australia&#x27;s most significant historical sights, such as the shipwreck of the &quot;Batavia&quot;.

Although an important tourist destination, the tourists are not allowed to stay overnight.

==Cultural references==
The majority of cultural references to the Houtman Abrolhos relate to the islands&#x27; shipwrecks, particularly the &quot;Batavia&quot;. The events surrounding the loss of the &quot;Batavia&quot; is one of the most celebrated episodes in Australian popular history; in the words of Henrietta Drake-Brockman:

The story has spawned a massive body of literature, both fiction and non-fiction, as well as numerous works in other media.

Other shipwrecks, notably &quot;Zeewijk&quot; (also spelled &quot;Zeewyk&quot;), have also become the subject of books and other works. Other cultural references to the Houtman Abrolhos are rare. By far the best known book on it is Malcolm Uren&#x27;s &quot;Sailormen&#x27;s ghosts: The Abrolhos islands in three hundred years of romance, history, and adventure&quot;. First published in 1940, this book saw numerous editions published in the 1940s, and was even republished in 1980 as a &quot;West Australian classic&quot;. In it, Uren tells both the history of the islands and the story of his own visit to the islands.

Other books include William Bede Christie&#x27;s 1909 &quot;Christmas on the briny: the innocents abroad, or, a holiday trip to the Abrolhos islands&quot;, Deborah Lisson&#x27;s 1991 The Devil&#x27;s Own, and Alison Louise Wright&#x27;s 1998 &quot;Abrolhos Islands Conversations&quot;. The latter, a book of interviews and portraits of the people of the Abrolhos, won the Special Award in the 1999 Western Australian Premier&#x27;s Book Awards.

The islands featured in the first episode of &quot;Surfing the Menu&quot;, an eight-part food and travel series produced for the ABC in 2003, and the following year were featured on &quot;Getaway&quot;, Australia&#x27;s longest-running and most popular holiday and travel television programme. They were the subject of a motion picture entitled &quot;Eye opener&quot;, published by The Film Centre WA in 1981, and of a piece of classical music entitled &quot;Abrolhos: A ceremonial overture&quot;, written by William Stewart in 1988 under commission to the Geraldton Town Council.

In April 2019 the Houtman Abrolhos became the site of the failure of reportedly one of Australia&#x27;s biggest drug smuggling operations, worth $73 million.

In 2020 a Western Australian man briefly established the Houtman Abrolhos Micro Nation, based on Uncle Margie Island. The self-declared &#x27;prince&#x27; represented himself in the four-day trial in 2023 and relied on a bevy of pseudolegal claims to challenge the Department of Primary Industries &amp; Regional Development (DPIRD).

==See also==
*List of islands in the Houtman Abrolhos
*List of islands of Australia

==Notes==
==References==
Works cited
*Markey, K. L., Abdo, D. A., Evans, S. N., Bosserelle, C. (2016). Keeping it Local: Dispersal Limitations of Coral Larvae to the High Latitude Coral Reefs of the Houtman Abrolhos Islands. PLos ONE 11(1).

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*Abrolhos Islands Information Guide 
*Fisheries Western Australia – Exploring the Houtman Abrolhos Islands
*Long Island Tourism Development, Abrolhos Islands </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q640228" start="4" end="20" title="Houtman Abrolhos" label="Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q640228" start="39" end="55" title="Houtman Abrolhos" label="Abrolhos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="98" end="108" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="117" end="129" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="176" end="204" title="Geraldton, Western Australia" label="Geraldton, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="371" end="378" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q783011" start="474" end="494" title="western rock lobster" label="western rock lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="709" end="718" title="shipwreck" label="shipwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="890" end="909" title="Unincorporated areas of Australia" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589347" start="980" end="1011" title="Government of Western Australia" label="Government of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121879268" start="1063" end="1076" title="Houtman Abrolhos Islands National Park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="1138" end="1149" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1160" end="1172" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="1246" end="1263" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254389" start="1342" end="1355" title="Wallabi Group" label="Wallabi Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278092" start="1357" end="1369" title="Easter Group" label="Easter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068344" start="1374" end="1388" title="Pelsaert Group" label="Pelsaert Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530387" start="1506" end="1518" title="North Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564397" start="1594" end="1613" title="West Wallabi Island" label="West Wallabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278052" start="1615" end="1634" title="East Wallabi Island" label="East Wallabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059405" start="1639" end="1652" title="Beacon Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Beacon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q810735" start="1705" end="1712" title="Batavia (1628 ship)" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1722" end="1734" title="Morning Reef" label="Morning Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="1782" end="1788" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1947" end="1961" title="Middle Channel" label="Middle Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117195936" start="2024" end="2034" title="Rat Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Rat Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21881015" start="2036" end="2049" title="Wooded Island" label="Wooded Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21896176" start="2051" end="2064" title="Morley Island" label="Morley Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21896175" start="2066" end="2078" title="Suomi Island" label="Suomi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802665" start="2083" end="2099" title="Alexander Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Alexander Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2135" end="2150" title="Zeewijk Channel" label="Zeewijk Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21886301" start="2268" end="2281" title="Middle Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Middle Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2283" end="2296" title="Square Island" label="Square Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2298" end="2309" title="Long Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068345" start="2311" end="2326" title="Pelsaert Island" label="Pelsaert Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2328" end="2341" title="Basile Island" label="Basile Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2350" end="2364" title="Mangrove Group" label="Mangrove Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q26165" start="2445" end="2452" title="Zeewijk" label="Zeewijk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2485" end="2499" title="Half Moon Reef" label="Half Moon Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618325" start="2534" end="2544" title="Gun Island" label="Gun Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2598" end="2609" title="Ocean Queen (ship)" label="Ocean Queen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2662" end="2670" title="Ben Ledi (ship)" label="Ben Ledi"/>
<link wikidata="Q59748" start="2795" end="2818" title="Ridderschap van Holland (1681)" label="Ridderschap van Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261316" start="2843" end="2853" title="Aagtekerke (1724)" label="Aagtekerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005114" start="2951" end="2982" title="Electoral district of Geraldton" label="Electoral district of Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q614973" start="2992" end="3017" title="City of Greater Geraldton" label="City of Greater Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q121879268" start="3069" end="3082" title="Houtman Abrolhos Islands National Park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589347" start="3090" end="3119" title="Western Australian Government" label="Western Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260145" start="3468" end="3525" title="Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development" label="Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="3665" end="3673" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="3759" end="3765" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="3780" end="3785" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="3945" end="3954" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch VOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q465223" start="4033" end="4044" title="Dirk Hartog" label="Dirk Hartog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268123" start="4207" end="4214" title="Duyfken" label="Duyfken"/>
<link wikidata="Q257948" start="4272" end="4292" title="Frederick de Houtman" label="Frederick de Houtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="4426" end="4450" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="4477" end="4487" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373988" start="4591" end="4603" title="Pedra Branca (Tasmania)" label="Pedra Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="4607" end="4615" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914005" start="4721" end="4727" title="bindii" label="bindii"/>
<link wikidata="Q736050" start="4970" end="4977" title="caltrop" label="caltrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q89657" start="4980" end="4996" title="chevaux de frise" label="chevaux de frise"/>
<link wikidata="Q331529" start="5281" end="5301" title="Abrolhos Archipelago" label="Abrolhos Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5324" end="5330" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572947" start="5602" end="5609" title="lookout" label="lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="5761" end="5770" title="loan word" label="loan word"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986588" start="6348" end="6391" title="theory of Portuguese discovery of Australia" label="theory of Portuguese discovery of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195196" start="6505" end="6521" title="Kenneth McIntyre" label="Kenneth McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029176" start="6771" end="6787" title="Jorge de Menezes" label="Jorge de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669075" start="7009" end="7020" title="Dieppe maps" label="Dieppe maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q44053" start="7207" end="7224" title="Pierre Desceliers" label="Pierre Desceliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538062" start="7285" end="7304" title="George Collingridge" label="George Collingridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129482" start="7438" end="7444" title="J. S. Battye" label="Battye"/>
<link wikidata="Q266680" start="7693" end="7701" title="portolan" label="portolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137508" start="7705" end="7720" title="Hessel Gerritsz" label="Hessel Gerritsz"/>
<link wikidata="Q26169" start="7849" end="7892" title="Caert van&amp;#x27;t Landt van d&amp;#x27;Eendracht" label="Caert van&amp;#x27;t Landt van d&amp;#x27;Eendracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="8076" end="8093" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="British Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q331564" start="8317" end="8335" title="Francisco Pelsaert" label="Francisco Pelsaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="8385" end="8392" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="8413" end="8430" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="8502" end="8509" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035668" start="8806" end="8819" title="East Indiaman" label="East Indiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588290" start="9183" end="9191" title="longboat" label="longboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618325" start="9290" end="9300" title="Gun Island" label="Gun Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="9364" end="9371" title="guilder" label="guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="9774" end="9780" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="10197" end="10202" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192790" start="10346" end="10358" title="Sunda Strait" label="Sunda Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="10431" end="10440" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q741094" start="10717" end="10738" title="John Clements Wickham" label="John Clements Wickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618325" start="10756" end="10766" title="Gun Island" label="Gun Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="10909" end="10914" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q716894" start="10919" end="10924" title="lease" label="lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424327" start="10933" end="10947" title="rock phosphate" label="rock phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077258" start="10979" end="10997" title="Charles Edward Broadhurst" label="Charles Broadhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618325" start="11126" end="11129" title="Gun Island" label="Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068345" start="11134" end="11142" title="Pelsaert Island" label="Pelsaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973561" start="11338" end="11356" title="Division of Durack" label="Division of Durack"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="11372" end="11396" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005114" start="11405" end="11436" title="electoral district of Geraldton" label="electoral district of Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994118" start="11444" end="11482" title="Western Australian Legislative Council" label="Western Australian Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="11722" end="11727" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="11916" end="11933" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="12199" end="12210" title="shelf break" label="shelf break"/>
<link wikidata="Q691831" start="12374" end="12392" title="carbonate platform" label="carbonate platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288064" start="12631" end="12646" title="Leeuwin Current" label="Leeuwin Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="12810" end="12829" title="southern hemisphere" label="southern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q217487" start="13168" end="13177" title="Shark Bay, Western Australia" label="Shark Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="13221" end="13234" title="topography" label="topographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q994122" start="13262" end="13268" title="eddy (fluid dynamics)" label="eddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="13446" end="13463" title="coastal upwelling" label="coastal upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="14587" end="14595" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="14688" end="14691" title="parts per trillion" label="ppt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="15287" end="15315" title="El Niño-Southern Oscillation" label="El Niño-Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395805" start="15329" end="15341" title="water column" label="water column"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540292" start="15401" end="15410" title="halocline" label="halocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q849599" start="15414" end="15425" title="thermocline" label="thermocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="15735" end="15739" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="16212" end="16240" title="El Niño-Southern Oscillation" label="El Niño-Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q923429" start="16658" end="16679" title="Bureau of Meteorology" label="Bureau of Meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="16698" end="16706" title="climate" label="climatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q846837" start="16741" end="16766" title="automatic weather station" label="automatic weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530387" start="16789" end="16801" title="North Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="16837" end="16850" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q845339" start="16852" end="16867" title="air temperature" label="air temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464943" start="16869" end="16879" title="wind speed" label="wind speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057900" start="16881" end="16895" title="wind direction" label="wind direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="16897" end="16914" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="16919" end="16939" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="17102" end="17123" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="17125" end="17142" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="17158" end="17187" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="18642" end="18658" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="18827" end="18849" title="extra-tropical cyclone" label="extra-tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572569" start="19072" end="19123" title="Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia" label="Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19184" end="19199" title="Geraldton Hills" label="Geraldton Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549838" start="19217" end="19237" title="Geraldton Sandplains" label="Geraldton Sandplains"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="19255" end="19268" title="biogeography" label="biogeographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435290" start="19342" end="19349" title="Refugium (population biology)" label="refugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209645" start="19379" end="19395" title="Tammar wallaby" label="tammar wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q744392" start="19428" end="19447" title="Australian sea lion" label="Australian sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107555003" start="19569" end="19595" title="Southwest Shelf Transition" label="Southwest Shelf Transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042895" start="19600" end="19658" title="Integrated Marine and Coastal Regionalisation of Australia" label="Integrated Marine and Coastal Regionalisation of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915376" start="19667" end="19674" title="biotone" label="biotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="19716" end="19721" title="Perth, Western Australia" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="19725" end="19734" title="Geraldton, Western Australia" label="Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20771" end="20789" title="Central West Coast" label="Central West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q155931" start="20904" end="20912" title="Chenopodiaceae" label="chenopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="21103" end="21117" title="vascular plant" label="vascular flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="21484" end="21488" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q157505" start="21492" end="21501" title="Hepatica" label="liverwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="21507" end="21513" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041367" start="21799" end="21820" title="Nitraria billardierei" label="Nitraria billardierei"/>
<link wikidata="Q161473" start="21898" end="21927" title="Mesembryanthemum crystallinum" label="Mesembryanthemum crystallinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798060" start="21967" end="21986" title="Threlkeldia diffusa" label="Threlkeldia diffusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709156" start="22037" end="22053" title="Atriplex cinerea" label="Atriplex cinerea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405656" start="22117" end="22134" title="Eucalyptus oraria" label="Eucalyptus oraria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670925" start="22165" end="22178" title="Acacia didyma" label="Acacia didyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670925" start="22300" end="22313" title="Acacia didyma" label="Acacia didyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115099" start="22406" end="22433" title="Chthonocephalus tomentellus" label="Chthonocephalus tomentellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249495" start="22529" end="22566" title="Declared Rare and Priority Flora List" label="Declared Rare and Priority Flora List"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023076" start="22574" end="22596" title="Calocephalus aervoides" label="Calocephalus aervoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q10953644" start="22613" end="22627" title="Galium migrans" label="Galium migrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117751" start="22666" end="22684" title="Lepidium puberulum" label="Lepidium puberulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q151022" start="22891" end="22910" title="Lycium ferocissimum" label="Lycium ferocissimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q141416" start="23366" end="23381" title="Opuntia stricta" label="Opuntia stricta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160909" start="23410" end="23431" title="Verbesina encelioides" label="Verbesina encelioides"/>
<link wikidata="Q159280" start="23448" end="23467" title="Echium plantagineum" label="Echium plantagineum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626241" start="23620" end="23657" title="list of birds of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of birds of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="23752" end="23759" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="24131" end="24153" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="24160" end="24179" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074601" start="24231" end="24254" title="wedge-tailed shearwater" label="wedge-tailed shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368963" start="24400" end="24408" title="seabird colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q941644" start="24416" end="24428" title="lesser noddy" label="lesser noddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130121" start="24483" end="24500" title="little shearwater" label="little shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q845982" start="24502" end="24526" title="white-faced storm petrel" label="white-faced storm petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q525717" start="24528" end="24540" title="common noddy" label="common noddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27129" start="24542" end="24554" title="Caspian tern" label="Caspian tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q18866" start="24556" end="24568" title="crested tern" label="crested tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q321293" start="24570" end="24582" title="roseate tern" label="roseate tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q76328" start="24587" end="24597" title="fairy tern" label="fairy tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q392232" start="24658" end="24676" title="Pacific reef heron" label="Pacific reef heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q619065" start="24678" end="24690" title="Pacific gull" label="Pacific gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q28490" start="24692" end="24704" title="bridled tern" label="bridled tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q45974" start="24706" end="24729" title="white-bellied sea eagle" label="white-bellied sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="24734" end="24740" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669562" start="24804" end="24833" title="Abrolhos painted button-quail" label="Abrolhos painted button-quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001293" start="24925" end="24955" title="Wildlife Conservation Act 1950" label="Wildlife Conservation Act 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q21881015" start="25091" end="25104" title="Wooded Island" label="Wooded Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21896176" start="25106" end="25119" title="Morley Island" label="Morley Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068345" start="25124" end="25139" title="Pelsaert Island" label="Pelsaert Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q209645" start="25232" end="25246" title="tammar wallaby" label="tammar wallaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q28970" start="25286" end="25294" title="bush rat" label="bush rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q331564" start="25628" end="25645" title="Francisco Pelsart" label="Francisco Pelsart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23193" start="25740" end="25748" title="Macropodidae" label="macropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="26106" end="26117" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="26153" end="26160" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="26427" end="26439" title="domestic cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="26527" end="26538" title="house mouse" label="house mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="26903" end="26912" title="black rat" label="black rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="27026" end="27041" title="European rabbit" label="European rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="27357" end="27370" title="domestic goat" label="domestic goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="27717" end="27733" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036204" start="27819" end="27844" title="Stokes&amp;#x27;s skink" label="Egernia stokesii stokesii"/>
<link wikidata="Q107113453" start="27881" end="27906" title="Morelia spilota imbricata" label="Morelia spilota imbricata"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001293" start="28006" end="28036" title="Wildlife Conservation Act 1950" label="Wildlife Conservation Act 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393209" start="28089" end="28108" title="Pogona minor minima" label="Pogona minor minima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191429" start="28190" end="28232" title="Department of Environment and Conservation (Western Australia)" label="Department of Environment and Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627208" start="28266" end="28306" title="list of reptiles of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of reptiles of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273817" start="28361" end="28383" title="Limnodynastes dorsalis" label="Limnodynastes dorsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11845745" start="28418" end="28438" title="Myobatrachus gouldii" label="Myobatrachus gouldii"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="28661" end="28668" title="benthic" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="28669" end="28674" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q103169" start="28756" end="28765" title="red algae" label="red algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q184573" start="28794" end="28805" title="brown algae" label="brown algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="28837" end="28848" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626035" start="29001" end="29038" title="list of algae of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of algae of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29783" end="29802" title="Pomacentrus milleri" label="Pomacentrus milleri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29840" end="29856" title="Scarus schlegeli" label="Scarus schlegeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393851" start="29900" end="29924" title="Stethojulis strigiventer" label="Stethojulis strigiventer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756428" start="29960" end="29977" title="Coris auricularis" label="Coris auricularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211898" start="30014" end="30031" title="Kyphosus cornelii" label="Kyphosus cornelii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315430" start="30070" end="30089" title="Choerodon rubescens" label="Choerodon rubescens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30122" end="30143" title="Chromis westaustralis" label="Chromis westaustralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702492" start="30183" end="30203" title="Thalassoma lutescens" label="Thalassoma lutescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076448" start="30238" end="30252" title="Scarus ghobban" label="Scarus ghobban"/>
<link wikidata="Q962972" start="30299" end="30321" title="Abudefduf sexfasciatus" label="Abudefduf sexfasciatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q947679" start="30359" end="30376" title="Thalassoma lunare" label="Thalassoma lunare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30405" end="30423" title="Stegastes obreptus" label="Stegastes obreptus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30456" end="30479" title="Halichoeres brownfieldi" label="Halichoeres brownfieldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q902217" start="30521" end="30541" title="Amblygobius phalaena" label="Amblygobius phalaena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30576" end="30603" title="Asterropteryx semipunctatus" label="Asterropteryx semipunctatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843364" start="30632" end="30653" title="Anampses geographicus" label="Anampses geographicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132480" start="30724" end="30738" title="Pagrus auratus" label="Pagrus auratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141925" start="30818" end="30838" title="Glaucosoma hebraicum" label="Glaucosoma hebraicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233039" start="30876" end="30898" title="Plectropomus leopardus" label="Plectropomus leopardus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627079" start="30994" end="31032" title="List of fishes of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="List of fishes of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="31472" end="31477" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q744392" start="31635" end="31654" title="Australian sea lion" label="Australian sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="32129" end="32136" title="seal hunting" label="sealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="32226" end="32234" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848431" start="32282" end="32288" title="trypot" label="trypot"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="32516" end="32530" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32723" end="32738" title="Serventy Island" label="Serventy Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32740" end="32754" title="Gilbert Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Gilbert Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802665" start="32756" end="32772" title="Alexander Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Alexander Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21896175" start="32774" end="32786" title="Suomi Island" label="Suomi Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32788" end="32799" title="Keru Island" label="Keru Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32801" end="32814" title="Square Island" label="Square Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32816" end="32828" title="Stick Island" label="Stick Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32830" end="32843" title="Gibson Island (Houtman Abrolhos)" label="Gibson Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618325" start="32845" end="32855" title="Gun Island" label="Gun Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21896176" start="32857" end="32870" title="Morley Island" label="Morley Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21881015" start="32875" end="32888" title="Wooded Island" label="Wooded Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="33206" end="33220" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="33271" end="33286" title="southern right whale" label="southern rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q221056" start="33453" end="33477" title="pygmy Bryde&amp;#x27;s whale" label="pygmy Bryde&amp;#x27;s whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="33512" end="33516" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="33545" end="33563" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207114" start="33596" end="33610" title="common dolphin" label="common dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215332" start="33648" end="33663" title="striped dolphin" label="striped dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="33728" end="33740" title="green turtle" label="green turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192095" start="33778" end="33795" title="loggerhead turtle" label="loggerhead turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626665" start="34336" end="34374" title="list of corals of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of corals of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="34522" end="34529" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524330" start="34754" end="34769" title="coralline algae" label="coralline algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="34839" end="34849" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q783011" start="34881" end="34901" title="western rock lobster" label="western rock lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193418" start="34970" end="34978" title="amphipod" label="amphipod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="35083" end="35090" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="35183" end="35192" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="35217" end="35224" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="35277" end="35287" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q188906" start="35303" end="35309" title="chiton" label="chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q238314" start="35327" end="35336" title="scaphopod" label="scaphopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626941" start="35525" end="35565" title="List of molluscs of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="List of molluscs of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35572" end="35595" title="southern saucer scallop" label="southern saucer scallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="35880" end="35891" title="echinoderms" label="echinoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q26634" start="36131" end="36155" title="crown-of-thorns starfish" label="crown-of-thorns starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626742" start="36281" end="36324" title="list of echinoderms of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of echinoderms of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q248530" start="36441" end="36451" title="demosponge" label="demosponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12902524" start="36977" end="36988" title="marine worm" label="marine worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="37051" end="37061" title="polychaete" label="polychaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608334" start="37069" end="37081" title="Terebellidae" label="Terebellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q193006" start="37112" end="37123" title="oligochaete" label="oligochaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q644633" start="37131" end="37142" title="Tubificidae" label="Tubificidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627323" start="37171" end="37208" title="list of worms of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of worms of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q61994851" start="37225" end="37232" title="hydroid (zoology)" label="hydroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122184" start="37302" end="37314" title="leptothecate" label="leptothecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14556976" start="37337" end="37350" title="anthoathecate" label="anthoathecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626837" start="37454" end="37494" title="list of hydroids of the Houtman Abrolhos" label="list of hydroids of the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="37805" end="37814" title="Geraldton" label="Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q783011" start="38469" end="38489" title="western rock lobster" label="western rock lobster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38668" end="38682" title="saucer scallop" label="saucer scallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116358" start="39729" end="39741" title="Port Gregory" label="Port Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39851" end="39860" title="wetlining" label="wetlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q820786" start="39964" end="39986" title="black-lip pearl oyster" label="black-lip pearl oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="40401" end="40406" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="40407" end="40418" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="40738" end="40745" title="finfish" label="finfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q686478" start="40869" end="40878" title="live rock" label="live rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="40897" end="40905" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238528" start="41076" end="41091" title="Pinctada albina" label="Pinctada albina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704793" start="41104" end="41115" title="maxima clam" label="maxima clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460859" start="41147" end="41158" title="rock oyster" label="rock oyster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41194" end="41208" title="saucer scallop" label="saucer scallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="41320" end="41333" title="filter feeder" label="filter feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="41363" end="41384" title="Oil exploration" label="Petroleum exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="41612" end="41623" title="snorkelling" label="snorkelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="41625" end="41631" title="Underwater diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="41751" end="41760" title="shipwreck" label="shipwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q810735" start="41774" end="41781" title="Batavia (1628 ship)" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q810735" start="42029" end="42036" title="Batavia (1628 ship)" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434652" start="42189" end="42213" title="Henrietta Drake-Brockman" label="Henrietta Drake-Brockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742679" start="42573" end="42585" title="Malcolm Uren" label="Malcolm Uren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987535" start="43362" end="43407" title="Western Australian Premier&amp;#x27;s Book Awards" label="Western Australian Premier&amp;#x27;s Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807599" start="43461" end="43477" title="Surfing the Menu" label="Surfing the Menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="43539" end="43542" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q10847311" start="43598" end="43605" title="Getaway (TV series)" label="Getaway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43967" end="43989" title="Geraldton Town Council" label="Geraldton Town Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260145" start="44416" end="44475" title="Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development" label="Department of Primary Industries &amp;amp; Regional Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840998" start="44500" end="44539" title="List of islands in the Houtman Abrolhos" label="List of islands in the Houtman Abrolhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510366" start="44541" end="44569" title="List of islands of Australia" label="List of islands of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69814" wikidata="Q898856" url="?curid=69814" title="Jethou">
<text>&lt;mapframe
text=&quot;Jethou&quot;
width=230 
height=230 
zoom=12
latitude=49.458333
longitude=-2.4625/&gt;
Jethou ( ) is a small island that is part of the Bailiwick of Guernsey in the Channel Islands. It is privately leased from the Crown, and not open to the public. Resembling the top of a wooded knoll, it is immediately south of Herm and covers approximately .

==History==
There is evidence of flint manufacturing in an area exposed only at low water between the island and Crevichon which shows occupation around 10,000 BC. It is said that in AD 709 a storm washed away the strip of land that connected the island with Herm.

The Vikings called the island . The island&#x27;s current name retains the related Norman &quot;-hou&quot; suffix, meaning &#x27;small island&#x27; or &#x27;small hill&#x27;.

In 1416, it became part of Henry V&#x27;s estate and still remains Crown property, now leased to the States of Guernsey.

On the top is a marker. It is said that in earlier times, pirates were hanged on it with chains, as on nearby Crevichon.

===Modern history===
In 1867 Lt Colonel Montague Fielden became the island&#x27;s tenant. However he was discovered using the island as a storehouse for smuggling brandy from France.

From 1920 to 1934 it was leased by the Scottish novelist Compton MacKenzie along with Herm and remained part of that estate for years, although it is currently part of a different one.

From September 1964 until December 1971 the island was occupied by the Faed family – Angus Faed, his wife Susan Faed and their four children, Colin, Erik, Colette and Amanda. Mrs Susan Faed was the 22nd tenant of Jethou.

In the 1950s and 60s the island was open to the public. During that period postage stamps were issued. Local stamps on the Bailiwick of Guernsey were banned on 1 October 1969, and the Isle of Jethou was closed to the public from 1970.

In 1972, Charles Hayward, founder of the Firth Cleveland Group of Companies, purchased the Crown tenancy of the island and lived there with his wife Elsie Darnell George until his death in 1983.

In 1996 the island was leased by Sir Peter Ogden of IT company Computacenter.

It was recognised in 2016 as an area of international environmental importance under the Ramsar Convention.

It is flanked by two islets, Crevichon to the north and Fauconnière to the south. There is one house on the island and two cottages as well as a large garage where vehicles such as quad bikes and tractors are stored.

==Governance==
Unlike the largely autonomous islands of Sark and Alderney within the Bailiwick, Jethou is administered entirely by the States of Guernsey, and elects members to the States of Deliberation as part of the St. Peter Port South electoral district.

==Wildlife==
At the back (east) of Jethou, puffins can be seen swimming off the rocks.

==Jethou in popular culture==
The British 1957 musical &quot;Free as Air&quot; by Dorothy Reynolds and Julian Slade was set on the minor and fictitious Channel Island of &#x27;Terhou&#x27;, which was based on Jethou.

Mary Gentle&#x27;s 2007 novel &quot;&quot; has a villainous noblewoman exiled to a convent in Jethou.

==See also==
*List of tenants of Jethou

==References==
==Bibliography==
* &quot;BBC Pronouncing Dictionary of British Names&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1971) 

==External links==
* Jethou homepage 
* Free Gutenberg Project book, &quot;Jethou; or, Crusoe Life in the Channel Isles&quot; by Ernest R. Suffling
* Stamps from Isle of Jethou 1998 Stamps Catalogue by Anders Backman – Freenee
* Island of Jethou at Britlink </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898856" start="110" end="116" title="Jethou" label="Jethou"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="159" end="180" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Bailiwick of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="188" end="203" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="233" end="242" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q202023" start="337" end="341" title="Herm" label="Herm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989520" start="483" end="492" title="Crevichon" label="Crevichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048822" start="732" end="736" title="-hou" label="-hou"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="839" end="846" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="923" end="931" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989520" start="1044" end="1053" title="Crevichon" label="Crevichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="1219" end="1225" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122051" start="1297" end="1314" title="Compton MacKenzie" label="Compton MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q202023" start="1326" end="1330" title="Herm" label="Herm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="1723" end="1736" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="1771" end="1792" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Bailiwick of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083560" start="1893" end="1908" title="Charles William Hayward" label="Charles Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083560" start="1925" end="1940" title="Firth Cleveland" label="Firth Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176210" start="2113" end="2128" title="Peter Ogden (businessman)" label="Sir Peter Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q211237" start="2143" end="2156" title="Computacenter" label="Computacenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="2248" end="2265" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="2289" end="2294" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989520" start="2297" end="2306" title="Crevichon" label="Crevichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210988" start="2449" end="2458" title="quad bike" label="quad bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="2464" end="2471" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405693" start="2542" end="2546" title="Sark" label="Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q179313" start="2551" end="2559" title="Alderney" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368324" start="2667" end="2689" title="States of Guernsey" label="States of Deliberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402086" start="2705" end="2725" title="Saint Peter Port South" label="St. Peter Port South"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="2790" end="2797" title="Atlantic puffin" label="puffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500184" start="2896" end="2907" title="Free as Air" label="Free as Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298609" start="2917" end="2933" title="Dorothy Reynolds" label="Dorothy Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307573" start="2938" end="2950" title="Julian Slade" label="Julian Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q387693" start="3053" end="3064" title="Mary Gentle" label="Mary Gentle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642835" start="3170" end="3195" title="List of tenants of Jethou" label="List of tenants of Jethou"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="3288" end="3311" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69817" wikidata="Q3151013" url="?curid=69817" title="Forensic engineering">
<text>Forensic engineering has been defined as &quot;the investigation of failures—ranging from serviceability to catastrophic—which may lead to legal activity, including both civil and criminal&quot;. The forensic engineering field is very broad in terms of the many disciplines that it covers, investigations that use forensic engineering are case of environmental damages to structures, system failures of machines, explosions, electrical, fire point of origin, vehicle failures and many more.

It includes the investigation of materials, products, structures or components that fail or do not operate or function as intended, causing personal injury, damage to property or economic loss. The consequences of failure may give rise to action under either criminal or civil law including but not limited to health and safety legislation, the laws of contract and/or product liability and the laws of tort. The field also deals with retracing processes and procedures leading to accidents in operation of vehicles or machinery. Generally, the purpose of a forensic engineering investigation is to locate cause or causes of failure with a view to improve performance or life of a component, or to assist a court in determining the facts of an accident. It can also involve investigation of intellectual property claims, especially patents. In the US, forensic engineers require a professional engineering license from each state.

==History==
As the field of engineering has evolved over time, so has the field of forensic engineering. Early examples include investigation of bridge failures such as the Tay rail bridge disaster of 1879 and the Dee bridge disaster of 1847. Many early rail accidents prompted the invention of tensile testing of samples and fractography of failed components.

==Investigation==
Vital to the field of forensic engineering is the process of investigating and collecting data related to the: materials, products, structures or components that failed. This involves: inspections, collecting evidence, measurements, developing models, obtaining exemplar products, and performing experiments. Often, testing and measurements are conducted in an Independent testing laboratory or other reputable unbiased laboratory.

When investigating a case a forensic engineer will follow a series of standard steps of their investigation process. First thing is when the forensic engineer arrives to the scene is to establish safety, they make sure that all the hazards have been dealt with an are safe to handle and be analyzed. The next step would be to do an initial incident appraisal, this is done before any analysis is done and they take a quick observation of what the solution is at hand. The third step in the investigative process is to plan how to the investigation will go and would resources they will need to obtain to do the analysis accurately. Next would be establishing the terms of reverence, this is when the forensic engineer will consult with the client on what they want done in the investigation. The next step is to create the investigative team, once there is plan on how to investigate they will make a team of the experts in the given field needed to conduct the analysis. lastly would be to start the investigation, and this is where they conduct their analysis.

==Analysis==

There are two of the main types of analysis done in forensic engineering, there is root cause analysis and failure analysis. Root cause analysis is defined as looking at the system as a whole and what led to the system failing, and is done with large scale object, for example a building collapse. Failure analysis is defined as the analysis of one part in the system that failed to operate, an example of this would be a car failure causing an accident. These two types of analysis are the initial assessments done when forensic engineering investigators start their investigation.

Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) and fault tree analysis methods also examine product or process failure in a structured and systematic way, in the general context of safety engineering. However, all such techniques rely on accurate reporting of failure rates, and precise identification, of the failure modes involved.

There is some common ground between forensic science and forensic engineering, such as scene of crime and scene of accident analysis, integrity of the evidence and court appearances. Both disciplines make extensive use of optical and scanning electron microscopes, for example. They also share common use of spectroscopy (infrared, ultraviolet, and nuclear magnetic resonance) to examine critical evidence. Radiography using X-rays (such as X-ray computed tomography), or neutrons is also very useful in examining thick products for their internal defects before destructive examination is attempted. Often, however, a simple hand lens may reveal the cause of a particular problem.

Trace evidence is sometimes an important factor in reconstructing the sequence of events in an accident. For example, tire burn marks on a road surface can enable vehicle speeds to be estimated, when the brakes were applied and so on. Ladder feet often leave a trace of movement of the ladder during a slip and may show how the accident occurred. When a product fails for no obvious reason, SEM and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) performed in the microscope can reveal the presence of aggressive chemicals that have left traces on the fracture or adjacent surfaces. Thus an acetal resin water pipe joint suddenly failed and caused substantial damages to a building in which it was situated. Analysis of the joint showed traces of chlorine, indicating a stress corrosion cracking failure mode. The failed fuel pipe junction mentioned above showed traces of sulfur on the fracture surface from the sulfuric acid, which had initiated the crack.

Extracting physical evidence from digital photography is a major technique used in forensic accident reconstruction. Camera matching, photogrammetry, and photo rectification techniques are used to create three-dimensional and top-down views from the two-dimensional photos typically taken at an accident scene. Overlooked or undocumented evidence for accident reconstruction can be retrieved and quantified as long as photographs of such evidence are available. By using photographs of the accident scene including the vehicle, &quot;lost&quot; evidence can be recovered and accurately determined.

Forensic materials engineering involves methods applied to specific materials, such as metals, glasses, ceramics, composites and polymers.

==Organizations==

The National Academy of Forensic Engineers (NAFE) was founded in 1982 by Marvin M. Specter, P.E., L.S., Paul E. Pritzker, P.E., and William A. Cox Jr., P.E. to identify and bring together professional engineers having qualifications and expertise as practicing forensic engineers to further their continuing education and promote high standards of professional ethics and excellence of practice. It seeks to improve the practice, elevate the standards, and advance the cause of forensic engineering. Full membership in the academy is limited to Registered Professional Engineers who are also members of the National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE). They must also be members in an acceptable grade of a recognized major technical engineering society. NAFE also offers Affiliate grades of membership to those who do not yet qualify for Member grade. Full members are board-certified through the &quot;Council of Engineering and Scientific Specialty Boards&quot; and earn the title &quot;Diplomate of Forensic Engineering&quot;, or &quot;DFE&quot;. This is typically used after their designation as Profesional Engineer.

==Examples==

The broken fuel pipe shown at left caused a serious accident when diesel fuel poured out from a van onto the road. A following car skidded and the driver was seriously injured when she collided with an oncoming lorry. Scanning electron microscopy or SEM showed that the nylon connector had fractured by stress corrosion cracking (SCC) due to a small leak of battery acid. Nylon is susceptible to hydrolysis when in contact with sulfuric acid, and only a small leak of acid would have sufficed to start a brittle crack in the injection moulded nylon 6,6 connector by SCC. The crack took about 7 days to grow across the diameter of the tube. The fracture surface showed a mainly brittle surface with striations indicating progressive growth of the crack across the diameter of the pipe. Once the crack had penetrated the inner bore, fuel started leaking onto the road.

The nylon 6,6 had been attacked by the following reaction, which was catalyzed by the acid:

Diesel fuel is especially hazardous on road surfaces because it forms a thin, oily film that cannot be easily seen by drivers. It is much like black ice in its slipperiness, so skids are common when diesel leaks occur. The insurers of the van driver admitted liability and the injured driver was compensated.

==Applications==
Most manufacturing models will have a forensic component that monitors early failures to improve quality or efficiencies. Insurance companies use forensic engineers to prove liability or nonliability. Most engineering disasters (structural failures such as bridge and building collapses) are subject to forensic investigation by engineers experienced in forensic methods of investigation. Rail crashes, aviation accidents, and some automobile accidents are investigated by forensic engineers in particular where component failure is suspected. Furthermore, appliances, consumer products, medical devices, structures, industrial machinery, and even simple hand tools such as hammers or chisels can warrant investigations upon incidents causing injury or property damages. The failure of medical devices is often safety-critical to the user, so reporting failures and analysing them is particularly important. The environment of the body is complex, and implants must both survive this environment, and not leach potentially toxic impurities. Problems have been reported with breast implants, heart valves, and catheters, for example.

Failures that occur early in the life of a new product are vital information for the manufacturer to improve the product. New product development aims to eliminate defects by testing in the factory before launch, but some may occur during its early life. Testing products to simulate their behavior in the external environment is a difficult skill, and may involve accelerated life testing for example. The worst kind of defect to occur after launch is a safety-critical defect, a defect that can endanger life or limb. Their discovery usually leads to a product recall or even complete withdrawal of the product from the market. Product defects often follow the bathtub curve, with high initial failures, a lower rate during regular life, followed by another rise due to wear-out. National standards, such as those of ASTM and the British Standards Institute, and International Standards can help the designer in increasing product integrity.

==Historic examples==

There are many examples of forensic methods used to investigate accidents and disasters, one of the earliest in the modern period being the fall of the Dee bridge at Chester, England. It was built using cast iron girders, each of which was made of three very large castings dovetailed together. Each girder was strengthened by wrought iron bars along the length. It was finished in September 1846, and opened for local traffic after approval by the first Railway Inspector, General Charles Pasley. However, on 24 May 1847, a local train to Ruabon fell through the bridge. The accident resulted in five deaths (three passengers, the train guard, and the locomotive fireman) and nine serious injuries. The bridge had been designed by Robert Stephenson, and he was accused of negligence by a local inquest.

Although strong in compression, cast iron was known to be brittle in tension or bending. On the day of the accident, the bridge deck was covered with track ballast to prevent the oak beams supporting the track from catching fire, imposing a heavy extra load on the girders supporting the bridge and probably exacerbating the accident. Stephenson took this precaution because of a recent fire on the Great Western Railway at Uxbridge, London, where Isambard Kingdom Brunel&#x27;s bridge caught fire and collapsed.

One of the first major inquiries conducted by the newly formed Railway Inspectorate was conducted by Captain Simmons of the Royal Engineers, and his report suggested that repeated flexing of the girder weakened it substantially. He examined the broken parts of the main girder, and confirmed that the girder had broken in two places, the first break occurring at the center. He tested the remaining girders by driving a locomotive across them, and found that they deflected by several inches under the moving load. He concluded that the design was flawed, and that the wrought iron trusses fixed to the girders did not reinforce the girders at all, which was a conclusion also reached by the jury at the inquest. Stephenson&#x27;s design had depended on the wrought iron trusses to strengthen the final structures, but they were anchored on the cast iron girders themselves, and so deformed with any load on the bridge. Others (especially Stephenson) argued that the train had derailed and hit the girder, the impact force causing it to fracture. However, eyewitnesses maintained that the girder broke first and the fact that the locomotive remained on the track showed otherwise.

==Publications==
Product failures are not widely published in the academic literature or trade literature, partly because companies do not want to advertise their problems. However, it then denies others the opportunity to improve product design so as to prevent further accidents.

The journal &quot;Engineering Failure Analysis&quot;, published in affiliation with the European Structural Integrity Society, publishes case studies of a wide range of different products, failing under different circumstances.

A publication dealing with failures of buildings, bridges, and other structures, is the &quot;Journal of Performance of Constructed Facilities&quot;, which is published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, under the umbrella of its Technical Council on Forensic Engineering.

The &quot;Journal of the National Academy of Forensic Engineers&quot; is a peer-reviewed open access journal that provides a multi-disciplinary examination of the forensic engineering field. Submission is open to NAFE members and the journal&#x27;s peer review process includes in-person presentation for live feedback prior to a single-blind technical peer review.

==See also==

* Failure mode and effects analysis
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


==References==
== Further reading ==
*&quot;Forensic Materials Engineering: Case Studies&quot; by Peter Rhys Lewis, Colin Gagg, Ken Reynolds, CRC Press (2004).
*&quot;Forensic Engineering Investigation&quot; by Randall K. Noon, CRC Press (2000).
*&quot;Introduction to Forensic Engineering&quot; (The Forensic Library) by Randall K. Noon, CRC Press (1992).
*National Academy of Forensic Engineers
*Introduction to Forensic Engineering. OpenLearn. Open University
*Forensic Engineering by Origin and Cause
*Guidelines for Investigating Process Safety Incidents, CCPS, AIChE, Wiley (3rd edition)
; Journals
*&quot;Engineering Failure Analysis&quot;
*&quot;Journal of the National Academy of Forensic Engineers&quot;
*&quot;Forensic Engineering&quot;. Institution of Civil Engineers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3151013" start="0" end="20" title="Forensic engineering" label="Forensic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="525" end="534" title="material science" label="materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="536" end="544" title="product (business)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671777" start="546" end="555" title="structure" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459068" start="632" end="647" title="personal injury" label="personal injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="861" end="878" title="product liability" label="product liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="895" end="899" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="1050" end="1058" title="Forensics" label="forensic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="1059" end="1070" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q171558" start="1236" end="1244" title="accident" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1283" end="1304" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1324" end="1330" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="1569" end="1583" title="bridge failure" label="bridge failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="1597" end="1621" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="Tay rail bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311992" start="1638" end="1657" title="Dee bridge disaster" label="Dee bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q115605" start="1719" end="1731" title="tensile test" label="tensile test"/>
<link wikidata="Q866682" start="1750" end="1762" title="fractography" label="fractography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017561" start="2165" end="2195" title="Independent testing laboratory" label="Independent testing laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389268" start="3899" end="3932" title="Failure mode and effects analysis" label="Failure mode and effects analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q428453" start="3944" end="3963" title="fault tree analysis" label="fault tree analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496962" start="4074" end="4092" title="safety engineering" label="safety engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737027" start="4153" end="4165" title="failure rate" label="failure rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="4462" end="4490" title="scanning electron microscope" label="scanning electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="4536" end="4548" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4550" end="4558" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="4560" end="4571" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="4577" end="4603" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="4635" end="4646" title="Radiography" label="Radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="4653" end="4658" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="4669" end="4694" title="X-ray computed tomography" label="X-ray computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="4700" end="4707" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="4854" end="4863" title="Magnifying glass" label="hand lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657640" start="4911" end="4925" title="Trace evidence" label="Trace evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="5302" end="5305" title="scanning electron microscope" label="SEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q386334" start="5310" end="5346" title="Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy" label="Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q146139" start="5497" end="5509" title="polyoxymethylene plastic" label="acetal resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q585977" start="5676" end="5701" title="stress corrosion cracking" label="stress corrosion cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="5779" end="5785" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="5819" end="5832" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813492" start="5983" end="5998" title="Match moving" label="Camera matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q190149" start="6000" end="6014" title="photogrammetry" label="photogrammetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262415" start="6020" end="6039" title="Image rectification" label="photo rectification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468716" start="6465" end="6495" title="Forensic materials engineering" label="Forensic materials engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="6552" end="6557" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="6560" end="6565" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="6569" end="6576" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="6579" end="6589" title="composite material" label="composites"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="6594" end="6601" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="7833" end="7844" title="diesel fuel" label="diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="7978" end="7983" title="lorry" label="lorry"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="7985" end="8013" title="Scanning electron microscopy" label="Scanning electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="8037" end="8042" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q585977" start="8070" end="8095" title="stress corrosion cracking" label="stress corrosion cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="8125" end="8137" title="battery acid" label="battery acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="8163" end="8173" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="8195" end="8208" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q260606" start="8292" end="8309" title="injection moulded" label="injection moulded"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8310" end="8319" title="nylon 6,6" label="nylon 6,6"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="8728" end="8739" title="Diesel fuel" label="Diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q220604" start="8871" end="8880" title="black ice" label="black ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309431" start="9284" end="9302" title="structural failure" label="structural failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078765" start="9444" end="9456" title="Rail crashes" label="Rail crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="9458" end="9476" title="aviation accidents and incidents" label="aviation accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="9487" end="9507" title="car accident" label="automobile accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="9841" end="9855" title="medical device" label="medical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="9866" end="9881" title="life-critical system" label="safety-critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q486975" start="10007" end="10015" title="implant (medicine)" label="implants"/>
<link wikidata="Q749053" start="10129" end="10143" title="breast implant" label="breast implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="10146" end="10157" title="heart valve" label="heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="10164" end="10172" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395034" start="10311" end="10334" title="New product development" label="New product development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533504" start="10554" end="10578" title="accelerated life testing" label="accelerated life testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="10644" end="10659" title="life-critical system" label="safety-critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q359495" start="10744" end="10758" title="product recall" label="product recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q432465" start="10852" end="10865" title="bathtub curve" label="bathtub curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="11008" end="11012" title="ASTM International" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778585" start="11021" end="11048" title="BSI Group" label="British Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334738" start="11054" end="11076" title="International standard" label="International Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311992" start="11309" end="11319" title="Dee bridge" label="Dee bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="11323" end="11330" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11332" end="11339" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="11360" end="11369" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371480" start="11370" end="11376" title="girder" label="girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="11484" end="11496" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770481" start="11697" end="11703" title="Ruabon" label="Ruabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="11889" end="11906" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036832" start="11952" end="11959" title="inquest" label="inquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133363" start="12539" end="12559" title="Railway Inspectorate" label="Railway Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="12600" end="12615" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115667" start="13486" end="13498" title="impact force" label="impact force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="13513" end="13521" title="fracture" label="fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="13532" end="13544" title="Witness" label="eyewitnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="13606" end="13616" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="13724" end="13743" title="academic literature" label="academic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q47461152" start="14029" end="14066" title="European Structural Integrity Society" label="European Structural Integrity Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="14346" end="14381" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q232932" start="14542" end="14553" title="open access" label="open access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389268" start="14836" end="14869" title="Failure mode and effects analysis" label="Failure mode and effects analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="15335" end="15350" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="15637" end="15667" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69818" wikidata="Q168691" url="?curid=69818" title="Victor Emmanuel II">
<text>Victor Emmanuel II (; full name: &quot;Vittorio Emanuele Maria Alberto Eugenio Ferdinando Tommaso di Savoia&quot;; 14 March 1820 – 9 January 1878) was King of Sardinia (also informally known as Piedmont–Sardinia) from 23 March 1849 until 17 March 1861, when he assumed the title of King of Italy and became the first king of an independent, united Italy since the 6th century, a title he held until his death in 1878. Borrowing from the old Latin title &quot;Pater Patriae&quot; of the Roman emperors, the Italians gave him the epithet of &quot;Father of the Fatherland&quot; ().

Born in Turin as the eldest son of Charles Albert, Prince of Carignano, and Maria Theresa of Austria, Victor Emmanuel fought in the First Italian War of Independence (1848–1849) before being made King of Sardinia following his father&#x27;s abdication. He appointed Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, as his Prime Minister, and he consolidated his position by suppressing the republican left. In 1855, he sent an expeditionary corps to side with French and British forces during the Crimean War; the deployment of Italian troops to the Crimea, and the gallantry shown by them in the Battle of the Chernaya (16 August 1855) and in the siege of Sevastopol led the Kingdom of Sardinia to be among the participants at the peace conference at the end of the war, where it could address the issue of the Italian unification to other European powers. This allowed Victor Emmanuel to ally himself with Napoleon III, Emperor of France. France had supported Sardinia in the Second Italian War of Independence, resulting in liberating Lombardy from Austrian rule.

Victor Emmanuel supported the Expedition of the Thousand (1860–1861) led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, which resulted in the rapid fall of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in southern Italy; however, Victor Emmanuel halted Garibaldi when he appeared ready to attack Rome, still under the Papal States, as it was under French protection. In 1860, Tuscany, Modena, Parma, and Romagna decided to side with Sardinia, and Victor Emmanuel then marched victoriously in the Marche and Umbria after the victorious Battle of Castelfidardo over the Papal forces. This led to his excommunication from the Catholic Church until 1878, just before his death in the same year. He subsequently met Garibaldi at Teano, receiving from him the control of southern Italy and becoming the first King of Italy on 17 March 1861.

In 1866, the Third Italian War of Independence allowed Italy to annex Veneto. In 1870, Victor Emmanuel also took advantage of the Prussian victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War to conquer the Papal States after the French withdrew. He entered Rome on 20 September 1870 and set up the new capital there on 2 July 1871. He died in Rome in 1878, and was buried in the Pantheon. The Italian national Victor Emmanuel II Monument in Rome, containing the Altare della Patria, was built in his honour.

==Biography==

Victor Emmanuel was born as the eldest son of Carlo Alberto Prince of Carignano, and Maria Theresa of Austria. His father succeeded a distant cousin as King of Sardinia in 1831. He lived for some years of his youth in Florence and showed an early interest in politics, the military, and sports. In 1842, he married his cousin, Adelaide of Austria. He was styled as the Duke of Savoy prior to becoming King of Sardinia. He took part in the First Italian War of Independence (1848–1849) under his father, King Charles Albert, fighting in the front line at the battles of Pastrengo, Santa Lucia, Goito and Custoza.

Victor Emmanuel became King of Sardinia in 1849 when his father abdicated the throne, after being defeated by the Austrians at the Battle of Novara. Victor Emmanuel was immediately able to obtain a rather favourable armistice at Vignale by the Austrian imperial army commander, Radetzky. The treaty, however, was not ratified by the Piedmontese lower parliamentary house, the Chamber of Deputies, and Victor Emmanuel retaliated by firing his Prime Minister, Claudio Gabriele de Launay, replacing him with Massimo D&#x27;Azeglio. After new elections, the peace with Austria was accepted by the new Chamber of Deputies. In 1849, Victor Emmanuel also fiercely suppressed a revolt in Genoa, defining the rebels as a &quot;vile and infected race of canailles&quot;.

In 1852, Victor Emmanuel appointed Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, as Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Sardinia. Cavour was a clever strategist focused on establishing the House of Savoy as Italy&#x27;s rulers. He applied liberalism and nationalism to dismantle the traditional structures of the Kingdom of Sardinia while advancing an anti-clerical agenda that started during Charles Albert. Cavour modernized the kingdom for war to expel the Austrians from Italy, facilitating Victor Emmanuel&#x27;s eventual ascension as king. He also played a key role in securing an alliance with Napoleon III, leading to French support that enabled Emmanuel’s forces to capture Milan and other Austrian territories, though Venice remained under Austrian control. Victor Emmanuel II soon became the symbol of &quot;Risorgimento&quot;, the Italian unification movement of the 1850s and early 60s. He was especially popular in Piedmont–Sardinia because of his respect for the new constitution and his liberal reforms.
===Crimean War===
Following Victor Emmanuel&#x27;s advice, Cavour joined Britain and France in the Crimean War against Russia. Cavour was reluctant to go to war due to the power of Russia at the time and the expense of doing so; however, Victor Emmanuel was convinced of the rewards to be gained from the alliance created with Britain and more importantly France. After successfully seeking British support and ingratiating himself with France and Napoleon III at the Congress of Paris in 1856 at the end of the war, Count Cavour arranged a secret meeting with the French emperor. In 1858, they met at Plombières-les-Bains (in Lorraine), where they agreed that if the French were to help Piedmont in its war against Austria, which still reigned over the Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia in northern Italy, France would be awarded Nice and Savoy.

===Wars of Italian Unification===
The Italo-French campaign against Austria in 1859 started successfully; however, sickened by the casualties of the war and worried about the mobilisation of Prussian troops, Napoleon III secretly made a treaty with Franz Joseph of Austria at Villafranca whereby Piedmont would only gain Lombardy. France did not as a result receive the promised Nice and Savoy but Austria kept Venetia, a major setback for the Piedmontese, in no small part because the treaty had been prepared without their knowledge. After several quarrels about the outcome of the war, Cavour resigned, and the king had to find other advisors. France only gained Nice and Savoy after the Treaty of Turin was signed in March 1860, after Cavour had been reinstalled as Prime Minister, and a deal with the French was struck for plebiscites to take place in the Central Italian Duchies.

Later that same year, Victor Emmanuel II sent his forces to fight the papal army at Castelfidardo and drove the Pope into Vatican City. His success at these goals led him to be excommunicated from the Catholic Church until 1878 when it was lifted just before his death. Then, Giuseppe Garibaldi conquered Sicily and Naples, and Piedmont–Sardinia grew even larger. On 17 March 1861, the Kingdom of Italy was officially established and Victor Emmanuel II became its king.

Victor Emmanuel supported Giuseppe Garibaldi&#x27;s Expedition of the Thousand (1860–1861), which resulted in the rapid fall of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in southern Italy; however, the king halted Garibaldi when he appeared ready to attack Rome, still under the Papal States, as it was under French protection. In 1860, through local plebiscites, Tuscany, Modena, Parma, and Romagna decided to side with Piedmont–Sardinia. Victor Emmanuel then marched victoriously in the Marche and Umbria after the victorious battle of Castelfidardo (1860) over the Papal forces.

The king subsequently met with Garibaldi at Teano, receiving from him the control of southern Italy. Another series of plebiscites in the occupied lands resulted in the proclamation of Victor Emmanuel as the first King of Italy by the new Parliament of unified Italy, on 17 March 1861. He did not renumber himself after assuming the new royal title, and Turin became the capital of the new state. Only Lazio, Veneto, and Trentino remained to be conquered.

===Completion of the unification===

In 1866, Victor Emmanuel allied himself with Prussia in the Third Italian War of Independence. Although not victorious in the Italian theatre, he managed to receive Veneto after the Austrian defeat in Germany. The British Foreign Secretary, Lord Clarendon, visited Florence in December 1867 and reported to London after talking to various Italian politicians: &quot;There is universal agreement that Victor Emmanuel is an imbecile; he is a dishonest man who tells lies to everyone; at this rate, he will end up losing his crown and ruining both Italy and his dynasty.&quot; In 1870, after two failed attempts by Garibaldi, he also took advantage of the Prussian victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War to capture Rome after the French withdrew. He entered Rome on 20 September 1870 and set up the new capital there on 2 July 1871, after a temporary move to Florence in 1864. The new Royal residence was the Quirinal Palace.

The rest of Victor Emmanuel II&#x27;s reign was much quieter. After the Kingdom of Italy was established, he decided to continue on as King Victor Emmanuel II instead of Victor Emmanuel I of Italy. This was a terrible move as far as public relations went, as it was not indicative of the fresh start that the Italian people wanted and suggested that Piedmont–Sardinia had taken over the Italian peninsula rather than unifying it. Despite this mishap, the remainder of Victor Emmanuel II&#x27;s reign was consumed by wrapping up loose ends and dealing with economic and cultural issues. His role in day-to-day governing gradually dwindled, as it became increasingly apparent that a king could no longer keep a government in office against the will of Parliament. As a result, while the wording of the Statuto Albertino stipulating that ministers were solely responsible to the crown remained unchanged, in practice they were now responsible to Parliament.

Victor Emmanuel died in Rome in 1878, after meeting with the envoys of Pope Pius IX, who had reversed the excommunication, and received last rites. He was buried in the Pantheon. His successor was his son Umberto I.
==Family and children==
In 1842, Victor Emmanuel married his paternal first cousin (aunt&#x27;s daughter) Adelaide of Austria (1822–1855). With her, he had eight children:
* Maria Clotilde (1843–1911), who married Napoléon Joseph (&quot;the Prince Napoléon&quot;). Their grandson Prince Louis Napoléon was the Bonapartist pretender to the French imperial throne.
* Umberto (1844–1900), later King of Italy. He married his first cousin Margherita of Savoy.
* Amadeo (1845–1890), later King of Spain. He married Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo and later Maria Letizia Bonaparte.
* Oddone Eugenio Maria (1846–1866), Duke of Montferrat.
* Maria Pia (1847–1911), who married King Louis of Portugal.
* Carlo Alberto (2 June 1851 – 28 June 1854), Duke of Chablais, died in early childhood.
* Vittorio Emanuele (6 July 1852 – 6 July 1852) died in infancy.
* Vittorio Emanuele (18 January 1855 – 17 May 1855), Count of Geneva, died in infancy.

In 1869 he married morganatically his principal mistress Rosa Vercellana (3 June 1833 – 26 December 1885). Popularly known in Piedmontese as &quot;Bela Rosin&quot;, she was born a commoner but made Countess of Mirafiori and Fontanafredda in 1858. Their offspring were:
* Vittoria Guerrieri (2 December 1848 – 29 December 1905), married three times: to Giacomo Spinola, Luigi Spinola and Paolo DeSimone. 
* Emanuele Alberto Guerrieri (16 March 1851 – 24 December 1894), Count of Mirafiori and Fontanafredda.

In addition to his morganatic second wife, Victor Emmanuel II had several other mistresses:

1) Laura Bon at Stupinigi, who bore him two children:
* Stillborn child (1852-1852).
* Emanuela of Roverbella (6 September 1853 – 1896).

2) Baroness Vittoria Duplesis who bore him another daughter:
* Maria Savoiarda Projetti (1854–1885/1888).

3) Unknown mistress at Mondovì,
mother of:
* Donato Etna (15 June 1858 – 11 December 1938) who became a soldier during the First World War.

4) Virginia Rho at Turin, mother of two children:
* Vittorio di Rho (1861 – Turin, 10 October 1913). He became a notable photographer.
* Maria Pia di Rho (25 February 1866 – Vienna, 19 April 1947). Married to count Alessandro Montecuccoli.

5) Rosalinda Incoronata De Domenicis (1846–1916), mother of one daughter:
* Vittoria De Domenicis (1869–1935) who married doctor Alberto Benedetti (1870–1920), with issue.

6) Angela Rosa De Filippo, mother of:
* Actor Domenico Scarpetta (1876–1952)

==Honours and arms==
===Italian===
* Knight of the Order of the Annunciation, &quot;23 December 1836&quot;; Grand Master, &quot;23 March 1849&quot;
* Grand Cross of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, &quot;1836&quot;; Grand Master, &quot;23 March 1849&quot;
* Grand Master of the Military Order of Savoy
* Grand Master of the Order of the Crown of Italy
* Grand Master of the Civil Order of Savoy
* Gold Medal of Military Valour
* Silver Medal of Military Valour
* Medal of the Liberation of Rome (1849–1870)
* Commemorative Medal of Campaigns of Independence Wars
* Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy
* Tuscan Grand Ducal family: Grand Cross of the Order of St. Joseph

===Foreign===
** Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, &quot;1841&quot;
** Grand Cross of the Order of St. Stephen, &quot;1869&quot;
** Knight of the House Order of Fidelity, &quot;1864&quot;
** Grand Cross of the Order of the Zähringer Lion, &quot;1864&quot;
* : Knight of the Order of St. Hubert, &quot;1869&quot;
* : Grand Cordon of the Order of Leopold, &quot;25 July 1855&quot;
* : Knight of the Order of the Elephant, &quot;2 September 1861&quot;
* French Empire:
** Médaille militaire
** Commemorative medal of the 1859 Italian Campaign
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Kamehameha I, &quot;1865&quot;
* Mexican Empire: Grand Cross of the Order of the Mexican Eagle, with Collar, &quot;1865&quot;
* Kingdom of Prussia:
** Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle, &quot;12 January 1866&quot;; with Collar, &quot;1875&quot;
** Pour le Mérite (military), &quot;29 May 1872&quot;
* : Knight of the Order of the Rue Crown, &quot;1850&quot;
* Sweden-Norway: Knight of the Order of the Seraphim, &quot;30 August 1861&quot;
* Beylik of Tunis: Husainid Family Order
* : Stranger Knight of the Order of the Garter, &quot;5 December 1855&quot;
==Ancestry==
==See also==
* Unification of Italy
* Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour
* Giuseppe Garibaldi
* Victor Emmanuel II Monument
* Rome
* Kingdom of Italy
* Italian Islands of the Aegean
* Italian Libya
* Pietro Badoglio

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* old interpretations but useful on details; vol 1 goes to 1859]; volume 2 online covers 1859–62

===In Italian===
* 
* 

==External links==
* External link: Genealogy of recent members of the House of Savoy
* View of Venezia Square Victor Emmanuel II monument (archived 1 July 2006)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="0" end="18" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="101" end="107" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845435" start="151" end="167" title="King of Sardinia" label="King of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="194" end="211" title="Piedmont–Sardinia" label="Piedmont–Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="282" end="295" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="341" end="353" title="united Italy" label="united Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="441" end="446" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q928994" start="459" end="472" title="Pater Patriae" label="Pater Patriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="486" end="499" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q928994" start="545" end="569" title="Father of the Fatherland" label="Father of the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="589" end="594" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="616" end="651" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q234568" start="657" end="681" title="Maria Theresa of Austria (1801–1855)" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q920894" start="713" end="746" title="First Italian War of Independence" label="First Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="847" end="877" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694075" start="991" end="1010" title="Sardinian Expeditionary Corps in the Crimean War" label="expeditionary corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="1061" end="1072" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342758" start="1161" end="1183" title="Battle of the Chernaya" label="Battle of the Chernaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="1376" end="1395" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1472" end="1484" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="1542" end="1576" title="Second Italian War of Independence" label="Second Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="1602" end="1610" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="1662" end="1688" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="1708" end="1726" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="1768" end="1795" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1890" end="1894" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="1912" end="1924" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887932" start="2129" end="2152" title="Battle of Castelfidardo" label="Battle of Castelfidardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="2192" end="2207" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2217" end="2232" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q58905" start="2318" end="2323" title="Teano" label="Teano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="2443" end="2476" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="2500" end="2506" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="2596" end="2615" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="2619" end="2643" title="Capture of Rome" label="conquer the Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="2804" end="2812" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="2835" end="2862" title="Victor Emmanuel II Monument" label="Victor Emmanuel II Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="2887" end="2906" title="Altare della Patria" label="Altare della Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="2995" end="3008" title="Carlo Alberto" label="Carlo Alberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q234568" start="3034" end="3058" title="Maria Theresa of Austria (1801–1855)" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3167" end="3175" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q231856" start="3276" end="3295" title="Adelaide of Austria" label="Adelaide of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070615" start="3318" end="3331" title="Duke of Savoy" label="Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q920894" start="3388" end="3421" title="First Italian War of Independence" label="First Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q580417" start="3518" end="3527" title="Battle of Pastrengo" label="Pastrengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q938724" start="3542" end="3547" title="Battle of Goito" label="Goito"/>
<link wikidata="Q48202" start="3552" end="3559" title="Battle of Custoza (1848)" label="Custoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="3585" end="3601" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="King of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837787" start="3693" end="3709" title="Battle of Novara (1849)" label="Battle of Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q153500" start="3840" end="3848" title="Radetzky" label="Radetzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="3907" end="3932" title="Parliament" label="lower parliamentary house"/>
<link wikidata="Q469134" start="4067" end="4089" title="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Azeglio" label="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Azeglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="4242" end="4247" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="4359" end="4389" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911047" start="4394" end="4435" title="Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="4496" end="4510" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="4620" end="4639" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="5126" end="5138" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="5426" end="5437" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110818" start="5795" end="5820" title="Congress of Paris (1856)" label="Congress of Paris in 1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q632969" start="5929" end="5949" title="Plombières-les-Bains" label="Plombières-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="5954" end="5962" title="Lorraine (province)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q209857" start="6081" end="6108" title="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia" label="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="6152" end="6156" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="6161" end="6166" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="6418" end="6441" title="Franz Joseph of Austria" label="Franz Joseph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47614" start="6445" end="6456" title="Villafranca di Verona" label="Villafranca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="6490" end="6498" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="6580" end="6587" title="Veneto" label="Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="6860" end="6875" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="Treaty of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="7178" end="7190" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="7233" end="7247" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="7332" end="7350" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="7553" end="7571" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="7579" end="7605" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="7659" end="7686" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="7796" end="7808" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="8006" end="8012" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="8017" end="8023" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887932" start="8045" end="8068" title="battle of Castelfidardo" label="battle of Castelfidardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58905" start="8144" end="8149" title="Teano" label="Teano"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="8314" end="8327" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="8353" end="8366" title="Unification of Italy" label="unified Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="8454" end="8459" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="8502" end="8507" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="8509" end="8515" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="8521" end="8529" title="Trentino" label="Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="8639" end="8646" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="8654" end="8687" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="9283" end="9302" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9458" end="9466" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="9508" end="9523" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q598854" start="10326" end="10343" title="Statuto Albertino" label="Statuto Albertino"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="10553" end="10565" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="10618" end="10628" title="last rites" label="last rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="10651" end="10659" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="10687" end="10696" title="Umberto I" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q231856" start="10804" end="10823" title="Adelaide of Austria" label="Adelaide of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q923098" start="10872" end="10886" title="Princess Maria Clotilde of Savoy" label="Maria Clotilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q434077" start="10912" end="10927" title="Napoléon Joseph Charles Paul Bonaparte" label="Napoléon Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q701093" start="10978" end="10999" title="Prince Louis Napoléon" label="Prince Louis Napoléon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="11063" end="11070" title="Umberto I of Italy" label="Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="11090" end="11103" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135631" start="11133" end="11152" title="Margherita of Savoy" label="Margherita of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="11156" end="11162" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="11182" end="11195" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q240291" start="11208" end="11232" title="Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo" label="Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q271988" start="11243" end="11266" title="Maria Letizia Bonaparte" label="Maria Letizia Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880827" start="11270" end="11290" title="Prince Oddone, Duke of Montferrat" label="Oddone Eugenio Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868" start="11312" end="11322" title="Montferrat" label="Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q238487" start="11326" end="11335" title="Maria Pia of Savoy" label="Maria Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156175" start="11366" end="11383" title="Louis of Portugal" label="Louis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312981" start="11431" end="11447" title="Duke of Chablais" label="Duke of Chablais"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="11601" end="11607" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="11646" end="11660" title="morganatically" label="morganatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q276000" start="11684" end="11699" title="Rosa Vercellana" label="Rosa Vercellana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085" start="11753" end="11764" title="Piedmontese language" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827740" start="12231" end="12240" title="Laura Bon" label="Laura Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="12690" end="12695" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="12788" end="12794" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q567417" start="13157" end="13182" title="Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation" label="Order of the Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422957" start="13275" end="13310" title="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus" label="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559783" start="13392" end="13415" title="Old Military Order of Savoy" label="Military Order of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276941" start="13438" end="13465" title="Order of the Crown of Italy" label="Order of the Crown of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206967" start="13488" end="13508" title="Civil Order of Savoy" label="Civil Order of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042072" start="13511" end="13540" title="Gold Medal of Military Valour" label="Gold Medal of Military Valour"/>
<link wikidata="Q850170" start="13543" end="13574" title="Medal of Military Valor" label="Silver Medal of Military Valour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497512" start="13623" end="13676" title="Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy" label="Commemorative Medal of Campaigns of Independence Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497512" start="13679" end="13720" title="Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy" label="Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="13723" end="13748" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscan Grand Ducal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q177889" start="13769" end="13788" title="Order of Saint Joseph" label="Order of St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="13821" end="13847" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q285071" start="13888" end="13908" title="Order of St. Stephen of Hungary" label="Order of St. Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q474336" start="13944" end="13967" title="House Order of Fidelity" label="House Order of Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q688779" start="14008" end="14035" title="Order of the Zähringer Lion" label="Order of the Zähringer Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q699459" start="14072" end="14091" title="Order of St. Hubert" label="Order of St. Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q26126" start="14134" end="14150" title="Order of Leopold (Belgium)" label="Order of Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="14195" end="14216" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="14249" end="14262" title="Second French Empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465214" start="14267" end="14285" title="Médaille militaire" label="Médaille militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332265" start="14289" end="14337" title="Commemorative medal of the 1859 Italian Campaign" label="Commemorative medal of the 1859 Italian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759084" start="14361" end="14382" title="Royal Order of Kamehameha I" label="Order of Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q371334" start="14403" end="14417" title="Second Mexican Empire" label="Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14438" end="14464" title="Mexican Imperial Orders#Imperial Order of the Mexican Eagle" label="Order of the Mexican Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="14498" end="14516" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94145" start="14535" end="14559" title="Order of the Black Eagle" label="Order of the Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="14623" end="14637" title="Pour le Mérite" label="Pour le Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q659711" start="14692" end="14714" title="Order of the Rue Crown" label="Order of the Rue Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="14735" end="14748" title="Sweden-Norway" label="Sweden-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331130" start="14764" end="14785" title="Royal Order of the Seraphim" label="Order of the Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899891" start="14816" end="14831" title="Beylik of Tunis" label="Beylik of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="14882" end="14901" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="14959" end="14979" title="Unification of Italy" label="Unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="14982" end="15012" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="15015" end="15033" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="15036" end="15063" title="Victor Emmanuel II Monument" label="Victor Emmanuel II Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="15066" end="15070" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="15073" end="15089" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555185" start="15092" end="15121" title="Italian Islands of the Aegean" label="Italian Islands of the Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="15124" end="15137" title="Italian Libya" label="Italian Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="15140" end="15155" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69820" wikidata="Q6673452" url="?curid=69820" title="Long boom">
<text>Long boom refers to various periods of economic growth, most commonly:

* The post–World War II economic expansion
* The 1990s United States boom
* The mid 1980s–2000s period, contemporary with the Great Moderation
* 1991-2020 Australian economic boom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2634334" start="78" end="114" title="post–World War II economic expansion" label="post–World War II economic expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586468" start="121" end="145" title="1990s United States boom" label="1990s United States boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599587" start="198" end="214" title="Great Moderation" label="Great Moderation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154521" start="227" end="251" title="Economy of Australia" label="Australian economic boom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69827" wikidata="Q229006" url="?curid=69827" title="Victor Emmanuel">
<text>Victor Emmanuel may refer to:
* Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia (1759–1824), Duke of Savoy and King of Sardinia
* Victor Emmanuel II of Italy (1820–1878), King of Sardinia and later King of Italy
* Victor Emmanuel III of Italy (1869–1947), King of Italy

==See also==
*Prince Vittorio Emanuele, Count of Turin (1870–1946)
*Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples (1937–2024)
*Víctor Manuel (born 1947), Spanish singer
*Altare della Patria or National Monument to Victor Emmanuel II, a building in Rome, Italy
*Vittorio Emanuele (Rome Metro), a train station in Rome</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229006" start="0" end="15" title="Victor Emmanuel" label="Victor Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q175250" start="32" end="61" title="Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia" label="Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="112" end="139" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="196" end="224" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279887" start="267" end="307" title="Prince Vittorio Emanuele, Count of Turin" label="Prince Vittorio Emanuele, Count of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="321" end="356" title="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples" label="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176413" start="370" end="383" title="Víctor Manuel" label="Víctor Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="413" end="432" title="Altare della Patria" label="Altare della Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230952" start="504" end="534" title="Vittorio Emanuele (Rome Metro)" label="Vittorio Emanuele (Rome Metro)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69830" wikidata="Q207416" url="?curid=69830" title="Bartolomé de las Casas">
<text>Bartolomé de las Casas, OP ( ; ); 11 November 1484 – 18 July 1566) was a Spanish clergyman, writer, and activist best known for his work as an historian and social reformer. He arrived in Hispaniola as a layman, then became a Dominican friar. He was appointed as the first resident Bishop of Chiapas, and the first officially appointed &quot;Protector of the Indians&quot;. His extensive writings, the most famous being &quot;A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies&quot; and &quot;Historia de Las Indias&quot;, chronicle the first decades of colonization of the Caribbean islands. He described and railed against the atrocities committed by the conquistadores against the Indigenous peoples.

Arriving as one of the first Spanish settlers in the Americas, Las Casas initially participated in the colonial economy built on forced Indigenous labor, but eventually felt compelled to oppose the abuses committed by European colonists against the Indigenous population. In 1515 he gave up his Native American laborers and &quot;encomienda&quot;. He then advocated, before Charles V, on behalf of rights for the natives. In his early writings, he advocated the use of African slaves to replace Indigenous labor. He did so without knowing that the Portuguese were carrying out &quot;brutal and unjust wars in the name of spreading the faith&quot;. Later in life, he retracted this position, as he regarded both forms of slavery as equally wrong.

In 1522, Las Casas tried to launch a new kind of peaceful colonialism on the coast of Venezuela, but this venture failed. He then entered the Dominican Order and became a friar, leaving public life for a decade. He traveled to Central America, acting as a missionary among the Maya of Guatemala and participating in debates among colonial churchmen about how best to bring the natives to the Christian faith.

Travelling back to Spain to recruit more missionaries, he continued lobbying for the abolition of the &quot;encomienda&quot;, gaining an important victory by the passage of the New Laws in 1542. He was appointed Bishop of Chiapas, but served only for a short time before he was forced to return to Spain because of resistance to the New Laws by the &quot;encomenderos&quot;, and conflicts with Spanish settlers because of his pro-Indian policies and activist religious stance. He served in the Spanish court for the remainder of his life; there he held great influence over Indies-related issues. In 1550, he participated in the Valladolid debate, in which Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda argued that the Indians were less than human, and required Spanish masters to become civilized. Las Casas maintained that they were fully human, and that forcefully subjugating them was unjustifiable.

Las Casas spent 50 years of his life actively fighting slavery and the colonial abuse of Indigenous peoples, especially by trying to convince the Spanish court to adopt a more humane policy of colonization. Although he did not completely succeed in changing Spanish views on colonization, his efforts did result in improvement of the legal status of the natives, and in an increased colonial focus on the ethics of colonialism.

Following his death in 1566, Las Casas was widely venerated as a holy figure, resulting in the opening of his cause for canonization in the Catholic Church.

== Life and times ==

=== Background and arrival in the New World ===
Bartolomé de las Casas was born in Seville&#x27; on 11 November 1484. For centuries, Las Casas&#x27;s birthdate was believed to be 1474; however, in the 1970s, scholars conducting archival work demonstrated this to be an error, after uncovering in the &quot;Archivo General de Indias&quot; records of a contemporary lawsuit that demonstrated he was born a decade later than had been supposed. Subsequent biographers and authors have generally accepted and reflected this revision. His father, Pedro de las Casas, a merchant, descended from one of the families that had migrated from France to found the Christian Seville; his family also spelled the name &quot;Casaus&quot;. According to one biographer, his family was of &quot;converso&quot; heritage, although others refer to them as ancient Christians who migrated from France. Following the testimony of Las Casas&#x27;s biographer Antonio de Remesal, tradition has it that Las Casas studied a &quot;licentiate&quot; at Salamanca, but Las Casas does not say so in his own writings.

Las Casas&#x27;s first encounter with Indigenous peoples happened before he even sailed to the Americas. In his &quot;Historia de las Indias&quot;, he wrote of Christopher Columbus&#x27; return to Seville, in 1493. Las Casas recorded having seen &quot;seven Indians&quot; in the entourage of Christopher Columbus, being exhibited in the vicinity of the Iglesia de San Nicolás de Bari, along with &quot;beautiful green parrots, vibrant in color&quot; and Indigenous artifacts. Pedro de Las Casas, Bartolomé&#x27;s merchant father, left in Columbus&#x27; second expedition. Upon his return, in 1499, Pedro de Las Casas brought to his son &quot;a young Amerinidian.&quot;

Three years later, in 1502, Las Casas immigrated with his father to the island of Hispaniola, on the expedition of Nicolás de Ovando. Las Casas became a &quot;hacendado&quot; and slave owner, receiving a piece of land in the province of Cibao. He participated in slave raids and military expeditions against the native Taíno population of Hispaniola. In 1506, he returned to Spain and completed his studies of canon law at Salamanca. That same year, he was ordained a deacon and then traveled to Rome, where he was ordained a secular priest in 1507.

In September 1510, a group of Dominican friars arrived in Santo Domingo led by Pedro de Córdoba; appalled by the injustices they saw committed by the slave owners against the Indians, they decided to deny slave owners the right to confession. Las Casas was among those denied confession for this reason. In December 1511, a Dominican preacher Fray Antonio de Montesinos preached a fiery sermon that implicated the colonists in the genocide of the native peoples. He is said to have preached: &quot;Tell me by what right of justice do you hold these Indians in such a cruel and horrible servitude? On what authority have you waged such detestable wars against these people who dealt quietly and peacefully on their own lands? Wars in which you have destroyed such an infinite number of them by homicides and slaughters never heard of before. Why do you keep them so oppressed and exhausted, without giving them enough to eat or curing them of the sicknesses they incur from the excessive labor you give them, and they die, or rather you kill them, in order to extract and acquire gold every day.&quot; Las Casas himself argued against the Dominicans in favor of the justice of the encomienda. The colonists, led by Diego Columbus, dispatched a complaint against the Dominicans to the King, and the Dominicans were recalled from Hispaniola.

=== Conquest of Cuba and change of heart ===

In 1513, as a chaplain, Las Casas participated in Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar&#x27;s and Pánfilo de Narváez&#x27; conquest of Cuba. He participated in campaigns at Bayamo and Camagüey and in the massacre of Hatuey. He witnessed many atrocities committed by Spaniards against the native Ciboney and Guanahatabey peoples. He later wrote: &quot;I saw here cruelty on a scale no living being has ever seen or expects to see.&quot; Las Casas and his friend Pedro de la Rentería were awarded a joint encomienda which was rich in gold and slaves, located on the Arimao River close to Cienfuegos. During the next few years, he divided his time between being a colonist and his duties as an ordained priest.

In 1514, Las Casas was studying a passage in the book Ecclesiasticus (Sirach) 34:18–22 for a Pentecost sermon and pondering its meaning. Las Casas was finally convinced that all the actions of the Spanish in the New World had been illegal and that they constituted a great injustice. He made up his mind to give up his slaves and encomienda, and started to preach that other colonists should do the same. When his preaching met with resistance, he realized that he would have to go to Spain to fight there against the enslavement and abuse of the native people. Aided by Pedro de Córdoba and accompanied by Antonio de Montesinos, he left for Spain in September 1515, arriving in Seville in November.

=== Las Casas and King Ferdinand ===

Las Casas arrived in Spain with the plan of convincing the King to end the encomienda system. This was easier thought than done, as most of the people who were in positions of power were themselves either encomenderos or otherwise profiting from the influx of wealth from the Indies. In the winter of 1515, King Ferdinand lay ill in Plasencia, but Las Casas was able to get a letter of introduction to the king from the Archbishop of Seville, Diego de Deza. On Christmas Eve of 1515, Las Casas met the monarch and discussed the situation in the Indies with him; the king agreed to hear him out in more detail at a later date. While waiting, Las Casas produced a report that he presented to the Bishop of Burgos, Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca, and secretary Lope Conchillos, who were functionaries in complete charge of the royal policies regarding the Indies; both were encomenderos. They were not impressed by his account, and Las Casas had to find a different avenue of change. He put his faith in his coming audience with the king, but it never came, for King Ferdinand died on 25 January 1516.

The regency of Castile passed on to Ximenez Cisneros and Adrian of Utrecht who were guardians for the under-age Prince Charles. Las Casas was resolved to see Prince Charles who resided in Flanders, but on his way there he passed Madrid and delivered to the regents a written account of the situation in the Indies and his proposed remedies. This was his &quot;Memorial de Remedios para Las Indias&quot; of 1516. In this early work, Las Casas advocated importing black slaves from Africa to relieve the suffering Indians, a stance he later retracted, becoming an advocate for the Africans in the colonies as well. This shows that Las Casas&#x27;s first concern was not to end slavery as an institution, but to end the physical abuse and suffering of the Indians. In keeping with the legal and moral doctrine of the time, Las Casas believed that slavery could be justified if it was the result of Just War, and at the time he assumed that the enslavement of Africans was justified. Worried by Las Casas&#x27; descriptions of the situation in the Indies, Cardinal Cisneros decided to send a group of Hieronymite monks to take over the government of the islands.

=== Protector of the Indians ===
Three Hieronymite monks, Luis de Figueroa, Bernardino de Manzanedo, and Alonso de Santo Domingo, were selected as commissioners to take over the authority of the Indies. Las Casas had a considerable part in selecting them and writing the instructions under which their new government would be instated, largely based on Las Casas&#x27;s &quot;memorial&quot;. Las Casas himself was granted the official title of Protector of the Indians, and given a yearly salary of one hundred pesos. In this new office Las Casas was expected to serve as an advisor to the new governors with regard to Indian issues, to speak the case of the Indians in court, and send reports back to Spain. Las Casas and the commissioners traveled to Santo Domingo on separate ships, and Las Casas arrived two weeks later than the Hieronimytes. During this time the Hieronimytes had time to form a more pragmatic view of the situation than the one advocated by Las Casas; their position was precarious as every encomendero on the Islands was fiercely against any attempts to curtail their use of native labor. Consequently, the commissioners were unable to take any radical steps towards improving the situation of the natives. They did revoke some encomiendas from Spaniards, especially those who were living in Spain and not on the islands themselves; they even repossessed the encomienda of Fonseca, the Bishop of Burgos. They also carried out an inquiry into the Indian question at which all the encomenderos asserted that the Indians were quite incapable of living freely without their supervision. Las Casas was disappointed and infuriated. When he accused the Hieronymites of being complicit in kidnapping Indians, the relationship between Las Casas and the commissioners broke down. Las Casas had become a hated figure by Spaniards all over the islands, and he had to seek refuge in the Dominican monastery. The Dominicans had been the first to indict the encomenderos, and they continued to chastise them and refuse the absolution of confession to slave owners, and even stated that priests who took their confession were committing a mortal sin. In May 1517, Las Casas was forced to travel back to Spain to denounce to the regent the failure of the Hieronymite reforms. Only after Las Casas had left did the Hieronymites begin to congregate Indians into towns similar to what Las Casas had wanted.

=== Las Casas and Emperor Charles V: The peasant colonization scheme ===

When he arrived in Spain, his former protector, regent, and Cardinal Ximenez Cisneros, was ill and had become tired of Las Casas&#x27;s tenacity. Las Casas resolved to meet instead with the young king Charles I. Ximenez died on 8 November, and the young King arrived in Valladolid on 25 November 1517. Las Casas managed to secure the support of the king&#x27;s Flemish courtiers, including the powerful Chancellor Jean de la Sauvage. Las Casas&#x27;s influence turned the favor of the court against Secretary Conchillos and Bishop Fonseca. Sauvage spoke highly of Las Casas to the king, who appointed Las Casas and Sauvage to write a new plan for reforming the governmental system of the Indies.

Las Casas suggested a plan where the encomienda would be abolished and Indians would be congregated into self-governing townships to become tribute-paying vassals of the king. He still suggested that the loss of Indian labor for the colonists could be replaced by allowing importation of African slaves. Another important part of the plan was to introduce a new kind of sustainable colonization, and Las Casas advocated supporting the migration of Spanish peasants to the Indies where they would introduce small-scale farming and agriculture, a kind of colonization that did not rely on resource depletion and Indian labor. Las Casas worked to recruit a large number of peasants who would want to travel to the islands, where they would be given lands to farm, cash advances, and the tools and resources they needed to establish themselves there. The recruitment drive was difficult, and during the process the power relation shifted at court when Chancellor Sauvage, Las Casas&#x27;s main supporter, unexpectedly died. In the end a much smaller number of peasant families were sent than originally planned, and they were supplied with insufficient provisions and no support secured for their arrival. Those who survived the journey were ill-received, and had to work hard even to survive in the hostile colonies. Las Casas was devastated by the tragic result of his peasant migration scheme, which he felt had been thwarted by his enemies. He decided instead to undertake a personal venture which would not rely on the support of others, and fought to win a land grant on the American mainland which was in its earliest stage of colonization.

=== The Cumaná venture ===

Following a suggestion by his friend and mentor Pedro de Córdoba, Las Casas petitioned a land grant to be allowed to establish a settlement in northern Venezuela at Cumaná. Founded in 1515, there was already a small Franciscan monastery in Cumana, and a Dominican one at Chiribichi, but the monks there were being harassed by Spaniards operating slave raids from the nearby Island of Cubagua. To make the proposal palatable to the king, Las Casas had to incorporate the prospect of profits for the royal treasury. He suggested fortifying the northern coast of Venezuela, establishing ten royal forts to protect the Indians and starting up a system of trade in gold and pearls. All the Indian slaves of the New World should be brought to live in these towns and become tribute paying subjects to the king. To secure the grant, Las Casas had to go through a long court fight against Bishop Fonseca and his supporters Gonzalo de Oviedo and Bishop Quevedo of Tierra Firme. Las Casas&#x27;s supporters were Diego Columbus and the new chancellor Gattinara. Las Casas&#x27;s enemies slandered him to the king, accusing him of planning to escape with the money to Genoa or Rome. In 1520 Las Casas&#x27;s concession was finally granted, but it was a much smaller grant than he had initially proposed; he was also denied the possibilities of extracting gold and pearls, which made it difficult for him to find investors for the venture. Las Casas committed himself to producing 15,000 ducats of annual revenue, increasing to 60,000 after ten years, and to erecting three Christian towns of at least 40 settlers each. Some privileges were also granted to the initial 50 shareholders in Las Casas&#x27;s scheme. The king also promised not to give any encomienda grants in Las Casas&#x27;s area. That said, finding fifty men willing to invest 200 ducats each and three years of unpaid work proved impossible for Las Casas. He ended up leaving in November 1520 with just a small group of peasants, paying for the venture with money borrowed from his brother in-law.

Arriving in Puerto Rico, in January 1521, he received the terrible news that the Dominican convent at Chiribichi had been sacked by Indians, and that the Spaniards of the islands had launched a punitive expedition, led by Gonzalo de Ocampo, into the very heart of the territory that Las Casas wanted to colonize peacefully. The Indians had been provoked to attack the settlement of the monks because of the repeated slave raids by Spaniards operating from Cubagua. As Ocampo&#x27;s ships began returning with slaves from the land Las Casas had been granted, he went to Hispaniola to complain to the Audiencia. After several months of negotiations Las Casas set sail alone; the peasants he had brought had deserted, and he arrived in his colony already ravaged by Spaniards.

Las Casas worked there in adverse conditions for the following months, being constantly harassed by the Spanish pearl fishers of Cubagua island who traded slaves for alcohol with the natives. Early in 1522, Las Casas left the settlement to complain to the authorities. While he was gone the native Caribs attacked the settlement of Cumaná, burned it to the ground, and killed four of Las Casas&#x27;s men. He returned to Hispaniola in January 1522, and heard the news of the massacre. The rumours even included him among the dead. To make matters worse, his detractors used the event as evidence of the need to pacify the Indians using military means.

===Las Casas as a Dominican friar===
Devastated, Las Casas reacted by entering the Dominican monastery of Santa Cruz in Santo Domingo as a novice in 1522 and finally taking holy vows as a Dominican friar in 1523. There he continued his theological studies, being particularly attracted to Thomist philosophy. He oversaw the construction of a monastery in Puerto Plata on the north coast of Hispaniola, subsequently serving as prior of the convent. In 1527 he began working on his &quot;History of the Indies&quot;, in which he reported much of what he had witnessed first hand in the conquest and colonization of New Spain. In 1531, he wrote a letter to Garcia Manrique, Count of Osorno, protesting again the mistreatment of the Indians and advocating a return to his original reform plan of 1516. In 1531, a complaint was sent by the encomenderos of Hispaniola that Las Casas was again accusing them of mortal sins from the pulpit. In 1533 he contributed to the establishment of a peace treaty between the Spanish and the rebel Taíno band of chief Enriquillo. In 1534, Las Casas made an attempt to travel to Peru to observe the first stages of conquest of that region by Francisco Pizarro. His party made it as far as Panama, but had to turn back to Nicaragua due to adverse weather. Lingering for a while in the Dominican convent of Granada, he got into conflict with Rodrigo de Contreras, Governor of Nicaragua, when Las Casas vehemently opposed slaving expeditions by the Governor. In 1536, Las Casas followed a number of friars to Guatemala, where they began to prepare to undertake a mission among the Maya Indians. They stayed in the convent founded some years earlier by Fray Domingo Betanzos and studied the Kʼicheʼ language with Bishop Francisco Marroquín, before traveling into the interior region called Tuzulutlan, &quot;The Land of War&quot;, in 1537.

Also in 1536, before venturing into Tuzulutlan, Las Casas went to Oaxaca, Mexico, to participate in a series of discussions and debates among the bishops of the Dominican and Franciscan orders. The two orders had very different approaches to the conversion of the Indians. The Franciscans used a method of mass conversion, sometimes baptizing many thousands of Indians in a day. This method was championed by prominent Franciscans such as Toribio de Benavente, known as &quot;Motolinia&quot;, and Las Casas made many enemies among the Franciscans for arguing that conversions made without adequate understanding were invalid. Las Casas wrote a treatise called &quot;De unico vocationis modo&quot; (On the Only Way of Conversion) based on the missionary principles he had used in Guatemala. Motolinia would later be a fierce critic of Las Casas, accusing him of being all talk and no action when it came to converting the Indians. As a direct result of the debates between the Dominicans and Franciscans and spurred on by Las Casas&#x27;s treatise, Pope Paul III promulgated the Bull &quot;Sublimis Deus&quot;, which stated that the Indians were rational beings and should be brought peacefully to the faith as such.

Las Casas returned to Guatemala in 1537 wanting to employ his new method of conversion based on two principles: 1) to preach the Gospel to all men and treat them as equals, and 2) to assert that conversion must be voluntary and based on knowledge and understanding of the faith. It was important for Las Casas that this method be tested without meddling from secular colonists, so he chose a territory in the heart of Guatemala where there were no previous colonies and where the natives were considered fierce and war-like. Because the land had not been possible to conquer by military means, the governor of Guatemala, Alonso de Maldonado, agreed to sign a contract promising that if the venture was successful he would not establish any new encomiendas in the area. Las Casas&#x27;s group of friars established a Dominican presence in Rabinal, Sacapulas, and Cobán. Through the efforts of Las Casas&#x27;s missionaries the so-called &quot;Land of War&quot; came to be called &quot;Verapaz&quot;, &quot;True Peace&quot;. Las Casas&#x27;s strategy was to teach Christian songs to merchant Indian Christians who then ventured into the area. In this way he was successful in converting several native chiefs, among them those of Atitlán and Chichicastenango, and in building several churches in the territory named Alta Verapaz. These congregated a group of Christian Indians in the location of what is now the town of Rabinal. In 1538 Las Casas was recalled from his mission by Bishop Marroquín who wanted him to go to Mexico and then on to Spain to seek more Dominicans to assist in the mission. Las Casas left Guatemala for Mexico, where he stayed for more than a year before setting out for Spain in 1540.

=== The New Laws ===
In Spain, Las Casas started securing official support for the Guatemalan mission, and he managed to get a royal decree forbidding secular intrusion into the Verapaces for the following five years. He also informed the Theologians of Salamanca, led by Francisco de Vitoria, of the mass baptism practiced by the Franciscans, resulting in a dictum condemning the practice as sacrilegious.

But apart from the clerical business, Las Casas had also traveled to Spain for his own purpose: to continue the struggle against the colonists&#x27; mistreatment of the Indians. The encomienda had, in fact, legally been abolished in 1523, but it had been reinstituted in 1526, and in 1530 a general ordinance against slavery was reversed by the Crown. For this reason it was a pressing matter for Bartolomé de las Casas to plead once again for the Indians with Charles V who was by now Holy Roman Emperor and no longer a boy. He wrote a letter asking for permission to stay in Spain a little longer to argue for the emperor that conversion and colonization were best achieved by peaceful means.

When the hearings started in 1542, Las Casas presented a narrative of atrocities against the natives of the Indies that would later be published in 1552 as &quot;A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies&quot;. Before a council consisting of Cardinal García de Loaysa, the Count of Osorno, Bishop Fuenleal, and several members of the Council of the Indies, Las Casas argued that the only solution to the problem was to remove all Indians from the care of secular Spaniards, by abolishing the encomienda system and putting them instead directly under the Crown as royal tribute-paying subjects. On 20 November 1542, the emperor signed the New Laws abolishing the encomiendas and removing certain officials from the Council of the Indies. The New Laws made it illegal to use Indians as carriers, except where no other transport was available, it prohibited all taking of Indians as slaves, and it instated a gradual abolition of the encomienda system, with each encomienda reverting to the Crown at the death of its holders. It also exempted the few surviving Indians of Hispaniola, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Jamaica from tribute and all requirements of personal service. However, the reforms were so unpopular in the New World that riots broke out and threats were made against Las Casas&#x27;s life. The Viceroy of New Spain, himself an encomendero, decided not to implement the laws in his domain, and instead sent a party to Spain to argue against the laws on behalf of the encomenderos. Las Casas himself was also not satisfied with the laws, as they were not drastic enough and the encomienda system was going to function for many years still under the gradual abolition plan. He drafted a suggestion for an amendment arguing that the laws against slavery were formulated in such a way that it presupposed that violent conquest would still be carried out, and he encouraged once again beginning a phase of peaceful colonization by peasants instead of soldiers.

=== Bishop of Chiapas ===
Before Las Casas returned to Spain, he was also appointed as Bishop of Chiapas, a newly established diocese of which he took possession in 1545 upon his return to the New World. He was consecrated in the Dominican Church of San Pablo on 30 March 1544. As Archbishop Loaysa strongly disliked Las Casas, the ceremony was officiated by Loaysa&#x27;s nephew, Diego de Loaysa, Bishop of Modruš, with Pedro Torres, Titular Bishop of &quot;Arbanum&quot;, and Cristóbal de Pedraza, Bishop of Comayagua, as co-consecrators. As a bishop Las Casas was involved in frequent conflicts with the encomenderos and secular laity of his diocese: among the landowners there was the conquistador Bernal Díaz del Castillo. In a pastoral letter issued on 20 March 1545, Las Casas refused absolution to slave owners and encomenderos even on their death bed, unless all their slaves had been set free and their property returned to them. Las Casas furthermore threatened that anyone who mistreated Indians within his jurisdiction would be excommunicated. He also came into conflict with the Bishop of Guatemala Francisco Marroquín, to whose jurisdiction the diocese had previously belonged. To Las Casas&#x27;s dismay Bishop Marroquín openly defied the New Laws. While bishop, Las Casas was the principal consecrator of Antonio de Valdivieso, Bishop of Nicaragua (1544).

The New Laws were finally repealed on 20 October 1545, and riots broke out against Las Casas, with shots being fired against him by angry colonists. After a year he had made himself so unpopular among the Spaniards of the area that he had to leave. Having been summoned to a meeting among the bishops of New Spain to be held in Mexico City on 12 January 1546, he left his diocese, never to return. At the meeting, probably after lengthy reflection, and realizing that the New Laws were lost in Mexico, Las Casas presented a moderated view on the problems of confession and restitution of property, Archbishop Juan de Zumárraga of Mexico and Bishop Julián Garcés of Puebla agreed completely with his new moderate stance, Bishop Vasco de Quiroga of Michoacán had minor reservations, and Bishops Francisco Marroquín of Guatemala and Juan Lopez de Zárate of Oaxaca did not object. This resulted in a new resolution to be presented to viceroy Mendoza. His last act as Bishop of Chiapas was writing a &quot;confesionario&quot;, a manual for the administration of the sacrament of confession in his diocese, still refusing absolution to unrepentant encomenderos. Las Casas appointed a vicar for his diocese and set out for Europe in December 1546, arriving in Lisbon in April 1547 and in Spain on November 1547.

=== The Valladolid debate ===
Las Casas returned to Spain, leaving behind many conflicts and unresolved issues. Arriving in Spain he was met by a barrage of accusations, many of them based on his Confesionario and its 12 rules, which many of his opponents found to be in essence a denial of the legitimacy of Spanish rule of its colonies, and hence a form of treason. The Crown had for example received a fifth of the large number of slaves taken in the recent Mixtón War, and so could not be held clean of guilt under Las Casas&#x27;s strict rules. In 1548, the Crown decreed that all copies of Las Casas&#x27;s Confesionario be burnt, and his Franciscan adversary, Motolinia, obliged and sent back a report to Spain. Las Casas defended himself by writing two treatises on the &quot;Just Title&quot; – arguing that the only legality with which the Spaniards could claim titles over realms in the New World was through peaceful proselytizing. All warfare was illegal and unjust and only through the papal mandate of peacefully bringing Christianity to heathen peoples could &quot;Just Titles&quot; be acquired.

As a part of Las Casas&#x27;s defense by offense, he had to argue against Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda. Sepúlveda was a doctor of theology and law who, in his book &quot;Democrates Alter, sive de justis causis apud Indos&quot; (Another Democrates, or A New Democrates, or on the Just Causes of War against the Indians) had argued that some native peoples were incapable of ruling themselves and should be pacified forcefully. The book was deemed unsound for publication by the theologians of Salamanca and Alcalá for containing unsound doctrine, but the pro-encomendero faction seized on Sepúlveda as their intellectual champion.

To settle the issues, a formal debate was organized, the famous Valladolid debate, which took place in 1550–51 with Sepúlveda and Las Casas each presenting their arguments in front of a council of jurists and theologians. First Sepúlveda read the conclusions of his &quot;Democrates Alter&quot;, and then the council listened to Las Casas read his counterarguments in the form of an &quot;Apología&quot;. Sepúlveda argued that the subjugation of certain Indians was warranted because of their sins against Natural Law; that their low level of civilization required civilized masters to maintain social order; that they should be made Christian and that this in turn required them to be pacified; and that only the Spanish could defend weak Indians against the abuses of the stronger ones. Las Casas countered that the scriptures did not in fact support war against all heathens, only against certain Canaanite tribes; that the Indians were not at all uncivilized nor lacking social order; that peaceful mission was the only true way of converting the natives; and finally that some weak Indians suffering at the hands of stronger ones was preferable to all Indians suffering at the hands of Spaniards.

The judge, Fray Domingo de Soto, summarised the arguments. Sepúlveda addressed Las Casas&#x27;s arguments with twelve refutations, which were again countered by Las Casas. The judges then deliberated on the arguments presented for several months before coming to a verdict. The verdict was inconclusive, and both debaters claimed that they had won.

Sepúlveda&#x27;s arguments contributed to the policy of &quot;war by fire and blood&quot; that the Third Mexican Provincial Council implemented in 1585 during the Chichimeca War. According to Lewis Hanke, while Sepúlveda became the hero of the conquistadors, his success was short-lived, and his works were never published in Spain again during his lifetime.

Las Casas&#x27;s ideas had a more lasting impact on the decisions of the king, Philip II, as well as on history and human rights. Las Casas&#x27;s criticism of the encomienda system contributed to its replacement with reducciones. His testimonies on the peaceful nature of the Native Americans also encouraged nonviolent policies concerning the religious conversions of the Indians in New Spain and Peru. It also helped convince more missionaries to come to the Americas to study the indigenous people, such as Bernardino de Sahagún, who learned the native languages to discover more about their cultures and civilizations.

The impact of Las Casas&#x27;s doctrine was also limited. In 1550, the king had ordered that the conquest should cease, because the Valladolid debate was to decide whether the war was just or not. The government&#x27;s orders were hardly respected; conquistadors such as Pedro de Valdivia went on to wage war in Chile during the first half of the 1550s. Expanding the Spanish territory in the New World was allowed again in May 1556, and a decade later, Spain started its conquest of the Philippines.

=== Later years and death ===

Having resigned the Bishopric of Chiapas, Las Casas spent the rest of his life working closely with the imperial court in matters relating to the Indies. In 1551 he rented a cell at the College of San Gregorio, where he lived with his assistant and friend Fray Rodrigo de Ladrada. He continued working as a kind of procurator for the natives of the Indies, many of whom directed petitions to him to speak to the emperor on their behalf. Sometimes indigenous nobility even related their cases to him in Spain, for example, the Nahua noble Francisco Tenamaztle from Nochistlán. His influence at court was so great that some even considered that he had the final word in choosing the members of the Council of the Indies.

In 1552, Las Casas published &quot;A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies&quot;. This book, written a decade earlier and sent to the attention of then-prince Philip II of Spain, contained accounts of the abuses committed by some Spaniards against Native Americans during the early stages of colonization. In 1555 his old Franciscan adversary Toribio de Benavente Motolinia wrote a letter in which he described Las Casas as an ignorant, arrogant troublemaker. Benavente described indignantly how Las Casas had once denied baptism to an aging Indian who had walked many leagues to receive it, only on the grounds that he did not believe that the man had received sufficient doctrinal instruction. This letter, which reinvoked the old conflict over the requirements for the sacrament of baptism between the two orders, was intended to bring Las Casas in disfavour. However, it did not succeed.

One matter in which he invested much effort was the political situation of the Viceroyalty of Peru. In Peru, power struggles between conquistadors and the viceroy became an open civil war in which the conquistadors led by Gonzalo Pizarro rebelled against the New Laws and defeated and executed the viceroy Blasco Núñez Vela in 1546. The emperor sent Pedro de la Gasca, a friend of Las Casas, to reinstate the rule of law, and he in turn defeated Pizarro. To restabilize the political situation the encomenderos started pushing not only for the repeal of the New Laws, but for turning the encomiendas into perpetual patrimony of the encomenderos – the worst possible outcome from Las Casas&#x27;s point of view. The encomenderos offered to buy the rights to the encomiendas from the Crown, and Charles V was inclined to accept since his wars had left him in deep economic troubles. Las Casas worked hard to convince the emperor that it would be a bad economic decision, that it would return the viceroyalty to the brink of open rebellion, and could result in the Crown losing the colony entirely. The emperor, probably because of the doubts caused by Las Casas&#x27;s arguments, never took a final decision on the issue of the encomiendas.

In 1561, he finished his &quot;Historia de las Indias&quot; and signed it over to the College of San Gregorio, stipulating that it could not be published until after forty years. In fact it was not published for 314 years, until 1875. He also had to repeatedly defend himself against accusations of treason: someone, possibly Sepúlveda, denounced him to the Spanish Inquisition, but nothing came from the case. Las Casas also appeared as a witness in the case of the Inquisition for his friend Archbishop Bartolomé Carranza de Miranda, who had been falsely accused of heresy. In 1565, he wrote his last will, signing over his immense library to the college. Bartolomé de Las Casas died on 18 July 1566, in Madrid.

== Works ==

=== &quot;Memorial de Remedios para las Indias&quot; ===
The text, written 1516, starts by describing its purpose: to present &quot;The remedies that seem necessary in order that the evil and harm that exists in the Indies cease, and that God and our Lord the Prince may draw greater benefits than hitherto, and that the republic may be better preserved and consoled.&quot;

Las Casas&#x27;s first proposed remedy was a complete moratorium on the use of Indian labor in the Indies until such time as better regulations of it were set in place. This was meant simply to halt the decimation of the Indian population and to give the surviving Indians time to reconstitute themselves. Las Casas feared that at the rate the exploitation was proceeding it would be too late to hinder their annihilation unless action were taken rapidly. The second was a change in the labor policy so that instead of a colonist owning the labor of specific Indians, he would have a right to man-hours, to be carried out by no specific persons. This required the establishment of self-governing Indian communities on the land of colonists – who would themselves organize to provide the labor for their patron. The colonist would only have rights to a certain portion of the total labor, so that a part of the Indians were always resting and taking care of the sick. He proposed 12 other remedies, all having the specific aim of improving the situation for the Indians and limiting the powers that colonists were able to exercise over them.

The second part of the &quot;Memorial&quot; described suggestions for the social and political organization of Indian communities relative to colonial ones. Las Casas advocated the dismantlement of the city of Asunción and the subsequent gathering of Indians into communities of about 1,000 Indians to be situated as satellites of Spanish towns or mining areas. Here, Las Casas argued, Indians could be better governed, better taught and indoctrinated in the Christian faith, and would be easier to protect from abuse than if they were in scattered settlements. Each town would have a royal hospital built with four wings in the shape of a cross, where up to 200 sick Indians could be cared for at a time. He described in detail social arrangements, distribution of work, how provisions would be divided and even how table manners were to be introduced. Regarding expenses, he argued that &quot;this should not seem expensive or difficult, because after all, everything comes from them [the Indians] and they work for it and it is theirs.&quot; He even drew up a budget of each pueblo&#x27;s expenses to cover wages for administrators, clerics, Bachelors of Latin, doctors, surgeons, pharmacists, advocates, ranchers, miners, muleteers, hospitalers, pig herders, fishermen, etc.

=== &quot;A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies&quot; ===
&quot;A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies&quot; () is an account written in 1542 (published in Seville in 1552) about the mistreatment of the indigenous peoples of the Americas in colonial times and sent to then-Prince Philip II of Spain.
One of the stated purposes for writing the account was Las Casas&#x27;s fear of Spain coming under divine punishment and his concern for the souls of the native peoples. The account was one of the first attempts by a Spanish writer of the colonial era to depict the unfair treatment that the indigenous people endured during the early stages of the Spanish conquest of the Greater Antilles, particularly the island of Hispaniola. Las Casas&#x27;s point of view can be described as being heavily against some of the Spanish methods of colonization, which, as he described them, inflicted great losses on the indigenous occupants of the islands. In addition, his critique towards the colonizers served to bring awareness to his audience on the true meaning of Christianity, to dismantle any misconceptions on evangelization. His account was largely responsible for the adoption of the New Laws of 1542, which abolished native slavery for the first time in European colonial history and led to the Valladolid debate.

The book became an important element in the creation and propagation of the so-called Black Legend – the tradition of describing the Spanish empire as exceptionally morally corrupt and violent. It was republished several times by groups that were critical of the Spanish realm for political or religious reasons. The first edition in translation was published in Dutch in 1578, during the religious persecution of Dutch Protestants by the Spanish crown, followed by editions in French (1578), English (1583), and German (1599) – all countries where religious wars were raging. The first edition published in Spain after Las Casas&#x27;s death appeared in Barcelona during the Catalan Revolt of 1646. The book was banned by the Aragonese inquisition in 1659.

The images described by Las Casas were later depicted by Theodore de Bry in copper plate engravings that served as a medium of the Black Legend against Spain.

=== &quot;Apologetic History of the Indies&quot; ===

The &quot;Apologetic Summary History of the People of These Indies&quot; () was first written as the 68th chapter of the &quot;General History of the Indies&quot;, but Las Casas changed it into a volume of its own, recognizing that the material was not historical. The material contained in the &quot;Apologetic History&quot; is primarily ethnographic accounts of the indigenous cultures of the Indies – the Taíno, the Ciboney, and the Guanahatabey, but it also contains descriptions of many of the other indigenous cultures that Las Casas learned about through his travels and readings. The history is apologetic because it is written as a defense of the cultural level of the Indians, arguing throughout that indigenous peoples of the Americas were just as civilized as the Roman, Greek and Egyptian civilizationsand more civilized than some European civilizations. It was in essence a comparative ethnography comparing practices and customs of European and American cultures and evaluating them according to whether they were good or bad, seen from a Christian viewpoint.

He wrote: &quot;I have declared and demonstrated openly and concluded, from chapter 22 to the end of this whole book, that all people of these our Indies are human, so far as is possible by the natural and human way and without the light of faith – had their republics, places, towns, and cities most abundant and well provided for, and did not lack anything to live politically and socially, and attain and enjoy civil happiness... And they equaled many nations of this world that are renowned and considered civilized, and they surpassed many others, and to none were they inferior. Among those they equaled were the Greeks and the Romans, and they surpassed them by many good and better customs. They surpassed also the English and the French and some of the people of our own Spain; and they were incomparably superior to countless others, in having good customs and lacking many evil ones.&quot; This work in which Las Casas combined his own ethnographic observations with those of other writers, and compared customs and cultures between different peoples, has been characterized as an early beginning of the discipline of anthropology.

=== &quot;History of the Indies&quot; ===
The &quot;History of the Indies&quot; is a three-volume work begun in 1527 while Las Casas was in the Convent of Puerto de Plata. It found its final form in 1561, when he was working in the Colegio de San Gregorio. Originally planned as a six-volume work, each volume describes a decade of the history of the Indies from the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1492 to 1520, and most of it is an eye-witness account. It was in the &quot;History of the Indies&quot; that Las Casas finally regretted his advocacy for African slavery, and included a sincere apology, writing: &quot;I soon repented and judged myself guilty of ignorance. I came to realize that black slavery was as unjust as Indian slavery... and I was not sure that my ignorance and good faith would secure me in the eyes of God.&quot; (Vol II, p. 257)

&quot;History of the Indies&quot; has never been fully translated into English. The only translations into English are the 1971 partial translation by Andrée M. Collard, and partial translations by Cynthia L. Chamberlin, Nigel Griffin, Michael Hammer and Blair Sullivan in UCLA&#x27;s &quot;Repertorium Columbianum&quot; (Volumes VI, VII and XI).

=== &quot;Archiving Christopher Columbus&#x27; Journal&quot; ===
De Las Casas copied Columbus&#x27; diary from his 1492 voyage to modern-day Bahamas. His copy is notable because Columbus&#x27; diary itself was lost.

=== &quot;De thesauris in Peru&quot; ===
== Legacy ==
Las Casas&#x27;s legacy has been highly controversial. In the years following his death, his ideas became taboo in the Spanish realm, and he was seen as a nearly heretical extremist. The accounts written by his enemies Lopez de Gómara and Oviedo were widely read and published in Europe. As the influence of the Spanish Empire was displaced by that of other European powers, Las Casas&#x27;s accounts were utilized as political tools to justify incursions into Spanish colonies. This historiographic phenomenon has been referred to by some historians as the &quot;Black Legend&quot;, a tendency by mostly Protestant authors to portray Spanish Catholicism and colonialism in the worst possible light.

Opposition to Las Casas reached its climax in historiography with Spanish right-wing, nationalist historians in the late 19th and early 20th centuries constructing a pro-Spanish White Legend, arguing that the Spanish Empire was benevolent and just and denying any adverse consequences of Spanish colonialism. Spanish pro-imperial historians such as Menéndez y Pelayo, Menéndez Pidal, and J. Pérez de Barrada depicted Las Casas as a madman, describing him as a &quot;paranoic&quot; and a monomaniac given to exaggeration, and as a traitor towards his own nation. Menéndez Pelayo also accused Las Casas of having been instrumental in suppressing the publication of Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda&#x27;s &quot;Democrates Alter&quot; (also called &quot;Democrates Secundus&quot;) out of spite, but other historians find that to be unlikely since it was rejected by the theologians of both Alcalá and Salamanca, who were unlikely to be influenced by Las Casas.

=== Criticisms ===

Las Casas has also often been accused of exaggerating the atrocities he described in the Indies, some scholars holding that the initial population figures given by him were too high, which would make the population decline look worse than it actually was, and that epidemics of European disease were the prime cause of the population decline, not violence and exploitation. Demographic studies such as those of colonial Mexico by Sherburne F. Cook in the mid-20th century suggested that the decline in the first years of the conquest was indeed drastic, ranging between 80 and 90%, due to many different causes but all ultimately traceable to the arrival of the Europeans. The overwhelming cause was disease introduced by the Europeans. Historians have also noted that exaggeration and inflation of numbers was the norm in writing in 16th-century accounts, and both contemporary detractors and supporters of Las Casas were guilty of similar exaggerations.

The Dominican friars Antonio de Montesinos and Pedro de Córdoba had reported extensive violence already in the first decade of the colonization of the Americas, and throughout the conquest of the Americas, there were reports of abuse of the natives from friars and priests and ordinary citizens, and many massacres of indigenous people were reported in full by those who perpetrated them. Even some of Las Casas&#x27;s enemies, such as Toribio de Benavente Motolinia, reported many gruesome atrocities committed against the Indians by the colonizers. All in all, modern historians tend to disregard the numerical figures given by Las Casas, but they maintain that his general picture of a violent and abusive conquest represented reality.

One persistent point of criticism has been Las Casas&#x27;s repeated suggestions of replacing Indian with African slave labor. Even though he regretted that position later in his life and included an apology in his &quot;History of the Indies&quot;, some later criticism held him responsible for the institution of the transatlantic slave trade. One detractor, the abolitionist David Walker, called Las Casas a &quot;wretch... stimulated by sordid avarice only,&quot; holding him responsible for the enslavement of thousands of Africans. Other historians, such as John Fiske writing in 1900, denied that Las Casas&#x27;s suggestions affected the development of the slave trade. Benjamin Keen likewise did not consider Las Casas to have had any substantial impact on the slave trade, which was well in place before he began writing. That view is contradicted by Sylvia Wynter, who argued that Las Casas&#x27;s 1516 Memorial was the direct cause of Charles V granting permission in 1518 to transport the first 4,000 African slaves to Jamaica.

A growing &quot;corpus&quot; of scholarship has sought to deconstruct and reassess the role of Las Casas in Spanish colonialism. Daniel Castro, in his &quot;Another Face of Empire&quot; (2007), takes on such a task. He argues that he was more of a politician than a humanitarian and that his liberation policies were always combined with schemes to make colonial extraction of resources from the natives more efficient. He also argues that Las Casas failed to realize that by seeking to replace indigenous spirituality with Christianity, he was undertaking a religious colonialism that was more intrusive than the physical one. The responses to his work are varied. Some claim that Castro&#x27;s portrayal of Las Casas had an air of anachronism. Others have agreed with Castro&#x27;s deconstruction of Las Casas as a nuanced and contradictory historical figure.

=== Cultural legacy ===
In 1848, Ciudad de San Cristóbal, then the capital of the Mexican state of Chiapas, was renamed San Cristóbal de Las Casas in honor of its first bishop. His work is a particular inspiration behind the work of the Las Casas Institute at Blackfriars Hall, Oxford. He is also often cited as a predecessor of the liberation theology movement. Bartolomé is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 20 July, on 18 July, and at the Evangelical Lutheran Church on 17 July. In the Catholic Church, the Dominicans introduced his cause for canonization in 1976. In 2002 the church began the process for his beatification.

He was among the first to develop a view of unity among humankind in the New World, stating that &quot;All people of the world are humans,&quot; and that they had a natural right to liberty – a combination of Thomist rights philosophy with Augustinian political theology. In this capacity, an ecumenical human rights institute located in San Cristóbal de las Casas, the Centro Fray Bartolomé de las Casas de Derechos Humanos, was established by Bishop Samuel Ruiz in 1989.

Residencial Las Casas in Santurce, San Juan, Puerto Rico is named after Las Casas.

He is also featured on the Guatemalan quetzal one centavo coin (Q0.01).

The small town of Lascassas, Tennessee, in the United States has also been named after him.

== See also ==

* Fountain to Bartolomé de las Casas

== Notes ==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Gunst, Laurie. &quot;Bartolomé de las Casas and the Question of Negro Slavery in the Early Spanish Indies.&quot; PhD dissertation, Harvard University 1982.
* 
* 
* From &quot;Apologética historia de las Indias&quot; (Madrid, 1909), originally translated for &quot;Introduction to Contemporary Civilization in the West&quot; (New York: Columbia University Press, 1946, 1954, 1961).
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Biblioteca de autor Bartolomé de las Casas 
* 
* &quot;Bartolomé de Las Casas Study Resources&quot;
* Mirror of the Cruel and Horrible Spanish Tyranny Perpetrated in the Netherlands, by the Tyrant, the Duke of Alba, and Other Commanders of King Philip II From the Collections at the Library of Congress
* &quot;Bartolomé de las Casas Statement of Opinion,&quot; (1542.) From the Collections at the Library of Congress
* &quot;Narratio Regionum Indicarum per Hispanos Quosdam Deuastatarum Verissima&quot; From the Collections at the Library of Congress
* Las Casas&#x27; Articulation of the Indians&#x27; Moral Agency: Looking Back at Las Casas Through Fichte – Rolando Pérez.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="0" end="22" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="24" end="26" title="Dominican Order" label="OP"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="188" end="198" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="226" end="235" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q875714" start="282" end="299" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of San Cristóbal de Las Casas" label="Bishop of Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251396" start="342" end="366" title="Protector of the Indians" label="Protector of the Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924760" start="426" end="474" title="A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies" label="A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="572" end="589" title="Spanish West Indies" label="Caribbean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="655" end="667" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="1033" end="1043" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="1077" end="1086" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="1536" end="1545" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="1592" end="1607" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="1677" end="1692" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="1727" end="1731" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="1735" end="1744" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121487" start="2037" end="2045" title="New Laws" label="New Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="2082" end="2089" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2215" end="2227" title="Encomienda#Encomenderos" label="encomenderos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229264" start="2489" end="2506" title="Valladolid debate" label="Valladolid debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q940132" start="2517" end="2540" title="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda" label="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="3292" end="3304" title="canonization" label="canonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3312" end="3327" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="3435" end="3442" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q477051" start="3658" end="3683" title="Archivo General de Indias" label="Archivo General de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4013" end="4020" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="4128" end="4136" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="4374" end="4383" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="4597" end="4617" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4634" end="4641" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="5189" end="5199" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="5222" end="5239" title="Nicolás de Ovando" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="5266" end="5275" title="hacienda" label="hacendado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="5344" end="5349" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="5426" end="5431" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q924774" start="5633" end="5647" title="secular priest" label="secular priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="5688" end="5697" title="Dominican order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="5716" end="5729" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357321" start="5737" end="5753" title="Pedro de Córdoba" label="Pedro de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="5889" end="5899" title="confession (religion)" label="confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q130273" start="6006" end="6027" title="Antonio de Montesinos" label="Antonio de Montesinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="6089" end="6097" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="6838" end="6848" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="6872" end="6886" title="Diego Columbus" label="Diego Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="7094" end="7120" title="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar" label="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40524" start="7132" end="7150" title="Pánfilo de Narváez" label="Pánfilo de Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="7169" end="7173" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q115382" start="7207" end="7213" title="Bayamo" label="Bayamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115329" start="7218" end="7226" title="Camagüey" label="Camagüey"/>
<link wikidata="Q540324" start="7250" end="7256" title="Hatuey" label="Hatuey"/>
<link wikidata="Q726722" start="7329" end="7336" title="Ciboney" label="Ciboney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118725" start="7341" end="7353" title="Guanahatabey" label="Guanahatabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q190005" start="7620" end="7630" title="Cienfuegos" label="Cienfuegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q155980" start="7797" end="7811" title="Ecclesiasticus" label="Ecclesiasticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155980" start="7813" end="7819" title="Sirach" label="Sirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="7836" end="7845" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="8789" end="8803" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="King Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q241767" start="8815" end="8824" title="Plasencia" label="Plasencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220594" start="8925" end="8938" title="Diego de Deza" label="Diego de Deza"/>
<link wikidata="Q590682" start="9194" end="9219" title="Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca" label="Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917763" start="9235" end="9250" title="Lope Conchillos y Quintana" label="Lope Conchillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="9592" end="9599" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="9613" end="9629" title="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros" label="Ximenez Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q57087" start="9634" end="9651" title="Pope Adrian VI" label="Adrian of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="9689" end="9703" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="9765" end="9773" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="9806" end="9812" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9937" end="9973" title="#Memorial de Remedios para las Indias" label="Memorial de Remedios para Las Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q847198" start="10472" end="10480" title="Just War" label="Just War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474312" start="10674" end="10685" title="Hieronymite" label="Hieronymite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474312" start="10776" end="10787" title="Hieronymite" label="Hieronymite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23612115" start="10795" end="10811" title="Luis de Figueroa" label="Luis de Figueroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251396" start="11181" end="11205" title="Protector of the Indians" label="Protector of the Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q590682" start="12133" end="12162" title="Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca" label="Fonseca, the Bishop of Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="12883" end="12893" title="mortal sin" label="mortal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q342392" start="13282" end="13307" title="Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros" label="Cardinal Ximenez Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="13492" end="13502" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14192" end="14221" title="Slavery in the Spanish New World colonies#Spanish enslavement of Africans" label="importation of African slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357321" start="15640" end="15656" title="Pedro de Córdoba" label="Pedro de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="15744" end="15753" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q319476" start="15757" end="15763" title="Cumaná" label="Cumaná"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142895" start="15976" end="15983" title="Cubagua" label="Cubagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="16507" end="16524" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Gonzalo de Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748388" start="16547" end="16559" title="Province of Tierra Firme" label="Tierra Firme"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="16594" end="16608" title="Diego Columbus" label="Diego Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="16748" end="16753" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="16757" end="16761" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="17067" end="17072" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="17657" end="17668" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="18244" end="18253" title="Real Audiencia" label="Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017602" start="18532" end="18545" title="pearl hunting" label="pearl fishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142895" start="18549" end="18556" title="Cubagua" label="Cubagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="18718" end="18724" title="Island Caribs" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="19193" end="19206" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="19261" end="19270" title="Dominican order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="19271" end="19276" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="19362" end="19369" title="Thomism" label="Thomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q988413" start="19428" end="19440" title="Puerto Plata (city)" label="Puerto Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q830337" start="19499" end="19504" title="Prior (ecclesiastical)" label="prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522118" start="19727" end="19742" title="García Fernández Manrique, 3rd Count of Osorno" label="Garcia Manrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183898" start="19744" end="19759" title="Count of Osorno" label="Count of Osorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="20102" end="20107" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344189" start="20122" end="20132" title="Enriquillo" label="Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="20182" end="20186" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="20218" end="20241" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="conquest of that region"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="20245" end="20262" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="20292" end="20298" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="20324" end="20333" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q205648" start="20408" end="20415" title="Granada, Nicaragua" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="20609" end="20618" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="20681" end="20685" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290347" start="20757" end="20773" title="Domingo Betanzos" label="Domingo Betanzos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36494" start="20790" end="20806" title="Kʼicheʼ language" label="Kʼicheʼ language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373530" start="20819" end="20838" title="Francisco Marroquín" label="Francisco Marroquín"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="21006" end="21012" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="21014" end="21020" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="21115" end="21131" title="Franciscan order" label="Franciscan order"/>
<link wikidata="Q532539" start="21379" end="21399" title="Toribio de Benavente" label="Toribio de Benavente"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="21988" end="22001" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="22018" end="22022" title="Papal bull" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848208" start="22029" end="22042" title="Sublimis Deus" label="Sublimis Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734511" start="22778" end="22797" title="Alonso de Maldonado" label="Alonso de Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246149" start="22995" end="23002" title="Rabinal" label="Rabinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401849" start="23004" end="23013" title="Sacapulas" label="Sacapulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q867077" start="23019" end="23024" title="Cobán" label="Cobán"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873914" start="23141" end="23148" title="Verapaz, Guatemala" label="Verapaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q273276" start="23385" end="23392" title="Lago de Atitlán" label="Atitlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q603423" start="23397" end="23413" title="Chichicastenango" label="Chichicastenango"/>
<link wikidata="Q504637" start="23471" end="23483" title="Alta Verapaz Department" label="Alta Verapaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="23676" end="23682" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="23698" end="23703" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334000" start="24106" end="24117" title="School of Salamanca" label="Theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="24121" end="24130" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q312384" start="24139" end="24159" title="Francisco de Vitoria" label="Francisco de Vitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658870" start="24226" end="24232" title="dictum" label="dictum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="24761" end="24779" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924760" start="25133" end="25181" title="A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies" label="A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710485" start="25229" end="25245" title="García de Loaysa" label="García de Loaysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657059" start="25251" end="25266" title="Osorno la Mayor" label="Count of Osorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195647" start="25275" end="25283" title="Sebastián Ramírez de Fuenleal" label="Fuenleal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="25312" end="25333" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121487" start="25616" end="25624" title="New Laws" label="New Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="26047" end="26057" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="26059" end="26063" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="26065" end="26076" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="26082" end="26089" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="26279" end="26286" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="26290" end="26299" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="27038" end="27045" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="27067" end="27074" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710485" start="27233" end="27239" title="García de Loaysa" label="Loaysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24935301" start="27322" end="27337" title="Diego de Loaysa" label="Diego de Loaysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708286" start="27339" end="27355" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Senj-Modruš" label="Bishop of Modruš"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205718" start="27362" end="27374" title="Pedro Torres (bishop)" label="Pedro Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q948657" start="27376" end="27390" title="Titular Bishop" label="Titular Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791937" start="27419" end="27439" title="Cristóbal de Pedraza" label="Cristóbal de Pedraza"/>
<link wikidata="Q952556" start="27441" end="27460" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tegucigalpa" label="Bishop of Comayagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q315795" start="27643" end="27667" title="Bernal Díaz del Castillo" label="Bernal Díaz del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q557648" start="27674" end="27689" title="pastoral letter" label="pastoral letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="27733" end="27743" title="absolution" label="absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373530" start="28054" end="28073" title="Francisco Marroquín" label="Francisco Marroquín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883189" start="28263" end="28284" title="Antonio de Valdivieso" label="Antonio de Valdivieso"/>
<link wikidata="Q871200" start="28286" end="28305" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of León in Nicaragua" label="Bishop of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="28643" end="28654" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q442901" start="28924" end="28941" title="Juan de Zumárraga" label="Juan de Zumárraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q586485" start="28945" end="28951" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956060" start="28963" end="28976" title="Julián Garcés" label="Julián Garcés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365345" start="28980" end="28986" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Puebla de los Angeles" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990920" start="29042" end="29058" title="Vasco de Quiroga" label="Vasco de Quiroga"/>
<link wikidata="Q961476" start="29062" end="29071" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Morelia" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373530" start="29108" end="29127" title="Francisco Marroquín" label="Francisco Marroquín"/>
<link wikidata="Q740436" start="29131" end="29140" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q23615813" start="29145" end="29165" title="Juan Lopez de Zárate" label="Juan Lopez de Zárate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363991" start="29169" end="29175" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Antequera, Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29316" end="29329" title="Sacrament of Penance (Catholic Church)#The Manuals of confession in the Middle Ages" label="confesionario"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="29980" end="29987" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q528758" start="30082" end="30092" title="Mixtón War" label="Mixtón War"/>
<link wikidata="Q940132" start="30807" end="30830" title="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda" label="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229264" start="31423" end="31440" title="Valladolid debate" label="Valladolid debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="32259" end="32268" title="Biblical Canaanites" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237514" start="32578" end="32593" title="Domingo de Soto" label="Domingo de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q126391770" start="33011" end="33043" title="Third Mexican Provincial Council" label="Third Mexican Provincial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q936533" start="33075" end="33089" title="Chichimeca War" label="Chichimeca War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536661" start="33104" end="33115" title="Lewis Hanke" label="Lewis Hanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="33156" end="33168" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="33238" end="33243" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="33351" end="33360" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="33388" end="33400" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="33490" end="33501" title="Reductions" label="reducciones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="33549" end="33565" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="33657" end="33666" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="33671" end="33675" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="33706" end="33718" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q379972" start="33783" end="33804" title="Bernardino de Sahagún" label="Bernardino de Sahagún"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="34168" end="34185" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="34209" end="34214" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="34385" end="34396" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q570586" start="34616" end="34639" title="Colegio de San Gregorio" label="College of San Gregorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q826591" start="34956" end="34961" title="Nahua peoples" label="Nahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885169" start="34968" end="34988" title="Francisco Tenamaztle" label="Francisco Tenamaztle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10977548" start="34994" end="35004" title="Nochistlán" label="Nochistlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="35126" end="35147" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924760" start="35185" end="35233" title="A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies" label="A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="35318" end="35336" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q532539" start="35502" end="35532" title="Toribio de Benavente Motolinia" label="Toribio de Benavente Motolinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="35931" end="35940" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="35944" end="35951" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="36131" end="36150" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="36185" end="36197" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q435292" start="36274" end="36289" title="Gonzalo Pizarro" label="Gonzalo Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q881775" start="36358" end="36375" title="Blasco Núñez Vela" label="Blasco Núñez Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q929681" start="36402" end="36419" title="Pedro de la Gasca" label="Pedro de la Gasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q940132" start="37618" end="37627" title="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda" label="Sepúlveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="37650" end="37669" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q809545" start="37797" end="37826" title="Bartolomé Carranza" label="Bartolomé Carranza de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="40994" end="41001" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="41041" end="41075" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="41118" end="41136" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q226765" start="41237" end="41254" title="divine punishment" label="divine punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="41511" end="41527" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="41556" end="41566" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121487" start="42021" end="42037" title="New Laws of 1542" label="New Laws of 1542"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229264" start="42133" end="42150" title="Valladolid debate" label="Valladolid debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="42239" end="42251" title="Black legend (Spain)" label="Black Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="42808" end="42817" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348955" start="42829" end="42843" title="Reapers&amp;#x27; War" label="Catalan Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="42880" end="42901" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Aragonese inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q708961" start="42969" end="42984" title="Theodore de Bry" label="Theodore de Bry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="43043" end="43069" title="Black Legend against Spain" label="Black Legend against Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="43465" end="43477" title="ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="43534" end="43539" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q726722" start="43545" end="43552" title="Ciboney" label="Ciboney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118725" start="43562" end="43574" title="Guanahatabey" label="Guanahatabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416320" start="43729" end="43739" title="apologia" label="apologetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="43902" end="43907" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="43909" end="43914" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="43919" end="43927" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="45331" end="45343" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="45724" end="45744" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q721423" start="47043" end="47058" title="Francisco López de Gómara" label="Lopez de Gómara"/>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="47063" end="47069" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="47388" end="47400" title="Black legend (Spain)" label="Black Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="47429" end="47439" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="47467" end="47478" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="47703" end="47715" title="White Legend" label="White Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q716799" start="47874" end="47891" title="Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo" label="Menéndez y Pelayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q381953" start="47893" end="47907" title="Ramón Menéndez Pidal" label="Menéndez Pidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="47991" end="47999" title="paranoia" label="paranoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q917061" start="48012" end="48021" title="monomania" label="monomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q940132" start="48188" end="48211" title="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda" label="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="48403" end="48409" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="48414" end="48423" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245672" start="48925" end="48942" title="Sherburne F. Cook" label="Sherburne F. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q130273" start="49473" end="49494" title="Antonio de Montesinos" label="Antonio de Montesinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357321" start="49499" end="49515" title="Pedro de Córdoba" label="Pedro de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q532539" start="49888" end="49918" title="Toribio de Benavente Motolinia" label="Toribio de Benavente Motolinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="50511" end="50536" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177046" start="50570" end="50582" title="David Walker (abolitionist)" label="David Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140992" start="50756" end="50766" title="John Fiske (philosopher)" label="John Fiske"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888908" start="50870" end="50883" title="Benjamin Keen" label="Benjamin Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507232" start="51053" end="51066" title="Sylvia Wynter" label="Sylvia Wynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="51224" end="51231" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="52196" end="52203" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q524894" start="52217" end="52243" title="San Cristóbal de Las Casas" label="San Cristóbal de Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124202222" start="52357" end="52373" title="Blackfriars, Oxford" label="Blackfriars Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="52430" end="52449" title="liberation theology" label="liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="52473" end="52483" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="remembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="52491" end="52508" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152292" start="52516" end="52529" title="Commemoration (Anglicanism)" label="commemoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="52533" end="52540" title="July 20" label="20 July"/>
<link wikidata="Q905917" start="52565" end="52592" title="Calendar of Saints (Lutheran)" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="52612" end="52627" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="52669" end="52681" title="canonization" label="canonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="52736" end="52749" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="52934" end="52941" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="52961" end="52968" title="Thomism" label="Thomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="52992" end="53003" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q781421" start="53004" end="53022" title="political theology" label="political theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="53045" end="53055" title="ecumenical" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q524894" start="53090" end="53116" title="San Cristóbal de las Casas" label="San Cristóbal de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q937519" start="53204" end="53215" title="Samuel Ruiz" label="Samuel Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315422" start="53226" end="53247" title="Residencial Las Casas" label="Residencial Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207396" start="53337" end="53355" title="Guatemalan quetzal" label="Guatemalan quetzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710007" start="53401" end="53421" title="Lascassas, Tennessee" label="Lascassas, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863977" start="53494" end="53528" title="Fountain to Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Fountain to Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="54323" end="54342" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="54438" end="54457" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69832" wikidata="Q369503" url="?curid=69832" title="Saccade">
<text>In vision science, a saccade ( ; ; ) is a quick, simultaneous movement of both eyes between two or more phases of focal points in the same direction. In contrast, in smooth-pursuit movements, the eyes move smoothly instead of in jumps. Controlled cortically by the frontal eye fields (FEF), or subcortically by the superior colliculus, saccades serve as a mechanism for focal points, rapid eye movement, and the fast phase of optokinetic nystagmus. The word appears to have been coined in the 1880s by French ophthalmologist Émile Javal, who used a mirror on one side of a page to observe eye movement in silent reading, and found that it involves a succession of discontinuous individual movements.

==Function==
Humans and many organisms do not look at a scene in steadiness; instead, the eyes move around, locating interesting parts of the scene and building up a three-dimensional &#x27;map&#x27; corresponding to the scene (as opposed to the graphical map of avians, which often relies upon detection of angular movement on the retina).

When scanning immediate surroundings or reading, human eyes make saccadic movements and stop several times, moving very quickly between each stop. The speed of movement during each saccade cannot be controlled; the eyes move as fast as they are able. One reason for the saccadic movement of the human eye is that the central part of the retina—known as the fovea—which provides the high-resolution portion of vision is very small in humans, only about 1–2 degrees of vision, but it plays a critical role in resolving objects. By moving the eye so that small parts of a scene can be sensed with greater resolution, body resources can be used more efficiently.

==Timing and kinematics==
Saccades are one of the fastest movements produced by the human eye (blinks may reach even higher peak velocities). The peak angular speed of the eye during a saccade reaches up to 700°/s in humans for great saccades (25° of visual angle); in some monkeys, peak speed can reach 1000°/s. Saccades to an unexpected stimulus normally take about 200 milliseconds (ms) to initiate, and then last from about 20–200 ms, depending on their amplitude (20–30 ms is typical in language reading). Under certain laboratory circumstances, the latency of, or reaction time to, saccade production can be cut nearly in half (express saccades). These saccades are generated by a neuronal mechanism that bypasses time-consuming circuits and activates the eye muscles more directly. Specific pre-target oscillatory (alpha rhythms) and transient activities occurring in posterior-lateral parietal cortex and occipital cortex also characterize express saccades.

To achieve such high speeds, there are specialized oculomotor burst neurons in the brainstem that wire into the ocular motor neuron. The burst neurons implement bang-bang control: they are either completely inhibited, or firing at its full rate of ~1000 Hz. Since the motion of the eye is essentially a linear system, bang-bang control minimizes travel time. After a saccade, a constant force is required to hold the position against elastic force, thus resulting in a pulse-step control.
The amplitude of a saccade is the angular distance the eye travels during the movement. For amplitudes up to 15 or 20°, the velocity of a saccade linearly depends on the amplitude (the so-called &quot;saccadic main sequence&quot;, a term borrowed from astrophysics; see Figure). For amplitudes larger than 20°, the peak velocity starts to plateau (nonlinearly) toward the maximum velocity attainable by the eye at around 60°. For instance, a 10° amplitude is associated with a velocity of 300°/s, and 30° is associated with 500°/s. Therefore, for larger amplitude ranges, the main sequence can best be modeled by an inverse power law function.

The high peak velocities and the main sequence relationship can also be used to distinguish micro-/saccades from other eye movements (like ocular tremor, ocular drift, and smooth pursuit). Velocity-based algorithms are a common approach for saccade detection in eye tracking. Although, depending on the demands on timing accuracy, acceleration-based methods are more precise.

Saccades may rotate the eyes in any direction to relocate gaze direction (the direction of sight that corresponds to the fovea), but normally saccades do not rotate the eyes torsionally. (Torsion is clockwise or counterclockwise rotation around the line of sight when the eye is at its central primary position; defined this way, Listing&#x27;s law says that, when the head is motionless, torsion is kept at zero.)

Head-fixed saccades can have amplitudes of up to 90° (from one edge of the oculomotor range to the other), but in normal conditions saccades are far smaller, and any shift of gaze larger than about 20° is accompanied by a head movement. During such gaze saccades, first, the eye produces a saccade to get gaze on target, whereas the head follows more slowly and the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) causes the eyes to roll back in the head to keep gaze on the target. Since the VOR can actually rotate the eyes around the line of sight, combined eye and head movements do not always obey Listing&#x27;s law.

The rotational inertia of the eye is negligible compared to the elastic and viscous force.

==Types==
Saccades can be categorized by intended goal in four ways:

# In a &quot;visually guided saccade&quot;, the eyes move toward a visual transient, or stimulus. The parameters of visually guided saccades (amplitude, latency, peak velocity, and duration) are frequently measured as a baseline when measuring other types of saccades. Visually guided saccades can be further subcategorized:
#:* A &quot;reflexive saccade&quot; is triggered exogenously by the appearance of a peripheral stimulus, or by the disappearance of a fixation stimulus.
#:* A &quot;scanning saccade&quot; is triggered endogenously for the purpose of exploring the visual environment.
# In an &quot;antisaccade&quot;, the eyes move away from the visual onset. They are more delayed than visually guided saccades, and observers often make erroneous saccades in the wrong direction. A successful antisaccade requires inhibiting a reflexive saccade to the onset location, and voluntarily moving the eye in the other direction.
# In a &quot;memory guided saccade&quot;, the eyes move toward a remembered point, with no visual stimulus.
# In a sequence of &quot;predictive saccades&quot;, the eyes are kept on an object moving in a temporally and/or spatially predictive manner. In this instance, saccades often coincide with (or anticipate) the predictable movement of an object.

As referenced to above, it is also useful to categorize saccades by latency (time between go-signal and movement onset). In this case the categorization is binary: Either a given saccade is an &quot;express saccade&quot; or it is not. The latency cut-off is approximately ~200 ms; any longer than this is outside the express saccade range.

Microsaccades are a related type of fixational eye movement that are small, jerk-like, involuntary eye movements, similar to miniature versions of voluntary saccades. They typically occur during visual fixation, not only in humans, but also in animals with foveal vision (primates, cats, etc.). Microsaccade amplitudes vary from 2 to 120 arcminutes.

==In depth==
When exploring the visual environment with the gaze, humans make two to three fixations a second. Each fixation involves binocularly coordinated movements of the eyes to acquire the new target in three dimensions: horizontal and vertical, but also in-depth. In literature it has been shown how an upward or a vertical saccade is generally accompanied by a divergence of the eyes, while a downward saccade is accompanied by a convergence. The amount of this &quot;intra-saccadic&quot; &quot;vergence&quot; has a strong functional significance for the effectiveness of binocular vision. When making an upward saccade, the eyes diverged to be aligned with the most probable uncrossed disparity in that part of the visual field. On the other way around, when making a downward saccade, the eyes converged to enable alignment with crossed disparity in that part of the field. The phenomenon can be interpreted as an adaptation of rapid binocular eye movements to the statistics of the 3D environment, in order to minimize the need for corrective vergence movements at the end of saccades.

==Pathophysiologic saccades==
Saccadic oscillations not fitting the normal function are a deviation from a healthy or normal condition. Nystagmus is characterized by the combination of &#x27;slow phases&#x27;, which usually take the eye off the point of regard, interspersed with saccade-like &quot;quick phases&quot; that serve to bring the eye back on target. Pathological slow phases may be due to either an imbalance in the vestibular system or damage to the brainstem &quot;neural integrator&quot; that normally holds the eyes in place. On the other hand, opsoclonus or ocular flutter are composed purely of fast-phase saccadic eye movements. Without the use of objective recording techniques, it may be very difficult to distinguish between these conditions.

Eye movement measurements are also used to investigate psychiatric disorders. For example, ADHD is characterized by an increase of antisaccade errors and an increase in delays for visually guided saccade. Various pathological conditions also alter microsaccades and other fixational eye movements.

Paroxysmal eye–head movements, termed aberrant gaze saccades, are an early symptom of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome in infancy.

==Saccade adaptation==
When the brain is led to believe that the saccades it is generating are too large or too small (by an experimental manipulation in which a saccade-target steps backward or forward contingent on the eye movement made to acquire it), saccade amplitude gradually decreases (or increases), an adaptation (also termed gain adaptation) widely seen as a simple form of motor learning, possibly driven by an effort to correct visual error. This effect was first observed in humans with ocular muscle palsy. In these cases, it was noticed that the patients would make hypometric (small) saccades with the affected eye, and that they were able to correct these errors over time. This led to the realization that visual or retinal error (the difference between the post-saccadic point of regard and the target position) played a role in the homeostatic regulation of saccade amplitude. Since then, much scientific research has been devoted to various experiments employing saccade adaptation.

==Reading==
Saccadic eye movement allows the mind to read quickly, but it comes with its disadvantages. It can cause the mind to skip over words because it does not see them as important to the sentence, and the mind completely leaves it from the sentence or it replaces it with the wrong word. This can be seen in &quot;Paris in the the Spring&quot;. This is a common psychological test, where the mind will often skip the second &quot;the&quot;, especially when there is a line break in between the two.

When speaking, the mind plans what will be said before it is said. Sometimes the mind is not able to plan in advance and the speech is rushed out. This is why there are errors like mispronunciation, stuttering, and unplanned pauses. The same thing happens when reading. The mind does not always know what will come next. This is another reason that the second &quot;the&quot; can be missed.

==Vision==
===Saccadic masking===
It is a common but false belief that during the saccade, no information is passed through the optic nerve to the brain. Whereas low spatial frequencies (the &#x27;fuzzier&#x27; parts) are attenuated, higher spatial frequencies (an image&#x27;s fine details) that would otherwise be blurred by the eye movement remain unaffected. This phenomenon, known as &quot;saccadic masking&quot; or &quot;saccadic suppression&quot;, is known to begin prior to saccadic eye movements in every primate species studied, implying neurological reasons for the effect rather than simply the image&#x27;s motion blur. This phenomenon leads to the so-called stopped-clock illusion, or chronostasis.

A person may observe the saccadic masking effect by standing in front of a mirror and looking from one eye to the next (and vice versa). The subject will not experience any movement of the eyes or any evidence that the optic nerve has momentarily ceased transmitting. Due to saccadic masking, the eye/brain system not only hides the eye movements from the individual but also hides the evidence that anything has been hidden. Of course, a second observer watching the experiment will see the subject&#x27;s eyes moving back and forth. The function&#x27;s main purpose is to prevent an otherwise significant smearing of the image. (You can experience your eye saccade movements by using your cellphone&#x27;s front-facing camera as a mirror, hold the cellphone screen a couple of inches away from your face as you saccade from one eye to the other—the cellphone&#x27;s signal processing delay allows you to see the end of the saccade movement.)

===Spatial updating===
When a visual stimulus is seen before a saccade, subjects are still able to make another saccade back to that image, even if it is no longer visible. This shows that the brain is somehow able to take into account the intervening eye movement. It is thought that the brain does this by temporarily recording a copy of the command for the eye movement, and comparing this to the remembered image of the target. This is called spatial updating. Neurophysiologists, having recorded from cortical areas for saccades during spatial updating, have found that memory-related signals get remapped during each saccade.

===Trans-saccadic perception===
It is also thought that perceptual memory is updated during saccades so that information gathered across fixations can be compared and synthesized. However, the entire visual image is not updated during each saccade. Some scientists believe that this is the same as visual working memory, but as in spatial updating the eye movement has to be accounted for. The process of retaining information across a saccade is called trans-saccadic memory, and the process of integrating information from more than one fixation is called trans-saccadic integration.

==Comparative physiology==
Saccades are a widespread phenomenon across animals with image-forming visual systems. They have been observed in animals across three phyla, including animals that do not have a fovea (most vertebrates do) and animals that cannot move their eyes independently of their head (such as insects). Therefore, while saccades serve in humans and other primates to increase the effective visual resolution of a scene, there must be additional reasons for the behavior. The most frequently suggested of these reasons is to avoid blurring of the image, which would occur if the response time of a photoreceptor cell is longer than the time a given portion of the image is stimulating that photoreceptor as the image drifts across the eye.

In birds, saccadic eye movements serve a further function. The avian retina is highly developed. It is thicker than the mammalian retina, has a higher metabolic activity, and has less vasculature obstruction, for greater visual acuity. Because of this, the retinal cells must obtain nutrients via diffusion through the choroid and from the vitreous humor. The pecten is a specialised structure in the avian retina. It is a highly vascular structure that projects into the vitreous humor. Experiments show that, during saccadic eye oscillations (which occupy up to 12% of avian viewing time), the pecten oculi acts as an agitator, propelling perfusate (natural lubricants) toward the retina. Thus, in birds, saccadic eye movements appear to be important in retinal nutrition and cellular respiration.

==See also==

*Chronostasis
*Eye movement
*Eye movement in language reading
*Eye movement in music reading
*Eye tracking
*Frame rate
*Frontal eye fields
*List of cognitive biases
*Supplementary eye field
*Medial eye fields
*Microsaccade
*Paramedian pontine reticular formation
*Raster scan
*Saccadic masking
*Saccadic suppression of image displacement
*Smooth pursuit
*Transsaccadic memory
*Whip pan

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7936208" start="3" end="17" title="vision science" label="vision science"/>
<link wikidata="Q369503" start="21" end="28" title="Saccade" label="saccade"/>
<link wikidata="Q760256" start="79" end="83" title="Eye movement (sensory)" label="eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400677" start="166" end="190" title="Smooth pursuit" label="smooth-pursuit movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470144" start="265" end="283" title="frontal eye fields" label="frontal eye fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109417" start="315" end="334" title="superior colliculus" label="superior colliculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q912716" start="426" end="447" title="optokinetic reflex" label="optokinetic nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q286028" start="525" end="536" title="Louis Émile Javal" label="Émile Javal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831192" start="605" end="619" title="silent reading" label="silent reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q49345" start="964" end="970" title="Bird vision" label="avians"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="1380" end="1386" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q865103" start="1400" end="1405" title="Fovea centralis" label="fovea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424908" start="1645" end="1655" title="Optical resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044679" start="1798" end="1803" title="blink" label="blink"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="1854" end="1867" title="angular speed" label="angular speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469782" start="2525" end="2537" title="alpha rhythm" label="alpha rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="2596" end="2611" title="parietal cortex" label="parietal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="2616" end="2632" title="occipital cortex" label="occipital cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432859" start="2831" end="2848" title="Bang–bang control" label="bang-bang control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="3411" end="3423" title="main sequence" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="3783" end="3792" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316935" start="3896" end="3902" title="microsaccade" label="micro-"/>
<link wikidata="Q760256" start="3923" end="3936" title="eye movements" label="eye movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077147" start="3943" end="3956" title="ocular tremor" label="ocular tremor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3958" end="3970" title="ocular drift" label="ocular drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400677" start="3976" end="3990" title="smooth pursuit" label="smooth pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="4008" end="4017" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q970687" start="4066" end="4078" title="eye tracking" label="eye tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258339" start="4511" end="4529" title="Listing&amp;#x27;s law" label="Listing&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883898" start="4963" end="4986" title="vestibulo-ocular reflex" label="vestibulo-ocular reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258339" start="5182" end="5200" title="Listing&amp;#x27;s law" label="Listing&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002245" start="5965" end="5988" title="Antisaccade task" label="&amp;quot;antisaccade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316935" start="6990" end="7002" title="Microsaccade" label="Microsaccade"/>
<link wikidata="Q201936" start="7026" end="7049" title="Fixation (visual)" label="fixational eye movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q760256" start="7089" end="7102" title="Eye movement (sensory)" label="eye movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q201936" start="7192" end="7200" title="Fixation (visual)" label="fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865103" start="7247" end="7253" title="Fovea centralis" label="foveal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="7328" end="7337" title="arcminute" label="arcminute"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="8575" end="8584" title="Pathologic nystagmus" label="Nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q596832" start="8867" end="8884" title="vestibular system" label="vestibular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="8902" end="8911" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027232" start="9000" end="9010" title="opsoclonus" label="opsoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077137" start="9014" end="9028" title="ocular flutter" label="ocular flutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="9296" end="9300" title="ADHD" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q201936" start="9477" end="9501" title="fixational eye movements" label="fixational eye movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485893" start="9590" end="9615" title="GLUT1 deficiency syndrome" label="GLUT1 deficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q110313216" start="10956" end="10979" title="Paris in the the Spring" label="Paris in the the Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q760721" start="12233" end="12245" title="chronostasis" label="chronostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="14575" end="14580" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q865103" start="14619" end="14624" title="Fovea centralis" label="fovea"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="15028" end="15046" title="photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptor cell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15234" end="15246" title="Bird vision#Anatomy of the eye" label="avian retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745755" start="15291" end="15307" title="mammalian eye" label="mammalian retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="15355" end="15366" title="blood vessel" label="vasculature"/>
<link wikidata="Q271762" start="15490" end="15497" title="choroid" label="choroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q326710" start="15511" end="15525" title="vitreous humor" label="vitreous humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892807" start="15531" end="15537" title="pecten oculi" label="pecten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892807" start="15767" end="15779" title="pecten oculi" label="pecten oculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="15949" end="15969" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q760721" start="15987" end="15999" title="Chronostasis" label="Chronostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760256" start="16001" end="16013" title="Eye movement (sensory)" label="Eye movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q953235" start="16015" end="16047" title="Eye movement in language reading" label="Eye movement in language reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422665" start="16049" end="16078" title="Eye movement in music reading" label="Eye movement in music reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q970687" start="16080" end="16092" title="Eye tracking" label="Eye tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="16094" end="16104" title="Frame rate" label="Frame rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470144" start="16106" end="16124" title="Frontal eye fields" label="Frontal eye fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607828" start="16126" end="16150" title="List of cognitive biases" label="List of cognitive biases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752525" start="16152" end="16175" title="Supplementary eye field" label="Supplementary eye field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806043" start="16177" end="16194" title="Medial eye fields" label="Medial eye fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316935" start="16196" end="16208" title="Microsaccade" label="Microsaccade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282504" start="16210" end="16248" title="Paramedian pontine reticular formation" label="Paramedian pontine reticular formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="16250" end="16261" title="Raster scan" label="Raster scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396580" start="16263" end="16279" title="Saccadic masking" label="Saccadic masking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396581" start="16281" end="16323" title="Saccadic suppression of image displacement" label="Saccadic suppression of image displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400677" start="16325" end="16339" title="Smooth pursuit" label="Smooth pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835356" start="16341" end="16361" title="Transsaccadic memory" label="Transsaccadic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993699" start="16363" end="16371" title="Whip pan" label="Whip pan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69835" wikidata="Q9294936" url="?curid=69835" title="Humbert">
<text>Humbert, Umbert or Humberto (Latinized &quot;Humbertus&quot;) is a Germanic given name, from &quot;hun&quot; &quot;warrior&quot; and &quot;beraht&quot; &quot;bright&quot;. It also came into use as a surname.

==Given name==
;Royalty and Middle Ages 
* Emebert (died 710)
* Humbert of Maroilles (before 652 – 680)
* Humbert (bishop of Würzburg) (died 842)
* Humbert I, Count of Savoy (980 – 1047 or 1048)
* Humbert II, Count of Savoy (1065–1103)
* Humbert III, Count of Savoy (1135–1189)
* Humbert, bastard of Savoy (c.1318–1374), soldier
* Humbert V de Beaujeu (1198–1250)
* Humbert I of Viennois (1240–1307), Dauphin of the Viennois
* Humbert II of Viennois (1312–1355), Dauphin of the Viennois
* Humbert I of Italy (1844–1900)
* Humbert II of Italy (1904–1983)
* Humbert of Silva Candida (1015–1061), Roman Catholic cardinal and Benedictine oblate
* Humbert of Romans (died 1277), master general of the Dominicans
;Others
*Humbert Achamer-Pifrader, Austrian jurist, member of the SS of Nazi Germany and commander of Einsatzgruppe A, one of the major perpetrators of the Holocaust
*Marshal Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco, Brazilian military leader and politician, President of Brazil and the first President of the Brazilian military dictatorship 
*Humberto Delgado, General of the Portuguese Air Force, diplomat and politician
* Humberto Ortega, Nicaraguan military leader and published writer, Minister of Defense of Nicaragua, one of the principal commanders of Sandinista revolution 
*Humbert Roque Versace, United States Army officer

==Surname==
* Agnès Humbert (1894–1963), French art historian and member of the French Resistance during World War II, daughter of Charles Humbert
* Albert Jenkins Humbert (1822–1877), British architect
* Charles Humbert (1866–1927), French politician and newspaper proprietor, father of Agnès Humbert 
* Christophe Humbert (born 1979), French judoka
* Gustav Humbert (born 1950), German CEO
* Jean-Henri Humbert (1887–1967), French botanist
* Jean Humbert (painter) (1734–1749), Dutch painter
* Jean Emile Humbert (1771–1839), Dutch military engineer who rediscovered ancient Carthage
* Jean Joseph Amable Humbert (1755–1823), French general
* Manon Humbert (born 1989), French curler
* Marie Humbert, Ghanaian actress
* Marie Georges Humbert (1859–1921), mathematician
**Humbert surface
*Pierre Humbert (architect) (1848–????)
*Pierre Humbert (mathematician) (1891–1953), for whom are named:
**Humbert polynomials
**Humbert series
* Nicole Humbert (née Rieger) (born 1972), German pole vaulter
* Thérèse Humbert (1856–1918), French female fraudster
* Ugo Humbert (born 1998), French tennis player

==Companies==
*Humbert Aviation, a French aircraft manufacturer

==Fictional characters==
* Humbert Humbert, narrator of the novel &quot;Lolita&quot;
* Baron Humbert von Gikkingen, an animated cat creation from &quot;Whisper of the Heart&quot; (film) and &quot;The Cat Returns&quot;
* Puff Puff Humbert, frontman of the virtual band Your Favorite Martian.
* Graham Humbert, character &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot; (TV Series)

==See also==
* Humbert, Pas-de-Calais, a commune in the Pas-de-Calais &quot;département&quot; in France
* Humberht (disambiguation)
* Umberto, an Italian masculine given name
* Humberto, a Portuguese and Spanish masculine given name</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9294936" start="0" end="7" title="Humbert" label="Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294936" start="9" end="15" title="Humbert" label="Umbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294936" start="19" end="27" title="Humbert" label="Humberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974881" start="67" end="86" title="Germanic given name" label="Germanic given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q613014" start="139" end="145" title="beraht" label="beraht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485199" start="252" end="259" title="Emebert" label="Emebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143202" start="273" end="293" title="Humbert of Maroilles" label="Humbert of Maroilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637357" start="315" end="343" title="Humbert (bishop of Würzburg)" label="Humbert (bishop of Würzburg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q451436" start="357" end="382" title="Humbert I, Count of Savoy" label="Humbert I, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553289" start="406" end="432" title="Humbert II, Count of Savoy" label="Humbert II, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q664561" start="447" end="474" title="Humbert III, Count of Savoy" label="Humbert III, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939920" start="489" end="514" title="Humbert, bastard of Savoy" label="Humbert, bastard of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636826" start="540" end="560" title="Humbert V de Beaujeu" label="Humbert V de Beaujeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q921781" start="575" end="596" title="Humbert I of Viennois" label="Humbert I of Viennois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390909" start="636" end="658" title="Humbert II of Viennois" label="Humbert II of Viennois"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="698" end="716" title="Humbert I of Italy" label="Humbert I of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="731" end="750" title="Humbert II of Italy" label="Humbert II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68335" start="765" end="789" title="Humbert of Silva Candida" label="Humbert of Silva Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623954" start="852" end="869" title="Humbert of Romans" label="Humbert of Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q84535" start="925" end="949" title="Humbert Achamer-Pifrader" label="Humbert Achamer-Pifrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="1018" end="1033" title="Einsatzgruppe A" label="Einsatzgruppe A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1072" end="1081" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q294430" start="1091" end="1125" title="Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco" label="Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1182" end="1188" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370527" start="1220" end="1251" title="Brazilian military dictatorship" label="Brazilian military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q551999" start="1254" end="1270" title="Humberto Delgado" label="Humberto Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337101" start="1335" end="1350" title="Humberto Ortega" label="Humberto Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463516" start="1470" end="1491" title="Sandinista revolution" label="Sandinista revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939933" start="1494" end="1515" title="Humbert Roque Versace" label="Humbert Roque Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q275730" start="1559" end="1572" title="Agnès Humbert" label="Agnès Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647924" start="1694" end="1716" title="A. J. Humbert" label="Albert Jenkins Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q766065" start="1750" end="1765" title="Charles Humbert" label="Charles Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966300" start="1850" end="1868" title="Christophe Humbert" label="Christophe Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q96879" start="1898" end="1912" title="Gustav Humbert" label="Gustav Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738811" start="1939" end="1957" title="Jean-Henri Humbert" label="Jean-Henri Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641657" start="1989" end="2011" title="Jean Humbert (painter)" label="Jean Humbert (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q601658" start="2041" end="2059" title="Jean Emile Humbert" label="Jean Emile Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474206" start="2133" end="2159" title="Jean Joseph Amable Humbert" label="Jean Joseph Amable Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q55402114" start="2190" end="2203" title="Manon Humbert" label="Manon Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q42728903" start="2233" end="2246" title="Marie Humbert" label="Marie Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424117" start="2267" end="2288" title="Marie Georges Humbert" label="Marie Georges Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939950" start="2318" end="2333" title="Humbert surface" label="Humbert surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385475" start="2335" end="2361" title="Pierre Humbert (architect)" label="Pierre Humbert (architect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804232" start="2375" end="2405" title="Pierre Humbert (mathematician)" label="Pierre Humbert (mathematician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284583" start="2441" end="2460" title="Humbert polynomials" label="Humbert polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939943" start="2463" end="2477" title="Humbert series" label="Humbert series"/>
<link wikidata="Q469831" start="2480" end="2494" title="Nicole Humbert" label="Nicole Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346348" start="2543" end="2558" title="Thérèse Humbert" label="Thérèse Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q54007306" start="2598" end="2609" title="Ugo Humbert" label="Ugo Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043191" start="2660" end="2676" title="Humbert Aviation" label="Humbert Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127149" start="2782" end="2788" title="Lolita" label="Lolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q842292" start="2856" end="2895" title="Whisper of the Heart (film)" label="&amp;quot;Whisper of the Heart&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51543" start="2906" end="2921" title="The Cat Returns" label="The Cat Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736859" start="2965" end="2977" title="virtual band" label="virtual band"/>
<link wikidata="Q49847" start="2978" end="2999" title="Your Favorite Martian" label="Your Favorite Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23673" start="3029" end="3069" title="Once Upon a Time (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Once Upon a Time&amp;quot; (TV Series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026202" start="3086" end="3108" title="Humbert, Pas-de-Calais" label="Humbert, Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939860" start="3177" end="3202" title="Humberht (disambiguation)" label="Humberht (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478120" start="3205" end="3212" title="Umberto" label="Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636835" start="3248" end="3256" title="Humberto" label="Humberto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69837" wikidata="Q5153042" url="?curid=69837" title="Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology Integration">
<text>The Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology Integration was created as part of the Clear Skies Initiative in February 2002 by George W. Bush, as a Cabinet-level effort to coordinate climate change science and technology research.

The White House says:
:&quot;The Secretary of Commerce and Secretary of Energy will lead the effort, in close coordination with the President&#x27;s Science Advisor. The research effort will continue to be coordinated through the National Science and Technology Council in accordance with the Global Change Research Act of 1990.&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5153042" start="4" end="66" title="Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology Integration" label="Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130772" start="94" end="116" title="Clear Skies Initiative" label="Clear Skies Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="137" end="151" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="193" end="207" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="246" end="257" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="275" end="296" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029968" start="301" end="320" title="United States Secretary of Energy" label="Secretary of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349673" start="391" end="406" title="Office of Science and Technology Policy" label="Science Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978287" start="472" end="511" title="National Science and Technology Council" label="National Science and Technology Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570169" start="535" end="561" title="Global Change Research Act" label="Global Change Research Act"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69838" wikidata="Q1363897" url="?curid=69838" title="William Friese-Greene">
<text>William Friese-Greene (born William Edward Green, 7 September 1855 – 5 May 1921) was a prolific English inventor and professional photographer. He was known as a pioneer in the field of motion pictures, having devised a series of cameras between 1888–1891 and shot moving pictures with them in London. He went on to patent an early two-colour filming process in 1905. Wealth came with inventions in printing, including phototypesetting and a method of printing without ink, and from a chain of photographic studios. However, Friese-Greene spent all his money on inventing, went bankrupt three times, was jailed once, and died in poverty.

==Early life==
William Edward Green was born on 7 September 1855, in Bristol. He studied at the Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s Hospital school. In 1871, he was apprenticed to the Bristol photographer Marcus Guttenberg, but later successfully went to court to be freed early from the indentures of his seven-year apprenticeship. He married the Swiss, Helena Friese (born Victoria Mariana Helena Friese), on 24 March 1874 and, in a remarkable move for the era, decided to add her maiden name to his surname. In 1876, he set up his own studio in Bath and, by 1881, had expanded his business, having more studios in Bath, Bristol and Plymouth.

==Cinematic inventor==
===Experiments with magic lanterns===
In Bath he came into contact with John Arthur Roebuck Rudge. Rudge was a scientific instrument maker who also worked with electricity and magic lanterns to create popular entertainments. Rudge built what he called the Biophantic Lantern, which could display seven photographic slides in rapid succession, producing the illusion of movement. It showed a sequence in which Rudge (with the invisible help of Friese-Greene) apparently took off his head. Friese-Greene was fascinated by the machine and worked with Rudge on a variety of devices over the 1880s, various of which Rudge called the Biophantascope. Moving his base to London in 1885, Friese-Greene realised that glass plates would never be a practical medium for continuously capturing life as it happens. Hence he began experiments with the new Eastman paper roll film, made transparent with castor oil, before turning his attention to experimenting with celluloid as a medium for motion picture cameras.

===Movie cameras===

In 1888, Friese-Greene had some form of moving picture camera constructed, the nature of which is not known. On 21 June 1889, Friese-Greene was issued patent no. 10131 for a motion-picture camera, in collaboration with a civil engineer, Mortimer Evans. It was apparently capable of taking up to ten photographs per second using paper and celluloid film. An illustrated report on the camera appeared in the British &quot;Photographic News&quot; on 28 February 1890. On 18 February, Friese-Greene sent details of the camera to Thomas Edison, whose laboratory had begun developing a motion picture system, with a peephole viewer, later christened the Kinetoscope. The &quot;Photographic News&quot; report was reprinted in &quot;Scientific American&quot; on 19 April. In 1890 he developed a camera with Frederick Varley to shoot stereoscopic moving images. This ran at a slower frame rate, and although the 3D arrangement worked, there are no records of projection. Friese-Greene worked on a series of moving picture cameras into the early 1890s, but although many individuals recount seeing his projected images privately, he never gave a successful public projection of moving pictures. Friese-Greene&#x27;s experiments with motion pictures were to the detriment of his other business interests and in 1891 he was declared bankrupt. He had sold the rights to the 1889 moving picture camera patent for £500 to investors in the City of London. The renewal fee was never paid and the patent lapsed.

===Colour film===
Friese-Greene&#x27;s later exploits were in the field of colour in motion pictures. From 1904 he lived in Brighton where there were a number of experimenters developing still and moving pictures in colour. Initially working with William Norman Lascelles Davidson, Friese-Greene patented a two-colour moving picture system using prisms in 1905. He and Davidson gave public demonstrations of this in January and July 1906 and Friese-Greene held screenings at his photographic studio.

He also experimented with a system which produced the illusion of true colour by exposing each alternate frame of ordinary black-and-white film stock through two or three different coloured filters. Each alternate frame of the monochrome print was then stained red or green (and/or blue). Although the projection of prints did provide an impression of colour, it suffered from red and green fringing when the subject was in rapid motion, as did the more popular and famous system, Kinemacolor.

In 1911, Charles Urban filed a lawsuit against Harold Speer, who had purchased rights in Friese-Greene&#x27;s 1905 patent and created a company &#x27;Biocolour&#x27;, claiming that this process infringed upon the Kinemacolor patent of George Albert Smith, despite the fact that Friese-Greene had both patented and demonstrated his work before Smith. Urban was granted an injunction against Biocolour in 1912, but the Sussex-based, racing driver Selwyn Edge funded an appeal to the High Court. This overturned the original verdict on the grounds that Kinemacolor made claims for itself which it could not deliver. Urban fought back and pushed it up to the House of Lords, which in 1915 upheld the decision of the High Court. The decision benefited nobody. For Urban it was a case of hubris because now he could no longer exercise control over his own system, so it became worthless. For Friese-Greene, the arrival of the war and personal poverty meant there was nothing more to be done with colour for some years.

His son Claude Friese-Greene continued to develop the system with his father, after whose death in the early 1920s he called it &quot;The Friese-Greene Natural Colour Process&quot; and shot with it the documentary films &quot;The Open Road&quot;, which offer a rare portrait of 1920s Britain in colour. These were featured in a BBC series &quot;The Lost World of Friese-Greene&quot; and then issued in a digitally restored form by the BFI on DVD in 2006.

==Death==

On 5 May 1921, Friese-Greene – then a largely forgotten figure – attended a stormy meeting of the cinema trade at the Connaught Rooms in London. The meeting had been called to discuss the current poor state of British film distribution and was chaired by Lord Beaverbrook. Disturbed by the tone of the proceedings, Friese-Greene got to his feet to speak. The chairman asked him to come forward onto the platform to be heard better, which he did, appealing for the two sides to come together. Shortly after returning to his seat, he collapsed. People went to his aid and took him outside, but he died almost immediately of heart failure.

Given his dramatic death in poverty (his pockets contained only one shilling and ten pence when he died), surrounded by film industry representatives who had almost entirely forgotten about his role in motion pictures, there was a spasm of collective shock and guilt. A very grand funeral was staged for him, with the streets of London lined by the curious. A two-minute silence was observed in some cinemas, and a fund was raised to commission a memorial for his grave. He was buried in the eastern section of London&#x27;s Highgate Cemetery, just south of the entrance and visible from the street through the railings. However, his memorial was not designed by Edwin Lutyens, as is often stated. It describes him as &quot;The Inventor of Kinematography&quot;, a term Friese-Greene never used in talking about his achievements. Indeed, he often spoke generously about other workers in the field of capturing movement.

His second wife, Edith Jane, died a few months later of cancer and is buried with him, as are some of his children.

==Family==
After the death of his first wife, with whom he had one daughter, Friese-Greene married Edith Jane Harrison (1875–1921) and they had six sons, one dying in infancy. The eldest, Claude (1898–1943), and the youngest, Vincent (1910–1943), are buried with their parents. Vincent was killed in action during the Second World War.

His great-grandson is the musician Tim Friese-Greene.

==Legacy==
In 1951 a biopic was made, starring Robert Donat, based on the biography, &quot;Friese-Greene, Close-Up of an Inventor&quot;, as part of the Festival of Britain. The film, &quot;The Magic Box,&quot; was not shown until the festival was nearly over and only went on full release after it had finished. Despite the all-star cast, positive reviews, and much praise for Robert Donat&#x27;s performance, it was not a financial succes. Nonetheless, Martin Scorsese has many times cited it as one of his favourite films, and one that inspired him.

The film did not portray Friese-Greene as the inventor motion pictures, only a &quot;pioneer&quot;, but some of the British press represented the film as if it did. The pro-Edison American film historian Terry Ramsaye called the film a &quot;perversion of history&quot;. In 1955, Kodak employee Brian Coe wrote an article in the &quot;British Journal of Photography&quot; called &quot;The Truth About Friese Greene&quot; in reaction against the biography and the film, which expressed the view that Friese-Greene had not made any contribution to the development of the motion picture. Although Coe&#x27;s work was much cited for decades, it has been discredited by more recent research.

Friese-Greene was from then on more or less banished to obscurity by film historians, but newer research is rehabilitating him, giving a better understanding of his achievements and influence on the technical development of cinema.

Despite a campaign by Bristol photographer Reece Winstone for the retention of Friese-Greene&#x27;s birthplace for use as a Museum of Cinematography, among other purposes, it was demolished by Bristol Corporation in 1958 to provide parking space for six cars.
Premises in Brighton&#x27;s Middle Street where Friese-Greene had a workshop for several years are often wrongly described as his home. They bear a plaque in a 1924 design by Eric Gill commemorating Friese-Greene&#x27;s achievements, wrongly stating that it is the place where he invented cinematography. The plaque was unveiled by Michael Redgrave, who had appeared in &quot;The Magic Box&quot;, in September 1951. A modern office building a few yards away is named Friese-Greene House. Other plaques include the 1930s Odeon Cinema in Kings Road, Chelsea, London, with its iconic façade, which carries high upon it a large sculpted head-and-shoulders medallion of &quot;William Friese-Greene&quot; and his years of birth and death. There are busts of him at Pinewood Studios and Shepperton Studios.

In 2006 the BBC ran a series of programmes called &quot;The Lost World of Friese-Greene&quot;, presented by Dan Cruickshank about Claude Friese-Greene&#x27;s road trip from Land&#x27;s End to John o&#x27; Groats, entitled &quot;The Open Road&quot;, which he filmed from 1924 to 1926 using The Friese-Greene Natural Colour Process. The British Film Institute then worked on a new version, using post-production techniques to reduce the problems of flickering and colour fringing around moving objects, which Kinemacolor and this process had when projected. The result was a unique view of Britain in colour in the mid-1920s and extracts of it continue to frequently circulate virally on social media.

==See also==
*History of film technology

==References==
==External links==

*&quot;King&#x27;s Road 1891&quot; Early Friese-Greene test film, shot in London on perforated celluloid
*William Friese-Greene &amp; Me Blog covering latest research on Friese-Greene
*Friese-Greene on Timeline of Historical Film Colors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1363897" start="0" end="21" title="William Friese-Greene" label="William Friese-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363897" start="28" end="48" title="William Friese-Greene" label="William Edward Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="104" end="112" title="inventor" label="inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33231" start="130" end="142" title="photographer" label="photographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="186" end="201" title="motion pictures" label="motion pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="230" end="237" title="cameras" label="cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="294" end="300" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="316" end="322" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="399" end="407" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149547" start="419" end="435" title="phototypesetting" label="phototypesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q746628" start="507" end="514" title="studios" label="studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="578" end="586" title="bankrupt" label="bankrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="604" end="610" title="jailed" label="jailed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="629" end="636" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="708" end="715" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270308" start="735" end="766" title="Queen Elizabeth&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Queen Elizabeth&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="974" end="979" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="1174" end="1178" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="1249" end="1256" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="1261" end="1269" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219506" start="1367" end="1392" title="John Arthur Roebuck Rudge" label="John Arthur Roebuck Rudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="1471" end="1484" title="magic lantern" label="magic lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q146612" start="2246" end="2255" title="celluloid" label="celluloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="2843" end="2856" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q669700" start="2966" end="2977" title="Kinetoscope" label="Kinetoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="3043" end="3062" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="3143" end="3155" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="3639" end="3647" title="bankrupt" label="bankrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016175" start="4060" end="4093" title="William Norman Lascelles Davidson" label="William Norman Lascelles Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q630548" start="4795" end="4806" title="Kinemacolor" label="Kinemacolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960355" start="4818" end="4831" title="Charles Urban" label="Charles Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q630548" start="5022" end="5033" title="Kinemacolor" label="Kinemacolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q768790" start="5044" end="5063" title="George Albert Smith (filmmaker)" label="George Albert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q117041" start="5254" end="5265" title="Selwyn Edge" label="Selwyn Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096738" start="5831" end="5851" title="Claude Friese-Greene" label="Claude Friese-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101934" start="6049" end="6062" title="The Open Road (1926 film series)" label="The Open Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748789" start="6168" end="6199" title="The Lost World of Friese-Greene" label="The Lost World of Friese-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401164" start="6408" end="6423" title="Connaught Rooms" label="Connaught Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="6545" end="6561" title="Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook" label="Lord Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="6996" end="7004" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q533697" start="7453" end="7470" title="Highgate Cemetery" label="Highgate Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="7591" end="7604" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096738" start="8153" end="8159" title="Claude Friese-Greene" label="Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8283" end="8299" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991354" start="8337" end="8354" title="Tim Friese-Greene" label="Tim Friese-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q116983" start="8404" end="8416" title="Robert Donat" label="Robert Donat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663784" start="8509" end="8528" title="Festival of Britain" label="Festival of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134041" start="8546" end="8559" title="The Magic Box" label="The Magic Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704934" start="9114" end="9127" title="Terry Ramsaye" label="Terry Ramsaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497647" start="9245" end="9275" title="British Journal of Photography" label="British Journal of Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306593" start="9874" end="9888" title="Reece Winstone" label="Reece Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q551426" start="10266" end="10275" title="Eric Gill" label="Eric Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q318263" start="10423" end="10439" title="Michael Redgrave" label="Michael Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="10639" end="10646" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="10850" end="10866" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278256" start="10871" end="10889" title="Shepperton Studios" label="Shepperton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10904" end="10907" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748789" start="10948" end="10979" title="The Lost World of Friese-Greene" label="The Lost World of Friese-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q285197" start="11000" end="11015" title="Dan Cruickshank" label="Dan Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483818" start="11065" end="11103" title="Land&amp;#x27;s End to John o&amp;#x27; Groats" label="Land&amp;#x27;s End to John o&amp;#x27; Groats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12607578" start="11607" end="11633" title="History of film technology" label="History of film technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69840" wikidata="Q150642" url="?curid=69840" title="Victor Emmanuel III">
<text>Victor Emmanuel III (; 11 November 1869 – 28 December 1947) was King of Italy from 29 July 1900 until his abdication on 9 May 1946. A member of the House of Savoy, he also reigned as Emperor of Ethiopia from 1936 to 1941 and King of the Albanians from 1939 to 1943, following the Italian invasions of Ethiopia and Albania. During his reign of nearly 46 years, which began after the assassination of his father Umberto I, the Kingdom of Italy became involved in two world wars. His reign also encompassed the birth, rise, and fall of the Fascist regime.

The first fourteen years of Victor Emmanuel&#x27;s reign were dominated by prime minister Giovanni Giolitti, who focused on industrialization and passed several democratic reforms, such as the introduction of universal male suffrage. In foreign policy, Giolitti&#x27;s Italy distanced itself from the fellow members of the Triple Alliance (the German Empire and Austria-Hungary) and colonized Libya following the Italo-Turkish War. Giolitti was succeeded by Antonio Salandra, Paolo Boselli, and Vittorio Emanuele Orlando. The First World War brought about Italian victory over the Habsburg Empire and the annexation of the Italian-speaking provinces of Trento and Trieste, completing the national unity of Italy, and the southern part of German-speaking Tirol (Sued-Tirol). For this reason, Victor Emmanuel was labelled the &quot;King of Victory&quot;. However, a part of Italian nationalists protested against the partial violation of the 1915 Treaty of London and what they defined as a &quot;mutilated victory&quot;, demanding the annexation of Croatian-speaking territories in Dalmatia and temporarily occupying the town of Fiume without royal assent.

During the early 1920s, several short-serving prime ministers, including the well-respected Giolitti, serving an unprecedented fifth term as prime minister, could not unify the country in the face of the growing Italian fascist movement. Strengthened by the economic downturn facing the country, the National Fascist Party led the March on Rome, and Victor Emmanuel appointed Benito Mussolini as prime minister. He remained silent on the domestic political abuses of Fascist Italy, and he accepted the additional crowns of the Emperor of Ethiopia in 1936 and the King of Albania in 1939 as a result of Italian imperialism under fascism. When World War II broke out in 1939, Victor Emmanuel advised Mussolini against entering the war. In June 1940, he relented and granted Mussolini sweeping powers to enter and conduct the war. 

Amidst the Allied invasion of Italy in 1943, Victor Emmanuel discharged Mussolini from the office of Prime Minister and signed the armistice of Cassibile with the Allies in September 1943. In the face of the coming German reprisal (Operation Achse), he and the government fled to Brindisi while the Germans established the Italian Social Republic as a puppet state in Northern Italy. Having signed the armistice with the Allies, he then declared war on Germany in October. He clashed constantly with Allied command. Under pressure from the Allies, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his powers to his son in June 1944, effectively ending his involvement in the war and in the government of Italy. Victor Emmanuel officially abdicated his throne in 1946 in favour of his son, who became King Umberto II. Victor Emmanuel hoped to strengthen support for the monarchy against an ultimately successful referendum to abolish it.

After the 1946 Italian institutional referendum established the Republic, Victor Emmanuel went into exile to Alexandria, where he died and was buried the following year in St. Catherine&#x27;s Cathedral, Alexandria. In 2017, his remains were returned to rest in Italy following an agreement between presidents Sergio Mattarella and Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. Victor Emmanuel was also called &quot;Sciaboletta&quot; (&quot;little sabre&quot;) by some Italians.

==Early years==


Victor Emmanuel III was born in Naples in the Kingdom of Italy to King Umberto I and Margherita of Savoy, the Queen consort. He was named after his grandfather, Victor Emmanuel II, King of Sardinia and later King of Italy. Unlike his paternal first cousin&#x27;s son, the tall Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta, Victor Emmanuel was short of stature even by 19th-century standards, to the point that today he would appear diminutive. From birth until his accession, Victor Emmanuel was known as &quot;The Prince of Naples&quot;. On 24 October 1896, he married Princess Elena of Montenegro.

==Reign==
===Accession to the throne===
On 29 July 1900, at the age of 30, Victor Emmanuel acceded to the throne upon his father&#x27;s assassination. The only advice that his father Umberto ever gave his heir was &quot;Remember: to be a king, all you need to know is how to sign your name, read a newspaper, and mount a horse.&quot; His early years showed evidence that, by the standards of the Savoy monarchy, he was a man committed to constitutional government. Even though his father was killed by an anarchist, the new king showed a commitment to constitutional freedoms.

Although parliamentary rule had been firmly established in Italy, the &quot;Statuto Albertino&quot;, or constitution, granted the king considerable residual powers. For instance, he had the right to appoint the prime minister even if the individual in question did not command majority support in the Chamber of Deputies. A shy and somewhat withdrawn individual, the King hated the day-to-day stresses of Italian politics, though the country&#x27;s chronic political instability forced him to intervene on no fewer than ten occasions between 1900 and 1922 to solve parliamentary crises.

===World War I===
When the First World War began, Italy at first remained neutral, despite being part of the Triple Alliance (albeit it was signed on defensive terms and Italy objected that the Sarajevo assassination did not qualify as aggression). In April 1915, Italy signed the secret Treaty of London committing itself to enter the war on the side of the Triple Entente. Most of the politicians opposed the war, and Italy&#x27;s Chamber of Deputies forced Prime Minister Antonio Salandra to resign. At this juncture, Victor Emmanuel declined Salandra&#x27;s resignation and personally made the decision for Italy to enter the war. The king possessed the right to do so under the &quot;Statuto,&quot; which stipulated that ultimate authority for declaring war rested with the crown.

Demonstrations in favour of the war were staged in Rome, with 200,000 gathering on 16 May 1915, in the Piazza del Popolo. The corrupt and disorganised war effort, the stunning loss of life suffered by the Royal Italian Army, especially at the great defeat of Caporetto, and the post–World War I recession turned the King against what he perceived as an inefficient political bourgeoisie. Nevertheless, the King visited the various areas of Northern Italy suffering repeated strikes and mortar hits from elements of the fighting there, and demonstrated considerable courage and concern in personally visiting many people, while his wife, the queen, took turns with nurses in caring for Italy&#x27;s wounded. It was at this time, the period of World War I, that the King enjoyed the genuine affection of the majority of his people. Still, during the war he received about 400 threatening letters from people of every social background, mostly members of the working class. On 8 November 1917, he met with the prime ministers of Britain (Lloyd George) and France (Paul Painlevé) at the Peschiera conference, where he defended Italy&#x27;s strategic decisions.

===Support for Mussolini===
The economic depression which followed World War I gave rise to much extremism among Italy&#x27;s sorely tried working classes. This caused the country as a whole to become politically unstable. Benito Mussolini, soon to be Italy&#x27;s Fascist dictator, took advantage of this instability for his rise to power.

====March on Rome====

In 1922, Mussolini led a force of his Fascist supporters on a March on Rome. Prime Minister Luigi Facta and his cabinet drafted a decree of martial law. After some hesitation the King refused to sign it, citing doubts about the ability of the army to contain the uprising without setting off a civil war.

Fascist violence had been growing in intensity throughout the summer and autumn of 1922, climaxing in rumours of a possible coup. On 24 October 1922, during the Fascist Congress in Naples, Mussolini announced that the Fascists would march on Rome to &quot;take by the throat our miserable ruling class&quot;. General Pietro Badoglio told the King that the military would be able without difficulty to rout the rebels, who numbered no more than 10,000 men armed mostly with knives and clubs whereas the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; had 30,000 soldiers in the Rome area armed with heavy weapons, armoured cars, and machine guns. During the &quot;March on Rome&quot;, the Fascist &quot;squadristi&quot; were halted by 400 lightly armed policemen, as the &quot;squadristi&quot; had no desire to take on the Italian state.

The troops were loyal to the King; even Cesare Maria De Vecchi, commander of the Blackshirts, and one of the organisers of the March on Rome, told Mussolini that he would not act against the wishes of the monarch. De Vecchi went to the Quirinal Palace to meet the king and assured him that the Fascists would never fight against the king. It was at this point that the Fascist leader considered leaving Italy altogether. But then, minutes before midnight, he received a telegram from the King inviting him to Rome. Facta had the decree for martial law prepared after the cabinet had unanimously endorsed it, and was very surprised when he learned about 9 am on 28 October that the king had refused to sign it. When Facta protested that the king was overruling the entire cabinet, he was told that this was the royal prerogative and the king did not wish to use force against the Fascists. The only politician Victor Emmanuel consulted during the crisis was Antonio Salandra, who advised him to appoint Mussolini prime minister and stated he was willing to serve in a cabinet headed by Mussolini.

By midday on 30 October, Mussolini had been appointed President of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister), at the age of 39, with no previous experience of office, and with only 32 Fascist deputies in the Chamber. Though the King claimed in his memoirs that it was the fear of a civil war that motivated his actions, it would seem that he received some &#x27;alternative&#x27; advice, possibly from the arch-conservative Antonio Salandra as well as General Armando Diaz, that it would be better to do a deal with Mussolini.

On 1 November 1922, the king reviewed the &quot;squadristi&quot; as they marched past the Quirinal Palace giving the fascist salute. Victor Emmanuel took no responsibility for appointing Mussolini prime minister, saying he learned from studying history that events were &quot;much more automatic than a result of individual action and influence&quot;. Victor Emmanuel was tired of the recurring crises of parliamentary government and welcomed Mussolini as a &quot;strong man&quot; who imposed &quot;order&quot; on Italy. Mussolini was always very respectful and deferential when he met him in private, which was exactly the behaviour which the king expected of his prime ministers. Many Fascist &quot;gerarchi&quot;, most notably Italo Balbo, regarded as the number two-man in Fascism, remained republicans, and the king greatly appreciated Mussolini&#x27;s conversion to monarchism. In private, Mussolini detested Victor Emmanuel as a tedious and tiresomely boring man, whose only interests were military history and his collections of stamps and coins, a man whom Mussolini sneered was &quot;too diminutive for an Italy destined to greatness&quot; (a reference to the king&#x27;s height). However, Mussolini told the other &quot;gerarchi&quot; that he needed the king&#x27;s support and that one day, another fascist revolution would take place &quot;without contraceptives&quot;.

===Building the fascist dictatorship===
The King failed to move against the Mussolini regime&#x27;s abuses of power (including, as early as 1924, the assassination of Giacomo Matteotti and other opposition MPs). During the Matteotti affair of 1924, Sir Ronald Graham, the British ambassador, reported: &quot;His Majesty once told me that he had never had a premier with whom he found it so satisfactory to deal as with Signor Mussolini, and I know from private sources that recent events have not changed his opinion&quot;. The Matteotti affair did much to turn Italian public opinion against Fascism, and Graham reported to London that &quot;Fascism is more unpopular by the day&quot; while quoting a high Vatican official as saying to him that Fascism was a &quot;spent force&quot;. The fact that Matteotti had been tortured by his killers for several hours before he was killed especially shocked Italian public opinion, who were much offended by the gratuitous cruelty of the &quot;squadristi&quot; killers. Given the widespread public revulsion against Mussolini generated by the murder of Matteotti, the king could have dismissed Mussolini in 1924 with a minimum of trouble and broad public support. Orlando told the king that the majority of the Italian people were tired of the abuses of the &quot;squadristi&quot;, of which the murder of Matteotti was only the most notorious example, and were hoping that he would dismiss Mussolini, saying that one word from the king would be enough to bring down his unpopular prime minister. The newspaper &quot;Corriere della Sera&quot; in an editorial stated the abuses of the Fascist government such as the murder of Matteotti had now reached such a point that the king had both a legal and moral duty to dismiss Mussolini at once and restore the rule of law. During the Matteotti affair, even pro-Fascist politicians like Salandra started to express some doubts about Mussolini after he took responsibility for all the Fascist violence, saying he did not order Matteotti&#x27;s murder, but he did authorise the violence of the &quot;squadristi&quot;, making him responsible for the murder of Matteotti. The king affirmed that &quot;the Chamber and the Senate were his eyes and ears&quot;, desiring a parliamentary initiative, according to the Statuto Albertino. The knowledge that the king and the Parliament would not dismiss the prime minister led to the Mussolini government winning a vote of no confidence in November 1924 in the chamber of deputies by 314 votes to 6 and in the Senate by 206 votes to 54. The deputies and the senators were unwilling to risk their lives by voting for a no-confidence motion as the king had made it clear that he would not dismiss Mussolini even if the motion did carry the votes of the majority.

Victor Emmanuel remained silent during the winter of 1925–26 when Mussolini dropped all pretence of democracy. During this time, the king signed without protest laws that eliminated freedom of speech and assembly, abolished freedom of the press, and declared the Fascist Party to be the only legal party in Italy. In December 1925, Mussolini passed a law declaring that he was responsible to the King, not Parliament. Under the &quot;Statuto Albertino&quot; Italian governments were legally answerable to Parliament, but politically answerable to the monarch. However, it had been a strong constitutional convention since at least the 1860s that they were legally and politically answerable to Parliament. In January 1926, the &quot;squadristi&quot; used violence to prevent opposition MPs from entering Parliament and in November 1926, Mussolini arbitrarily declared that all of the opposition MPs had forfeited their seats, which he handed out to Fascists. Despite this blatant violation of the &quot;Statuto Albertino&quot;, the king remained passive and silent as usual. In 1926, Mussolini had violated the &quot;Statuto Albertino&quot; by creating a special judicial tribunal to try political crimes with no possibility of a royal pardon. Even though the right of pardon was part of the royal prerogative, the king gave his assent to the law. However, the king did veto an attempt by Mussolini to change the Italian flag by adding the &quot;fasces&quot; symbol to stand beside the coat of arms of the House of Savoy on the Italian tricolour. The king considered this proposal to be disrespectful to his family, and refused to sign the law when Mussolini submitted it to him. By 1928, practically the only check on Mussolini&#x27;s power was the King&#x27;s prerogative of dismissing him from office. Even then, this prerogative could only be exercised on the advice of the Fascist Grand Council, a body that only Mussolini could convene.

Whatever the circumstances, Victor Emmanuel showed weakness from a position of strength, with dire future consequences for Italy and fatal consequences for the monarchy itself. Fascism was a force of opposition to left-wing radicalism. This appealed to many people in Italy at the time, and certainly to the King. In many ways, the events from 1922 to 1943 demonstrated that the monarchy and the moneyed class, for different reasons, felt Mussolini and his regime offered an option that, after years of political chaos, was more appealing than what they perceived as the alternative: socialism and anarchism. Both the spectre of the Russian Revolution and the tragedies of World War I played a large part in these political decisions. Victor Emmanuel always saw the Italian Socialists and Communists as his principal enemies, and felt that Mussolini&#x27;s dictatorship had saved the existing status quo in Italy. Victor Emmanuel always returned the fascist salute when the Blackshirts marched past the Quirinal Palace and he lit votive lamps at public ceremonies to honour the Fascist &quot;martyrs&quot; killed fighting against the Socialists and Communists. At the same time, the Crown became so closely identified with Fascism that by the time Victor Emmanuel was able to shake himself loose from it, it was too late to save the monarchy. In what proved to be a prescient speech, Senator Luigi Albertini called the king a &quot;traitor&quot; to Italy by supporting the Fascist regime and warned that the king would one day regret what he had done.

Victor Emmanuel was disgusted by what he regarded as the superficiality and frivolity of what he called the &quot;so-called elegant society&quot; of Rome, and as such, the king preferred to spend his time out in the countryside where he went hunting, fishing and reading military history books outside. A taciturn man who felt deeply uncomfortable expressing himself in conversation, Victor Emmanuel was content to let Mussolini rule Italy as he regarded &quot;Il Duce&quot; as a &quot;strong man&quot; who saved him the trouble from meeting various politicians as he had done before 1922.

===Lateran Treaty===
Victor Emmanuel was anti-clerical, being greatly embittered by the refusal of the Catholic Church to recognize Rome as the capital of Italy, but he realized that as long as the Catholic Church remained opposed to the Italian state, that many Italians would continue to regard the Italian state as illegitimate and that a treaty with the Vatican was necessary. However, when Orlando attempted to open negotiations with the Vatican in 1919, he was blocked by the king who was furious at the way in which the Catholic Church had maintained pro-Austrian neutrality during World War I. Aside from championing the authenticity of the Shroud of Turin, which belonged to the House of Savoy, the king had little interest in religion. In private Victor Emmanuel regarded the Catholic Church with a jaundiced eye, making remarks about senior clerics as being greedy, cynical and oversexed hypocrites who took advantage of the devout faith of ordinary Italians.

In 1926, the king allowed Mussolini to do what he prevented Orlando from doing in 1919, giving permission to open negotiations with the Vatican to end the &quot;Roman Question&quot;. In 1929, Mussolini, on behalf of the King, signed the Lateran Treaty. The treaty was one of the three agreements made that year between the Kingdom of Italy and the Holy See. On 7 June 1929, the Lateran Treaty was ratified and the &quot;Roman Question&quot; was settled.

===Popular support===

The Italian monarchy enjoyed popular support for decades. Foreigners noted how even as late as the 1930s newsreel images of King Victor Emmanuel and Queen Elena evoked applause, sometimes cheering, when played in cinemas, in contrast to the hostile silence shown toward images of Fascist leaders.

On 30 March 1938, the Italian Parliament established the rank of First Marshal of the Empire for Victor Emmanuel and Mussolini. This new rank was the highest rank in the Italian military. His equivalence with Mussolini was seen by the king as offensive and a clear sign that the ultimate goal of the fascist was to get rid of him.

As popular as Victor Emmanuel was, several of his decisions proved fatal to the monarchy. Among these decisions was his assumption of the crowns of Ethiopia and Albania and his public silence when Mussolini&#x27;s Fascist government issued German-style racial purity laws.

===Colonial expansion===
====Emperor of Ethiopia====
Prior to his government&#x27;s invasion of Ethiopia, Victor Emmanuel travelled in 1934 to Italian Somaliland, where he celebrated his 65th birthday on 11 November. In 1936, Victor Emmanuel assumed the crown as Emperor of Ethiopia. His decision to do this was not universally accepted. Victor Emmanuel was only able to assume the crown after the Italian Army invaded Ethiopia (Abyssinia) and overthrew Emperor Haile Selassie during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War.

Ethiopia was annexed to the Italian Empire. The League of Nations condemned Italy&#x27;s participation in this war and the Italian claim by right of conquest to Ethiopia was rejected by some major powers, such as the United States and the Soviet Union, but was accepted by Great Britain and France in 1938. In 1943, Italy&#x27;s possession of Ethiopia came to an end.

The term of the last acting Viceroy of Italian East Africa, including Eritrea and Italian Somaliland, ended on 27 November 1941 with surrender to the allies. In November 1943 Victor Emmanuel renounced his claims to the titles of Emperor of Ethiopia and King of Albania, recognizing the previous holders of those titles as legitimate.

====King of the Albanians====
The crown of the King of the Albanians had been assumed by Victor Emmanuel in 1939 when Italian forces invaded the nearly defenceless monarchy across the Adriatic Sea and caused King Zog I to flee.

In 1941, while in Tirana, the King escaped an assassination attempt by the 18-year-old Albanian patriot Vasil Laçi. Later, this attempt was cited by Communist Albania as a sign of the general discontent among the oppressed Albanian population. A second attempt by Dimitri Mikhaliov in Albania gave the Italians an excuse to affirm a possible connection with Greece as a result of the monarch&#x27;s assent to the Greco-Italian War.

===World War II===
====Pact with Germany====
Under the terms of the Pact of Steel signed on 22 May 1939, which was an offensive and defensive alliance with Germany, Italy would have been obliged to follow Germany into war in 1939. As the Pact of Steel was signed, the German Foreign Minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, told Mussolini that there would be no war until 1942 or 1943, but the Italian ambassador in Berlin, Baron Bernardo Attolico, warned Rome that the information he was hearing from sources in the German government suggested that Hitler was intent on seeing the Danzig crisis escalate into war that year. Between 11 and 13 August 1939, the Italian Foreign Minister, Count Galeazzo Ciano, visited Hitler at the Berghof, and learned for the first time that Germany was definitely going to invade Poland later that same summer. Mussolini at first was prepared to follow Germany into war in 1939, but was blocked by Victor Emmanuel. At a meeting with Count Ciano on 24 August 1939, the king stated that &quot;we are absolutely in no condition to wage war&quot;; the state of the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; was &quot;pitiful&quot;; and since Italy was not ready for war, it should stay out of the coming conflict, at least until it was clear who was winning. More importantly, Victor Emmanuel stated that as the king of Italy he was the supreme commander-in-chief, and he wanted to be involved in any &quot;supreme decisions&quot;, which in effect was claiming a right to veto any decision Mussolini might make about going to war. On 25 August, Ciano wrote in his diary that he informed a &quot;furiously warlike&quot; Mussolini that the king was against Italy going to war in 1939, forcing &quot;Il Duce&quot; to concede that Italy would have to declare neutrality. Unlike in Germany where officers from 1934 onward took an oath of personal loyalty to Hitler, officers of the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot;, &quot;Regina Marina&quot; and the &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot; all took their oaths of loyalty to the king, not Mussolini. The vast majority of the Italian officers in all three services saw Victor Emmanuel as opposed to Mussolini as the principal locus of their loyalty, allowing the king to check decisions by Mussolini that he disapproved of.

Italy declared neutrality in September 1939, but Mussolini always made it clear that he wanted to intervene on the side of Germany provided that this would not strain Italy&#x27;s resources too much (the costs of the wars in Ethiopia and Spain had pushed Italy to the verge of bankruptcy by 1939). On 18 March 1940, Mussolini met Hitler at a summit at the Brenner Pass and promised him that Italy would soon enter the war. Victor Emmanuel had powerful doubts about the wisdom of going to war, and at one point in March 1940 hinted to Ciano that he was considering dismissing Mussolini as Ciano wrote in his diary: &quot;the King feels that it may become necessary for him to intervene at any moment to give things a different direction; he is prepared to do this and to do it quickly&quot;. Victor Emmanuel hoped that a vote against Italy entering the war would be registered in the Fascist Grand Council, as he knew that the &quot;gerarchi&quot; Cesare Maria De Vecchi, Italo Balbo and Emilio De Bono were all anti-war, but he refused to insist upon calling the Grand Council as a precondition for giving his consent to declaring war. On 31 March 1940, Mussolini submitted to Victor Emmanuel a long memorandum arguing that Italy to achieve its long-sought &quot;spazio vitale&quot; had to enter the war on the Axis side sometime that year. However, the king remained resolutely opposed to Italy entering the war until late May 1940, much to Mussolini&#x27;s intense frustration. At one point, Mussolini complained to Ciano that there were two men, namely Victor Emmanuel and Pope Pius XII, who were preventing him from doing the things that he wanted to do, leading to state he wanted to &quot;blow&quot; the Crown and Catholic Church &quot;up to the skies&quot;.

====Joining the Axis====
Victor Emmanuel was a cautious man, and he always consulted all of the available advisors before making a decision, in this case, the senior officers of the armed forces who informed him of Italy&#x27;s military deficiencies. On 10 May 1940, Germany launched a major offensive into the Low Countries and France, and as the Wehrmacht continued to advance into France, the king&#x27;s opposition to Italy entering the war started to weaken by the second half of May 1940. Mussolini argued all through May 1940 that since it was evident that Germany was going to win the war that here was an unparalleled chance for Italy to make major gains at the expense of France and Britain that would allow Italy to become the dominant power in the Mediterranean. On 1 June 1940, Victor Emmanuel finally gave Mussolini his permission for Italy to enter the war, though the king retained the supreme command while only giving Mussolini power over political and military questions. The delay between the king&#x27;s permission to enter the war and the declaration of war was caused by Mussolini&#x27;s demand that he have the powers of supreme command, an attempt to take away a royal prerogative that Victor Emmanuel rejected, and was finally settled by the compromise of giving Mussolini operational command powers.

On 10 June 1940, ignoring advice that the country was unprepared, Mussolini made the fatal decision to have Italy enter World War II on the side of Nazi Germany. Almost from the beginning, disaster followed disaster. The first Italian offensive, an invasion of France launched on 17 June 1940, ended in complete failure, and only the fact that France signed an armistice with Germany on 22 June, followed by another armistice with Italy on 24 June allowed Mussolini to present it as a victory. Victor Emmanuel sharply criticized the terms of the Franco-Italian Armistice, saying he wanted Italy to occupy Tunisia, Corsica, and Nice, though the fact the armistice allowed him to proclaim a victory over France was a source of much pleasure to him. In 1940 and 1941, Italian armies in North Africa and in Greece suffered humiliating defeats. Unlike his opposition over going to war with major powers like France and Britain (who might actually defeat Italy), Victor Emmanuel blessed Mussolini&#x27;s plans to invade Greece in the fall of 1940, saying he expected the Greeks to collapse as soon as Italy invaded. Through the &quot;carabinieri&quot; (para-military police), Victor Emmanuel was kept well informed of the state of public opinion and from the autumn of 1940 onward received reports that the war together with the Fascist regime were becoming extremely unpopular with the Italian people. When Mussolini made Marshal Pietro Badoglio the scapegoat for the failure of the invasion of Greece and sacked him as Chief of the General Staff in December 1940, Badoglio appealed to the king for help. Victor Emmanuel refused to help Badoglio, saying that Mussolini would manage the situation just always as he had in the past. In January 1941, the king admitted to his aide-de-camp, General Paolo Puntoni, that war was not going well and the Fascist regime was becoming very unpopular, but he had decided to keep Mussolini on as a prime minister because there was no replacement for him. Because the king had supported Fascism, he feared that to overthrow the Fascist system would mean the end of the monarchy as the anti-Fascist parties were all republican.

During the invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, Victor Emmanuel moved to a villa owned by the Pirzio Biroli family at Brazzacco in order to be close to the front. In May 1941, Victor Emmanuel gave permission to his unpopular cousin, Prince Aimone, to become King of Croatia under the title Tomislav II, in an attempt to get him out of Rome, but Aimone frustrated this ambition by never going to Croatia to receive his crown. During a tour of the new provinces that were annexed to Italy from Yugoslavia, Victor Emmanuel commented that Fascist policies towards the Croats and Slovenes were driving them towards rebellion, but chose not to intervene to change the said policies. On 22 June 1941, Germany launched Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union. Mussolini had the king issue a declaration of war, and sent an Italian expeditionary force to the Eastern Front, through Victor Emmanuel was later to claim that he wanted only a &quot;token&quot; force to go to the Soviet Union, rather than the 10 divisions that Mussolini actually sent.

In late 1941, Italian East Africa was lost. The loss of Italian East Africa together with the defeats in North Africa and the Balkans caused an immense loss of confidence in Mussolini&#x27;s ability to lead, and many Fascist &quot;gerarchi&quot; such as Emilio De Bono and Dino Grandi were hoping by the spring of 1941 that the king might sack him in order to save the Fascist regime. In the summer of 1941, the &quot;carabinieri&quot; generals told the king that they were prepared to have the &quot;carabinieri&quot; serve as a strike force for a coup against Mussolini, saying if the war continued, it was bound to cause a revolution that would sweep away both the Fascist regime and the monarchy. Victor Emmanuel rejected this offer, and in September 1941, when Count Ciano told him the war was lost, blasted him for his &quot;defeatism&quot;, saying he still believed in Mussolini. On 11 December 1941, Victor Emmanuel rather glibly agreed to Mussolini&#x27;s request to declare war on the United States. Failing to anticipate the American &quot;Europe First&quot; strategy, the king believed that the Americans would follow an &quot;Asia First&quot; strategy of focusing all their efforts against Japan in revenge for Pearl Harbor, and that declaring war on the United States was a harmless move. The king was pleased by the news of Japan entering the war, believing that with Britain&#x27;s Asian colonies in danger that this would force the British to redeploy their forces to Asia and might finally allow for the Axis conquest of Egypt. Marshal Enrico Caviglia wrote in his diary that it was &quot;criminal&quot; the way that Victor Emmanuel refused to act against Mussolini despite the fact that he was clearly mismanaging the war. One Italian journalist remembered that by the fall of 1941 he did not know anyone who felt anything other than &quot;contempt&quot; for the king who was unwilling to disassociate himself from Fascism.

The British historian Denis Mack Smith wrote that Victor Emmanuel tended to procrastinate when faced with very difficult choices, and his unwillingness to dismiss Mussolini despite mounting pressure from within the Italian elite was his way of trying to avoid making a decision. Moreover, Victor Emmanuel had considerable respect for Mussolini, who he saw as his most able prime minister, and appeared to dread taking on a man whose intelligence was greater than his own. In a conversation with the papal nuncio, the king explained that he could not sign an armistice because he hated the United States as a democracy whose leaders were accountable to the American people; because Britain was &quot;rotten to the core&quot; and would soon cease to be a great power; and because everything he kept hearing about the massive losses sustained by the Red Army convinced him that Germany would win on the Eastern Front at least. Another excuse used by Victor Emmanuel was that Mussolini was allegedly still popular with the Italian people and that it would offend public opinion if he dismissed Mussolini. The Vatican favoured Italy exiting the war by 1943, but papal diplomats told their American counterparts that the king was &quot;weak, indecisive and excessively devoted to Mussolini&quot;.

====Disillusionment with Mussolini====
In the summer of 1942, Grandi had a private audience with Victor Emmanuel, where he asked him to dismiss Mussolini and sign an armistice with the Allies before the Fascist regime was destroyed only to be told to &quot;trust your king&quot; and &quot;stop speaking like a mere journalist&quot;. Grandi told Ciano that the king must be either &quot;crazy&quot; and/or &quot;senile&quot; as he was utterly passive, refusing to act against Mussolini. In late 1942, Italian Libya was lost. During Operation Anton on 9 November 1942, the unoccupied part of France was occupied by the Axis forces, which allowed Victor Emmanuel to proclaim in a speech at long last Corsica and Nice had been &quot;liberated&quot;. Early in 1943, the ten divisions of the &quot;Italian Army in Russia&quot; (&quot;Armata Italiana in Russia&quot;, or Armir) were crushed in a side-action in the Battle of Stalingrad. By the middle of 1943, the last Italian forces in Tunisia had surrendered and Sicily had been taken by the Allies. Hampered by lack of fuel as well as several serious defeats, the Italian Navy spent most of the war confined to port. As a result, the Mediterranean Sea was not in any real sense Italy&#x27;s &quot;Mare Nostrum&quot;. While the Air Force generally did better than the Army or the Navy, it was chronically short of modern aircraft.

===Efforts to save the monarchy===
As Italy&#x27;s fortunes worsened, the popularity of the King suffered. One coffee-house ditty went as follows:

By early 1943, Mussolini was so psychologically shattered by the successive Italian defeats that he was so depressed and drugged as to be almost catatonic at times, staring blankly into space for hours while high on various drugs and mumbling incoherently that the war would soon turn around for the Axis powers because it had to. Even Victor Emmanuel was forced to concede that Mussolini had taken a turn &quot;for the worse&quot;, which he blamed on &quot;that woman&quot; as he called Mussolini&#x27;s mistress, Clara Petacci. On 15 May 1943, the king sent Mussolini a letter saying Italy should sign an armistice and exit the war. On 4 June 1943, Grandi saw the king and told him that he had to dismiss Mussolini before the Fascist system was destroyed; when the king rejected that course under the grounds that the Fascist Grand Council would never vote against Mussolini, Grandi assured him that it would, saying the majority of the &quot;gerarchi&quot; were now against Mussolini. Using the Vatican as an intermediary, Victor Emmanuel contacted the British and American governments in June 1943 to ask if they, the Allies, were willing to see the House of Savoy continue after the war.

On 19 July 1943, Rome was bombed for the first time in the war, further cementing the Italian people&#x27;s disillusionment with their once-popular King. When the King visited the bombed areas of Rome, he was loudly booed by his subjects who blamed him for the war, which caused Victor Emmanuel to become worried about the possibility of a revolution which might bring in a republic. By this time, plans were being discussed within the Italian elite for replacing Mussolini. Victor Emmanuel stated that he wanted to keep the Fascist system going after dismissing Mussolini, and he was seeking to correct merely some of &quot;its deleterious aspects&quot;. The two replacements that were being mooted for Mussolini were Marshal Pietro Badoglio and his rival, Marshal Enrico Caviglia. As Marshal Caviglia was one of the few officers of the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; who kept his distance from the Fascist regime, he was unacceptable to Victor Emmanuel who wanted an officer who was committed to upholding Fascism, which led him to choose Badoglio who had loyally served Mussolini and committed all sorts of atrocities in Ethiopia, but who had a grudge against &quot;Il Duce&quot; for making him the scapegoat for the failed invasion of Greece in 1940. In addition, Badoglio was an opportunist who was well known for his sycophancy towards those in power, which led the king to choose him as Mussolini&#x27;s successor as he knew that Badoglio would do anything to have power whereas Caviglia had a reputation as a man of principle and honour. The king felt that Badoglio as prime minister would obey any royal orders whereas he was not so certain that Caviglia would do the same. On 15 July 1943, in a secret meeting Victor Emmanuel told Badoglio that he would soon be sworn in as Italy&#x27;s new prime minister and the king wanted no &quot;ghosts&quot; (i.e. liberal politicians from the pre-fascist era) in his cabinet.

====Coup d&#x27;état against Mussolini====

On the night of 25 July 1943, the Grand Council of Fascism voted to adopt an &quot;Ordine del Giorno&quot; (order of the day) proposed by Count Dino Grandi to ask Victor Emmanuel to resume his full constitutional powers under Article 5 of the &quot;Statuto.&quot; In effect, this was a motion of no confidence in Mussolini.

The following afternoon, Mussolini asked for an audience with the king at Villa Savoia. When Mussolini tried to tell Victor Emmanuel about the Grand Council&#x27;s vote, Victor Emmanuel abruptly cut him off and dismissed him in favour of Badoglio. He then ordered Mussolini&#x27;s arrest.

Publicly, Victor Emmanuel and Badoglio claimed that Italy would continue the war as a member of the Axis. Privately, they both began negotiating with the Allies for an armistice. The king was advised by his generals to sign an immediate armistice, since German troops in Italy were still outnumbered by Italian troops. But Victor Emmanuel was unwilling to accept the Allied demand for unconditional surrender, and as a result, the secret armistice talks in Lisbon were dragged out over the summer of 1943. Besides rejecting unconditional surrender as &quot;truly monstrous&quot;, Victor Emmanuel wanted from the Allies a guarantee that he would keep his throne; a promise that Italian colonial empire in Libya and the Horn of Africa would be restored; that Italy would keep the part of Yugoslavia that had been annexed by Mussolini; and finally the Allies should promise not to invade the Italian mainland, and instead invade France and the Balkans. Mack Smith wrote that these demands were &quot;unrealistic&quot; and caused much time to be wasted in the Lisbon peace talks as the Allies were willing to concede that Victor Emmanuel could keep his throne and rejected all of his other demands. In the meantime, German forces continued to be rushed into Italy.

====Armistice with the Allies====
On 8 September 1943, Victor Emmanuel publicly announced an armistice with the Allies. Confusion reigned as Italian forces were left without orders, and the Germans, who had been expecting this move for some time, quickly disarmed and interned Italian troops and took control in the occupied Balkans, France and the Dodecanese, as well as in Italy itself. Many of the units that did not surrender joined forces with the Allies against the Germans.

Fearing a German advance on Rome, Victor Emmanuel and his government fled south to Brindisi. This choice may have been necessary to protect his safety; indeed, Hitler had planned to arrest him shortly after Mussolini&#x27;s overthrow. Nonetheless, it still came as a surprise to many observers inside and outside Italy. Unfavourable comparisons were drawn with King George VI and Queen Elizabeth, who refused to leave London during the Blitz, and of Pope Pius XII, who mixed with Rome&#x27;s crowds and prayed with them after Rome&#x27;s working-class neighbourhood of Quartiere San Lorenzo had been destroyed by bombing.

Despite the German occupation, Victor Emmanuel kept refusing to declare war on Germany, saying he needed a vote by Parliament first, though that had not stopped him from signing declarations of war on Ethiopia, Albania, Great Britain, France, Greece, Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union and the United States, none of which had been sanctioned by Parliament. Under strong pressure from the Allied Control Commission, the king finally declared war on Germany on 8 October 1943. Ultimately, the Badoglio government in Southern Italy raised the Italian Co-Belligerent Army (&quot;Esercito Cobelligerante del Sud&quot;), the Italian Co-Belligerent Air Force (&quot;Aviazione Cobelligerante Italiana&quot;), and the Italian Co-Belligerent Navy (&quot;Marina Cobelligerante del Sud&quot;). All three forces were loyal to the King. Relations with the Allied Control Commission were very strained as the king remained obsessed with protocol, screaming with fury when General Noel Mason-Macfarlane met him wearing shirt sleeves and shorts, a choice of attire he considered very disrespectful. Victor Emmanuel was ultra-critical of the slow progress made by the American 5th Army and the British 8th Army as the Allies fought their way up the Italian peninsula, saying he wanted to return to Rome as soon as possible, and felt that all of the Allied soldiers fighting to liberate Italy were cowards. Likewise, Victor Emmanuel refused to renounce the usurped Ethiopian and Albanian crowns in favour of the legitimate monarchs of those states, claiming that the Fascist-dominated Parliament had given him these titles and he could only renounce them if parliament voted on the matter.

On 12 September, the Germans launched Operation Eiche and rescued Mussolini from captivity. In a short time, he established a new Fascist state in northern Italy, the Italian Social Republic (&quot;Repubblica Sociale Italiana&quot;). This was never more than a German-dominated puppet state, but it did compete for the allegiance of the Italian people with Badoglio&#x27;s government in the south.

By this time, it was apparent that Victor Emmanuel was irrevocably tainted by his earlier support of the Fascist regime. At a 10 April meeting, under pressure from ACC officials Robert Murphy and Harold Macmillan, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his constitutional powers to his son, Crown Prince Umberto. Privately, Victor Emmanuel told General Noel Mason-MacFarlane that by forcing him to give power to Umberto, the Allies were effectively giving power to the Communists.

By this time, however, events had moved beyond Victor Emmanuel&#x27;s ability to control. After Rome was liberated on 4 June, he turned over his remaining powers to Umberto and named him Lieutenant General of the Realm, while nominally retaining the title of king.

==Post war and fall of the monarchy==
===Abdication===

Within a year of the war&#x27;s end, public opinion forced a referendum on whether to retain the monarchy or become a republic. In hopes of helping the monarchist cause, Victor Emmanuel formally abdicated in favor of his son, who ascended to the throne as Umberto II on 9 May 1946.

===Abolition of the monarchy ===
This move failed. In the referendum held a month later, 54 per cent of voters favoured a republic, and the Kingdom of Italy was no more. Some historians such as Sir Charles Petrie, have speculated that the result might have been different if Victor Emmanuel had abdicated in favour of Umberto shortly after the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943, or at the latest had abdicated outright in 1944 rather than simply transferring his powers to his son. Umberto had been widely praised for his performance as &quot;de facto&quot; head of state beginning in 1944, and his relative popularity might have saved the monarchy. The Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini declared that he would not come back to Italy as a subject of the &quot;degenerate king&quot; and more generally as long as the house of Savoy was ruling; Benedetto Croce had previously stated in 1944 that &quot;as long as the present king remains head of state, we feel that Fascism has not ended, ... that it will be reborn, more or less disguised.&quot;

===Exile and death===
In any event, once the referendum&#x27;s result was certified, Victor Emmanuel and all other male members of the House of Savoy were required to leave the country. Taking refuge in Egypt, where he was welcomed with great honour by King Farouk, Victor Emmanuel died in Alexandria a year later, of pulmonary congestion. He was interred behind the altar of St Catherine&#x27;s Cathedral. He was the last surviving grandchild of Victor Emmanuel II of Italy. In 1948, &quot;Time&quot; magazine included an article about &quot;The Little King&quot;.

====2017 repatriation====
On 17 December 2017, an Italian air force military plane officially repatriated the remains of Victor Emmanuel III, which were transferred from Alexandria to the sanctuary of Vicoforte, near Turin, and interred alongside those of Elena, which had been transferred two days earlier from Montpellier, France.

==Legacy==
The abdication prior to the referendum probably brought back to the minds of undecided voters the monarchy&#x27;s role during the Fascist period and the King&#x27;s own actions (or lack of them), at the very moment monarchists hoped voters would focus on the positive impression created by Umberto and his wife, Maria José, over the previous two years. The &quot;May&quot; King and Queen, Umberto and Maria José, in Umberto&#x27;s brief, month-long reign, were unable to shift the burden of recent history and opinion.

Victor Emmanuel III was one of the most prolific coin collectors of all time, having amassed approximately 100,000 specimens dating from the fall of the Roman Empire up to the Unification of Italy and in 1897 becoming honorary president of the new Italian Numismatic Society, of which he was a founding member. On his abdication, the collection was donated to the Italian people, except for the coins of the House of Savoy which he took with him to Egypt. On the death of Umberto II in 1983, the Savoy coins joined the rest of the collection in the National Museum of Rome. Between 1910 and 1943, Victor Emmanuel wrote the 20-volume &quot;Corpus Nummorum Italicorum,&quot; which catalogued each specimen in his collection. He was awarded the medal of the Royal Numismatic Society in 1904.

After World War I, Avenue Victor-Emmanuel III in Paris was named after him in honour of Italy&#x27;s alliance in that war, but the king&#x27;s support of the Axis Powers led the road to be renamed Franklin D. Roosevelt Avenue in 1946 following the end of World War II.

In Florestano Vancini&#x27;s film &quot;The Assassination of Matteotti&quot; (1973), Victor Emmanuel is played by Giulio Girola.

==Honours==
===National orders and decorations===
* Kingdom of Italy:
** Knight of the Annunciation, &quot;1 January 1887&quot;; Sovereign, &quot;29 July 1900&quot;
** Grand Cross of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, &quot;1 January 1887&quot;; Sovereign, &quot;29 July 1900&quot;
** Grand Cross of the Crown of Italy, &quot;1 January 1887&quot;; Sovereign, &quot;29 July 1900&quot;
** Sovereign of the Military Order of Savoy
** Sovereign of the Civil Order of Savoy
** Sovereign of the Colonial Order of the Star of Italy
** Founder and Sovereign of the Order of the Roman Eagle, &quot;14 March 1942&quot;
** Mauritian Medal for Military Merit of 10 Lustrums
** War Merit Cross
** Commemorative Medal for the Italo-Austrian War 1915–1918
** Commemorative Medal of Campaigns of Independence Wars
** Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy
*Italian Albania:
** Sovereign of the Order of Besa, &quot;1939–1943&quot;
** Sovereign of the Order of Skanderbeg, &quot;1939–1943&quot;
* Sovereign Military Order of Malta: Bailiff Grand Cross of Honour and Devotion, &quot;10 February 1891&quot;

===Foreign orders and decorations===
==Family==
On 21 October 1896, Victor Emmanuel married Princess Elena of Montenegro, daughter of King Nicholas I of Montenegro. Their issue included:

# Yolanda (1 June 1901 – 16 October 1986), married Giorgio Carlo Calvi, Count of Bergolo on 9 April 1923. They had five children.
# Mafalda (19 November 1902 – 28 August 1944), married Prince Philipp of Hesse on 23 September 1925. They had four children. She died in the Nazi concentration camp at Buchenwald.
# Umberto, later Umberto II, King of Italy (15 September 1904 – 18 March 1983) married Princess Marie José of Belgium on 8 January 1930. They had four children.
# Giovanna (13 November 1907 – 26 February 2000), married King Boris III of Bulgaria on 25 October 1930. They had two children including Simeon II, King and later Prime Minister of Bulgaria.
# Maria Francesca (26 December 1914 – 4 December 2001), married Prince Luigi of Bourbon–Parma on 25 January 1939. They had four children.

==Ancestry==
==See also==
* Kingdom of Italy
* Italian Empire
* Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta, Viceroy and Governor-General of Italian East Africa
* Aimone, 4th Duke of Aosta, titular king Tomislav II of Croatia
==References==


==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
* Genealogy of recent members of the House of Savoy
* King Vittorio Emanuele III</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="0" end="19" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="64" end="77" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="148" end="162" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="183" end="202" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Emperor of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412197" start="225" end="246" title="King of the Albanians" label="King of the Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="410" end="419" title="Umberto I" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="425" end="441" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="465" end="475" title="world wars" label="world wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885257" start="525" end="551" title="fall of the Fascist regime in Italy" label="fall of the Fascist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q297190" start="644" end="661" title="Giovanni Giolitti" label="Giovanni Giolitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="678" end="695" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="763" end="786" title="universal male suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q153867" start="877" end="892" title="Triple Alliance (1882)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="898" end="911" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="916" end="931" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="967" end="984" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q354715" start="1012" end="1028" title="Antonio Salandra" label="Antonio Salandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q471232" start="1030" end="1043" title="Paolo Boselli" label="Paolo Boselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q297793" start="1049" end="1074" title="Vittorio Emanuele Orlando" label="Vittorio Emanuele Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1080" end="1095" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1135" end="1150" title="Habsburg Empire" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="1207" end="1213" title="Trentino" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q16293" start="1218" end="1225" title="Province of Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765912" start="1242" end="1256" title="National Unity and Armed Forces Day" label="national unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="1494" end="1515" title="1915 Treaty of London" label="1915 Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557053" start="1549" end="1566" title="mutilated victory" label="mutilated victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="1635" end="1643" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="1682" end="1687" title="Fiume" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="1923" end="1938" title="Italian fascist" label="Italian fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="2011" end="2033" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="2042" end="2055" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="2087" end="2103" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="2178" end="2191" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q839554" start="2313" end="2346" title="Italian imperialism under fascism" label="Italian imperialism under fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="2552" end="2576" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="Allied invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="2672" end="2694" title="armistice of Cassibile" label="armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q714259" start="2773" end="2788" title="Operation Achse" label="Operation Achse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="2821" end="2829" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="2864" end="2887" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="2909" end="2923" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="3333" end="3343" title="Umberto II" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="3476" end="3513" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="3575" end="3585" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450280" start="3638" end="3680" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Alexandria" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956186" start="3776" end="3793" title="Sergio Mattarella" label="Sergio Mattarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="3798" end="3818" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="3972" end="3978" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="3986" end="4002" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="4011" end="4020" title="Umberto I" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q135631" start="4025" end="4044" title="Margherita of Savoy" label="Margherita of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719039" start="4050" end="4063" title="Queen consort" label="Queen consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="4101" end="4119" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q845435" start="4121" end="4137" title="King of Sardinia" label="King of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="4148" end="4161" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431121" start="4217" end="4242" title="Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta" label="Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q181530" start="4500" end="4519" title="Elena of Montenegro" label="Elena of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="5027" end="5036" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q598854" start="5176" end="5193" title="Statuto Albertino" label="Statuto Albertino"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="5311" end="5325" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651272" start="5401" end="5420" title="Chamber of Deputies (Kingdom of Italy)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5634" end="5655" title="History of Italy#Giolitti" label="between 1900 and 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5715" end="5730" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153867" start="5797" end="5812" title="Triple Alliance (1882)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="5882" end="5904" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="Sarajevo assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="5976" end="5992" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="6047" end="6061" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q354715" start="6163" end="6179" title="Antonio Salandra" label="Antonio Salandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="6680" end="6698" title="Royal Italian Army" label="Royal Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="6734" end="6743" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234542" start="6753" end="6779" title="post–World War I recession" label="post–World War I recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="6850" end="6861" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="6915" end="6929" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="7431" end="7444" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="7510" end="7522" title="Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q315434" start="7536" end="7549" title="Paul Painlevé" label="Paul Painlevé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293849" start="7558" end="7578" title="Rapallo and Peschiera conferences" label="Peschiera conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7700" end="7711" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="7856" end="7872" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="7898" end="7905" title="Italian fascism" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="8060" end="8073" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q431330" start="8090" end="8101" title="Luigi Facta" label="Luigi Facta"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="8138" end="8149" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="8621" end="8636" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056880" start="9161" end="9183" title="Cesare Maria De Vecchi" label="Cesare Maria De Vecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="9202" end="9213" title="Blackshirts" label="Blackshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q354715" start="10078" end="10094" title="Antonio Salandra" label="Antonio Salandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="10272" end="10309" title="President of the Council of Ministers of Italy" label="President of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="10426" end="10433" title="Chamber of Deputies (Italy)" label="Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q354715" start="10642" end="10658" title="Antonio Salandra" label="Antonio Salandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q333778" start="10678" end="10690" title="Armando Diaz" label="Armando Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="11476" end="11487" title="Italo Balbo" label="Italo Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q267304" start="12297" end="12314" title="Giacomo Matteotti" label="Giacomo Matteotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651272" start="14316" end="14323" title="Chamber of Deputies (Kingdom of Italy)" label="Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510898" start="14332" end="14338" title="Senate of the Kingdom of Italy" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="15505" end="15530" title="constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330482" start="16793" end="16814" title="Fascist Grand Council" label="Fascist Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="17457" end="17466" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="17492" end="17510" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17532" end="17543" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236274" start="18251" end="18266" title="Luigi Albertini" label="Luigi Albertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q178331" start="19652" end="19667" title="Shroud of Turin" label="Shroud of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="20212" end="20226" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="20298" end="20314" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="20323" end="20331" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351925" start="20395" end="20409" title="Roman Question" label="Roman Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q735478" start="20558" end="20566" title="newsreel" label="newsreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201444" start="20816" end="20843" title="First Marshal of the Empire" label="First Marshal of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="21231" end="21239" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="21244" end="21251" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="21323" end="21354" title="Italian Racial Laws" label="German-style racial purity laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="21500" end="21518" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Italian Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="21620" end="21639" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Emperor of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="21819" end="21833" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="21845" end="21872" title="Second Italo-Abyssinian War" label="Second Italo-Abyssinian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="21903" end="21917" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="21923" end="21940" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="22114" end="22126" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q462140" start="22272" end="22302" title="Viceroy of Italian East Africa" label="Viceroy of Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="22314" end="22321" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="22326" end="22344" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Italian Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412197" start="22626" end="22647" title="King of the Albanians" label="King of the Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q714644" start="22697" end="22719" title="Italian invasion of Albania" label="Italian forces invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="22763" end="22775" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q60699" start="22787" end="22797" title="Zog of Albania" label="King Zog I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="22826" end="22832" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916561" start="22912" end="22922" title="Vasil Laçi" label="Vasil Laçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467864" start="22957" end="22974" title="Communist Albania" label="Communist Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="23166" end="23172" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="23221" end="23238" title="Greco-Italian War" label="Greco-Italian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q161859" start="23309" end="23322" title="Pact of Steel" label="Pact of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="23534" end="23556" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q514596" start="23664" end="23681" title="Bernardo Attolico" label="Bernardo Attolico"/>
<link wikidata="Q220105" start="23926" end="23940" title="Galeazzo Ciano" label="Galeazzo Ciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760890" start="26434" end="26442" title="Gerarca" label="gerarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056880" start="26449" end="26471" title="Cesare Maria De Vecchi" label="Cesare Maria De Vecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="26473" end="26484" title="Italo Balbo" label="Italo Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q354486" start="26489" end="26503" title="Emilio De Bono" label="Emilio De Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="27078" end="27091" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="27554" end="27603" title="Battle of France" label="major offensive into the Low Countries and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28716" end="28728" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="28744" end="28756" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q698178" start="28842" end="28863" title="Italian invasion of France" label="an invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862273" start="29142" end="29166" title="Franco-Italian Armistice" label="Franco-Italian Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017684" start="29201" end="29208" title="French protectorate of Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="29210" end="29217" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="29223" end="29227" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q696018" start="29379" end="29391" title="Operation Compass" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="29399" end="29405" title="Greco-Italian War" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="30021" end="30036" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419724" start="30386" end="30399" title="Paolo Puntoni" label="Paolo Puntoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="30766" end="30788" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53290" start="30874" end="30883" title="Brazzacco" label="Brazzacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="30989" end="31002" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="Prince Aimone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31014" end="31029" title="List of rulers of Croatia#King of the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1943)" label="King of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="31151" end="31158" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854595" start="31170" end="31179" title="Crown of Zvonimir" label="his crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="31467" end="31487" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165975" start="31586" end="31634" title="Italian Expeditionary Corps in Russia" label="Italian expeditionary force to the Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="31826" end="31845" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q354486" start="32066" end="32080" title="Emilio De Bono" label="Emilio De Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q353201" start="32085" end="32096" title="Dino Grandi" label="Dino Grandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164126" start="32777" end="32820" title="Italian declaration of war on the United States" label="request to declare war on the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q955197" start="33366" end="33381" title="Enrico Caviglia" label="Enrico Caviglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604679" start="33778" end="33794" title="Denis Mack Smith" label="Denis Mack Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="35548" end="35561" title="Italian Libya" label="Italian Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q691565" start="35579" end="35594" title="Case Anton" label="Operation Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075488" start="35745" end="35752" title="Italian occupation of Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659016" start="35840" end="35862" title="Italian Army in Russia" label="Italian Army in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="35956" end="35976" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="36028" end="36035" title="Tunisian Campaign" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="36056" end="36091" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Sicily had been taken by the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q855186" start="36158" end="36170" title="Regia Marina" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="36228" end="36245" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922873" start="36291" end="36303" title="Mare Nostrum" label="Mare Nostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="36321" end="36330" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q275987" start="37088" end="37101" title="Clara Petacci" label="Clara Petacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641960" start="37793" end="37818" title="Bombing of Rome in World War II" label="bombed for the first time"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="38494" end="38509" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q955197" start="38533" end="38548" title="Enrico Caviglia" label="Enrico Caviglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330482" start="39768" end="39792" title="Grand Council of Fascism" label="Grand Council of Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q353201" start="39878" end="39889" title="Dino Grandi" label="Dino Grandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="40020" end="40043" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000387" start="40133" end="40145" title="Villa Ada" label="Villa Savoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="40449" end="40453" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="40503" end="40509" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="41704" end="41729" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="armistice with the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q714259" start="41866" end="41902" title="Operation Achse" label="disarmed and interned Italian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q708173" start="41960" end="41970" title="Dodecanese campaign" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="42176" end="42184" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="42454" end="42468" title="George VI of the United Kingdom" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="42473" end="42488" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="42525" end="42534" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="42543" end="42556" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q541703" start="42662" end="42683" title="Quartiere San Lorenzo" label="Quartiere San Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="43225" end="43239" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732906" start="43251" end="43278" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Army" label="Italian Co-Belligerent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q381570" start="43330" end="43362" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Air Force" label="Italian Co-Belligerent Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848018" start="43420" end="43447" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Navy" label="Italian Co-Belligerent Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309811" start="43676" end="43697" title="Noel Mason-Macfarlane" label="Noel Mason-Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q203491" start="43861" end="43878" title="United States Army North" label="American 5th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="43887" end="43903" title="British 8th Army" label="British 8th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="43918" end="43959" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="fought their way up the Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q698778" start="44421" end="44436" title="Operation Eiche" label="Operation Eiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="44550" end="44573" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="44661" end="44673" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000858" start="44960" end="44973" title="Robert Daniel Murphy" label="Robert Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="44978" end="44994" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="45070" end="45090" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Crown Prince Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309811" start="45132" end="45153" title="Noel Mason-MacFarlane" label="Noel Mason-MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840799" start="45448" end="45479" title="Luogotenente" label="Lieutenant General of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="46006" end="46022" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065760" start="46060" end="46078" title="Sir Charles Petrie" label="Sir Charles Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13003" start="46538" end="46554" title="Arturo Toscanini" label="Arturo Toscanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q192348" start="46710" end="46725" title="Benedetto Croce" label="Benedetto Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q124943" start="47116" end="47121" title="Kingdom of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="47171" end="47177" title="Farouk of Egypt" label="Farouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="47203" end="47213" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="47231" end="47251" title="pulmonary edema" label="pulmonary congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450280" start="47289" end="47318" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Alexandria" label="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="47360" end="47387" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="47404" end="47408" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471751" start="47668" end="47690" title="sanctuary of Vicoforte" label="sanctuary of Vicoforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="47697" end="47702" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="47792" end="47811" title="Montpellier, France" label="Montpellier, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q72919" start="48137" end="48147" title="Marie-José of Belgium" label="Maria José"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437510" start="48394" end="48409" title="coin collectors" label="coin collectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963410" start="48593" end="48619" title="Italian Numismatic Society" label="Italian Numismatic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="48817" end="48827" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135392" start="48894" end="48917" title="Museo Nazionale Romano" label="National Museum of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915792" start="49087" end="49124" title="medal of the Royal Numismatic Society" label="medal of the Royal Numismatic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385318" start="49408" end="49426" title="Florestano Vancini" label="Florestano Vancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596632" start="49445" end="49475" title="The Assassination of Matteotti" label="The Assassination of Matteotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q567417" start="49608" end="49634" title="Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation" label="Knight of the Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422957" start="49703" end="49744" title="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus" label="Grand Cross of Saints Maurice and Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276941" start="49813" end="49846" title="Order of the Crown of Italy" label="Grand Cross of the Crown of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559783" start="49932" end="49955" title="Old Military Order of Savoy" label="Military Order of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206967" start="49976" end="49996" title="Civil Order of Savoy" label="Civil Order of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q571774" start="50017" end="50052" title="Colonial Order of the Star of Italy" label="Colonial Order of the Star of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480484" start="50085" end="50109" title="Order of the Roman Eagle" label="Order of the Roman Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q840944" start="50140" end="50155" title="Maurician medal" label="Mauritian Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541614" start="50193" end="50208" title="War Merit Cross (Italy)" label="War Merit Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142801" start="50212" end="50268" title="Commemorative Medal for the Italo-Austrian War 1915–1918" label="Commemorative Medal for the Italo-Austrian War 1915–1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497512" start="50272" end="50325" title="Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy" label="Commemorative Medal of Campaigns of Independence Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497512" start="50329" end="50370" title="Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy" label="Commemorative Medal of the Unity of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448131" start="50372" end="50387" title="Italian protectorate of Albania (1939–1943)" label="Italian Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302358" start="50409" end="50422" title="Order of Besa" label="Order of Besa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645150" start="50466" end="50485" title="Order of Skanderbeg" label="Order of Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181530" start="50712" end="50740" title="Princess Elena of Montenegro" label="Princess Elena of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283255" start="50754" end="50783" title="Nicholas I of Montenegro" label="King Nicholas I of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626207" start="50810" end="50817" title="Princess Yolanda of Savoy" label="Yolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525425" start="50859" end="50896" title="Giorgio Calvi di Bergolo" label="Giorgio Carlo Calvi, Count of Bergolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235832" start="50940" end="50947" title="Princess Mafalda of Savoy" label="Mafalda"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741" start="50993" end="51016" title="Prince Philipp of Hesse" label="Prince Philipp of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="51079" end="51083" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="51084" end="51102" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="51106" end="51116" title="Buchenwald" label="Buchenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="51120" end="51127" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q72919" start="51214" end="51235" title="Marie José of Belgium" label="Marie José of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q235168" start="51281" end="51289" title="Giovanna of Italy" label="Giovanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="51342" end="51363" title="Boris III of Bulgaria" label="Boris III of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060355" start="51416" end="51425" title="Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Simeon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404583" start="51442" end="51468" title="Prime Minister of Bulgaria" label="Prime Minister of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961095" start="51472" end="51487" title="Princess Maria Francesca of Savoy" label="Maria Francesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q895187" start="51550" end="51563" title="Bourbon–Parma" label="Bourbon–Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="51637" end="51653" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="51656" end="51670" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q431121" start="51673" end="51698" title="Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta" label="Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="51700" end="51707" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="51712" end="51728" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="51732" end="51751" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="51754" end="51779" title="Aimone, 4th Duke of Aosta" label="Aimone, 4th Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="51794" end="51816" title="Tomislav II of Croatia" label="Tomislav II of Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69841" wikidata="Q270263" url="?curid=69841" title="London Zoo">
<text>London Zoo, previously known as ZSL London Zoo or London Zoological Gardens and sometimes called Regent&#x27;s Park Zoo, is the world&#x27;s oldest scientific zoo. It was opened in London on 27 April 1828, and was originally intended to be used as a collection for scientific study. In 1831 or 1832, the animals of the Tower of London menagerie were transferred to the zoo&#x27;s collection. It was opened to the public in 1847. As of December 2022, it houses a collection of 14,926 individuals, making it one of the largest collections in the United Kingdom.

It is managed under the aegis of the Zoological Society of London (established in 1826), and is situated at the northern edge of Regent&#x27;s Park, on the boundary line between the City of Westminster and the borough of Camden (the Regent&#x27;s Canal runs through it). The Society also has a more spacious site at Whipsnade Zoo in Bedfordshire to which the larger animals such as elephants and rhinos have been moved.
As well as being the first scientific zoo, London Zoo also opened the first reptile house (1849), the first public aquarium (1853), first insect house (1881) and the first children&#x27;s zoo (1938).

ZSL receives no state funding and relies on &#x27;Fellows&#x27; and &#x27;Friends&#x27; memberships, entrance fees, venue hire, and sponsorship to generate income.

==History==
===1828–1938===

The Zoological Society of London (ZSL) was established by Sir Stamford Raffles and Sir Humphry Davy in 1826, who obtained the land for the zoo and saw the plans before Raffles died of apoplexy (a stroke) later that year on 5 July, his birthday. After his death, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne took over the project and supervised the building of the first animal houses. The zoo opened in April 1828 to fellows of the Society, providing access to species such as Arabian oryx, greater kudus, orangutan and the now extinct quagga and thylacine. The Society was granted a royal charter in 1829 by King George IV, and in 1847 the zoo opened to the public to aid funding.

It was believed that tropical animals could not survive outside in London&#x27;s cold weather, so they were all kept indoors until 1902, when Peter Chalmers Mitchell was appointed secretary of the Society. He set about a major reorganisation of the buildings and enclosures of the zoo, bringing many of the animals out into the open, where many thrived. This was an idea inspired by Hamburg Zoo, and led to newer designs for many of the buildings. Mitchell also envisaged a new park to the north of London, and in 1926 Hall Farm, near to Whipsnade village, was bought. In 1931, Whipsnade Wild Animal Park, the world&#x27;s first open zoological park, opened. The first woman to be a curator at London Zoo was Evelyn Cheesman, in 1920.

===Second World War 1939–1945===
After the start of the Second World War, the London Zoo was closed multiple times for over a week, the first time being at 11:00 am on 3 September 1939, when all zoological places were closed by government order. Valuable animals were transferred to Whipsnade Zoo during the war for safety. On 27 September 1940, high explosive bombs damaged the Rodent house, the Civet house, the gardener&#x27;s office, the propagating sheds, the North Gate and the Zebra house. In January 1941, the Camel House was also hit, and the aquarium could not open until May 1943 due to extensive bombing. No animals were harmed during the incidents, although a zebra, a female ass, and her foal escaped from the zoo during the bombings. For safety reasons, all venomous animals were killed at London Zoo. Throughout the war, members of the armed forces paid half price for entry, and the wounded entered free of charge.

===Since 1946===

In 1962, &#x27;Caroline&#x27;, an Arabian oryx, was lent to Phoenix Zoo, Arizona, US, in the world&#x27;s first international co-operative breeding programme. Today, the zoo participates in breeding programmes for over 130 species.

In the 1980s, London Zoo housed 8,000 animals of more than 900 species, and in the 1990s, the zoo possessed 7,000 animals of 850 species; the next biggest collection in Britain was Chester Zoo, with just under 3,500 animals. Many of the species in London Zoo could not be seen anywhere else in the country, such as the wombat, Tasmanian devil or long-nosed potoroo. Although this vast collection was part of the zoo&#x27;s appeal, it may also have been one of the main causes of its financial problems. This contributed to the zoo being faced with closure in the 1980s. Due to the public change of attitude to animals kept in captivity and unsuitably cramped space, the zoo also suffered dwindling visitor numbers. However, when it was announced that London Zoo would close in 1991, a swell of public support in visitors and donations allowed the zoo to continue its work, attempt to balance its books and take on the huge task of restoring its buildings and creating environments more suitable for animal behaviour in the late 20th century. The BAFTA winning 1993 documentary series &quot;The Ark&quot; by Molly Dineen chronicled this period of time.

One benefit of the &#x27;swell of public support&#x27; was the development of volunteer staff. Volunteers who give one day a week to assist the running of London Zoo, wearing red pullovers, are employed by both Education and Animal care.

During the covid epidemic, which started in 2020, the zoo was closed from 21 March to 15 June 2020. This closure resulted in a &quot;perilous financial position&quot; for the zoo due to the loss of revenue.

The Snowdon Aviary was redeveloped as Monkey Valley, opening in 2022.

==Areas and attractions==
The Zoo has many named areas and attractions. Several of them are available for hire outside the zoo&#x27;s opening hours, including The Terrace, Penguin Beach, Ninos cove, Tiny Giants, Land of the Lions, Tiger Territory, and Attenborough Komodo Dragon House.

===Monkey Valley===

The Snowdon Aviary was designed by Cedric Price, Frank Newby and Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon, built between 1962 and 1964, and opened in 1965. It was Britain&#x27;s first public, walk-through aviary, and primarily housed shorebirds such as gulls and ibis. It is constructed with a pyramidal aluminium framework reaching 21m high. In 2021, the aviary was re-developed into a walkthrough primatarium called &quot;Monkey Valley&quot;, which opened to the public in August 2022 and houses a troop of eastern black and white colobus monkeys. The structure has been a Grade II* listed building since 1998.

===Land of the Lions===
Land of the Lions is London Zoo&#x27;s Asiatic lion enclosure, opened in 2016. It covers 2,500 square metres, and is designed to resemble an Indian town on the edge of the Gir Forest National Park, intended to demonstrate how the lion&#x27;s natural habitat overlaps with local urban environments. Hanuman langurs, small Indian mongooses, and Rüppell&#x27;s vultures are also displayed in this area.

===Tiger Territory===
Tiger Territory is London Zoo&#x27;s Sumatran tiger enclosure, designed by architect Michael Kozdon and officially opened by the Duke of Edinburgh in March 2013. The zoo currently houses four tigers: a male named Asim, a female named Gaysha, and their two cubs, Zac and Crispin, born in June 2022. The enclosure is 2,500 square metres (27,000 square feet) in size and features authentic Indonesian plant life, as well as a net canopy of 3mm steel cable supported by four metal poles.

===The Casson Pavilion ===
The Casson Pavilion is one of the zoo&#x27;s Grade II listed buildings and was designed by architect Sir Hugh Casson between 1962 and 1965. The building was originally built to house rhinos and elephants. However, after an accident in which a keeper was killed in 2001, the animals were relocated to Whipsnade Zoo, and since then, the building has housed camels and porcupines. At one point, it was also part of Tiger Territory when it housed bearded pigs and Malayan tapirs. It is now its own exhibit, known as The Cassons, and it houses a family of red river hogs and babirusas.

===Gorilla Kingdom===
Opened by the Duke of Edinburgh in March 2007, Gorilla Kingdom consists of a moated island, home to a group of western lowland gorillas. The zoo currently holds seven gorillas: an adult male named Kiburi, two adult females named Mjukuu and Effie, a juvenile female named Alika (the daughter of Mjukuu and former silverback Kumbuka) born in December 2014, a juvenile male named Gernot (the son of Effie and former silverback Kumbuka) born in November 2015, a female infant named Juno born to mother Mjukuu on 17 January 2024 and a second female infant named Venus was born to mother Effie on 8 February 2024, just three and a half weeks after the first. The Gorilla Kingdom area also features smaller enclosures housing white-naped mangabeys and Diana monkeys. The exhibit also features a walk-through aviary housing African birds.

===Into Africa===
Into Africa is an Africa-themed area that opened in April 2006. Animals on display in this area include Chapman&#x27;s zebras, common warthogs, okapis, common ostriches, giraffes, pygmy hippos, and African wild dogs. The Giraffe House at London Zoo, built in 1837, is the world&#x27;s oldest zoo building still used for its original purpose. The Giraffe House has been designated as a Grade II listed building because of its historical and architectural significance.

===Rainforest Life and Night Life===
Rainforest Life is a walk-through indoor exhibit that houses many species of South American rainforest animals. Among the species in the main forest walk-through are Linnaeus&#x27;s two-toed sloths, golden lion tamarins, red titi monkeys, red-faced spider monkeys, big hairy armadillos, Goeldi&#x27;s marmosets, southern tamandua, golden-headed lion tamarins, red-footed tortoises and Rodrigues flying foxes. The building also has a darkened area called &quot;Nightlife&quot;, which houses nocturnal animals such as Mohol bushbaby, slender lorises, West African pottos, Malagasy giant rats, aye-ayes and blind cave fish.

===The Outback===
The Mappin Terraces opened in 1913, and features an artificial rocky cliff made of concrete blocks for animal enrichment. This was the zoo&#x27;s first major attempt at recreating natural environments without bars, influenced by European zoos such as Tierpark Hagenbeck, and many different species have been kept in this enclosure during its lifetime, including bears, penguins, sheep, goats, kangaroos, leopards, and wild boar. The Mappin Terraces is currently an Australia-themed exhibit called &quot;The Outback&quot;, housing emus, red kangaroos and red-necked wallabies.

===The former Aquarium===
There was an aquarium at the zoo from 1853 until 2019. The zoo&#x27;s first aquarium was also the world&#x27;s first public aquarium, and was created and stocked by Philip Henry Gosse who coined the word &quot;aquarium&quot;, as a portmanteau of aquatic vivarium. In 1853 opened a building known as Fish House, while the most recent aquarium was built in 1921 next to and beneath the Mappin Terraces and was officially opened by King George V and his wife Queen Mary in April 1924. The collection in 1853 included 58 fish species and 200 invertebrate species.

The aquarium was separated into three halls, each home to different types of fish and other aquatic wildlife. The first hall primarily contained freshwater species such as rudd and European eels, as well as some saltwater species involved in various conservation projects and captive-breeding programmes, such as broad sea fans, uarus and seahorses. The second hall displayed various species of coral reef fish from around the world, such as clownfish, copperband butterflyfish and regal tangs, as well as real coral. The third hall housed species native to the Amazon River, including red-bellied piranhas, angelfish, arapaimas and ocellate river stingrays. In addition to the three halls, the aquarium also featured the &quot;Big Fish Tank&quot;. This tank housed large fish species that were all former pets. They had to be rescued because their owners did not have the proper equipment or understanding to care for them.

The dedicated London Aquarium, unconnected with ZSL, opened in 1997. The Zoo&#x27;s smaller aquarium closed on 22 October 2019; some of the aquatic creatures were moved to a new aquarium at Whipsnade Zoo, while others were set to be housed in a new corals exhibit in the Tiny Giants building in 2020.

===Animal Adventure===
Animal Adventure, formerly known as the Ambika Paul Children&#x27;s Zoo, was established in 2009. It is a dedicated area for children, featuring playgrounds and a water fountain. It was built after a child who loved visiting the zoo with her family, Ambika Paul, died from cancer. Her parents donated £1,000,000 to the zoo to build a children&#x27;s zoo in her honour. Many of the animals in Animal Adventure are domestic animals, such as llamas, alpacas, and goats, as well as kunekune pigs. Exotic species on display include Cape porcupines, South American coatis, and yellow mongooses.

At approximately 6 am on Saturday, 23 December 2017, a large fire broke out at Animal Adventure. The fire was brought under control by 9:30 am after spreading to the cafe and shop on the premises. It is estimated that three-quarters of the cafe/shop suffered severe damage. A nine-year-old aardvark named Misha was pronounced dead, and four meerkats were declared unaccounted for and presumed dead. The zoo reopened on Christmas Eve.

=== The former Reptile House ===
One of London Zoo&#x27;s most well-known buildings, the Reptile House opened in 1927 and was designed by Joan Beauchamp Procter and Sir Edward Guy Dawber. It housed several species of reptile, including Jamaican boa, Philippine crocodiles, Annam leaf turtles, Fiji banded iguanas, northern caiman lizards, puff adders, king cobras and emerald tree boas. In December 2012, a refurbished amphibian section was opened to the public, displaying amphibians such as Chinese giant salamanders, axolotls, African bullfrogs, Lake Oku clawed frogs, White&#x27;s tree frogs and various types of poison dart frog. A new Reptile House, titled &quot;The Secret Life of Reptiles and Amphibians&quot;, opened in Easter 2024.

===Giants of the Galápagos===
Giants of the Galápagos was opened in 2009 to coincide with the 200th birthday of Charles Darwin, and is home to three female Galápagos giant tortoises named Dolly, Polly and Priscilla. It includes a large indoor area with a heated pond and underfloor heating, while the outdoor paddock has been designed to mimic the tortoise&#x27;s natural environment and features two heated pools, one of which is a naturalistic clay wallow.

===The Attenborough Komodo Dragon House===

London Zoo&#x27;s Komodo dragon enclosure was opened by Sir David Attenborough in July 2004. The zoo used to own two Komodo dragons, a female named Rinka and a male named Raja. Raja was filmed in his exhibit for an action sequence in the 2012 James Bond film &quot;Skyfall&quot;. A new male dragon called Ganas (one of the parthenogenic hatchlings from Chester Zoo) moved to London in 2015 after the previous dragons died. Their enclosure is designed to resemble the dragon&#x27;s natural habitat of a dry river bed, and sounds of Indonesian birds are regularly played into the enclosure.

===Tiny Giants===
Tiny Giants, formerly called B.U.G.S., is an exhibit featuring invertebrates and fish. It is held in a building called The Millennium Conservation Centre, and the building displays over 160 species, including western honey bees, leafcutter ants, emperor scorpions, golden orb weavers, Madagascar orb weavers, Mexican redknee tarantulas, bird-eating spiders, desert locusts, moon jellyfish, partula snails and many others. 

It also features a large coral reef aquarium with corals and over 200 reef fish. The Millennium Conservation Centre aims to be environmentally friendly, constructed from materials requiring little energy to produce, and generating its heating from the body heat of both the animals and visitors. In May 2015, an exhibit called &quot;In With the Spiders&quot; opened in the exhibit as Europe&#x27;s first and only spider walkthrough exhibit. It houses many different types of spiders, including one of the United Kingdom&#x27;s most endangered animals, the fen raft spider, as well as golden orb weavers.

===Penguin Beach===
Penguin Beach opened on 26 May 2011 and houses Humboldt penguins. A single male northern rockhopper penguin named Ricky also lived there until he was moved to Whipsnade Zoo in March 2017. The pool itself is the largest penguin pool containing penguins in an English zoo.

===In with the Lemurs===
Opened in March 2015, In with the Lemurs is a walk-through exhibit housing a group of ring-tailed lemurs and Lac Alaotra bamboo lemurs. It also has a family of aye-ayes living in the indoor section as well as lesser hedgehog tenrecs. The exhibit is designed to resemble a shrub forest in Madagascar, featuring plant life such as loquat and Chusan palm trees.

===Meet the Monkeys===
Opened by comedians Noel Fielding and Julian Barratt of The Mighty Boosh in 2005, Meet the Monkeys is a walk-through enclosure that houses a troop of black-capped squirrel monkeys. The exhibit has no roof, and there are no boundaries between the monkeys and the visitors. It is the southernmost enclosure in the zoo.

===Butterfly Paradise===

Opened in May 2006, Butterfly Paradise houses several species of butterfly and moth from around the world, as well as plant species specially selected to provide nectar and breeding areas for the insects. Species on display include the clipper butterfly, blue morpho butterfly, atlas moth, zebra longwing, glasswing butterfly and postman butterfly. The exhibit also features a caterpillar hatchery and a pupa display cabinet, where visitors can witness different types of pupae and the development of new butterflies.

===Bird Safari===
The Bird Safari opened in 2005 as a redevelopment of the old stork and ostrich house, replacing enclosures that were outdated by modern zoo-keeping standards. It is a walk-through exhibit housing various species of birds including waldrapp ibises, Abdim&#x27;s storks, great arguses, emerald doves, and scarlet ibises.

===Blackburn Pavilion===
The Blackburn Pavilion is a rainforest-themed tropical bird aviary that opened in March 2008 as a refurbishment of the zoo&#x27;s outdated birdhouse. It rejuvenated the birdhouse by adding a walk-through element. The building was originally constructed in 1883 as a reptile house. The pavilion houses roughly 50 different species of exotic rainforest birds, including blue-crowned laughingthrushes, collared trogons, Socorro doves, red-crested turacos, splendid sunbirds and red-and-yellow barbets. Outside the entrance is one of the pavilion&#x27;s prominent features, a large elaborate clock by Tim Hunkin. It gives a bird-themed display every thirty minutes throughout the day.

===Gibbon Habitat===
The Gibbon Habitat is a new enclosure for the zoo&#x27;s two gibbons. It has two viewing points: one at ground level near the camel paddock and one at a higher level from Tiger Territory. One male pair is a northern white-cheeked gibbon, and the other is a hybrid species. They were initially housed in the Gorilla Kingdom.

===Meerkats and Otters===
The Meerkats and Otters exhibit, previously known as &quot;Happy Families&quot;, consists of two enclosures. One enclosure is home to Asian small-clawed otters, while the other enclosure houses meerkats. The exhibit was initially designed to accommodate meerkats, otters, European forest reindeer and Goeldi&#x27;s monkeys. However, the reindeer were relocated to Whipsnade Zoo, and the monkeys were transferred to the zoo&#x27;s Rainforest Life building.

===Three Island Pond===
Three Island Pond was only granted exhibit status in 2021. This artificially shaped pond is named after the three islands within it. It is separated into two enclosures: one houses greater flamingoes, and the other is home to Eastern white pelicans.

===Others===
Other notable animals in London Zoo&#x27;s collection include Bactrian camels, military macaws, hyacinth macaws, blue-throated macaws and Alaotran gentle lemurs.

The zoo&#x27;s north bank, north of the canal, formerly housed the bird incubation and rearing unit. The area is currently undeveloped.

==Subsidised entry==
London Zoo established a Community Access Scheme in 2019 to provide 100,000 subsidised tickets to charities and groups assisting low-income families, older individuals, and people with disabilities. The scheme is intended to run until 2023. This started with a grant from the National Lottery Heritage Fund to convert the Snowdon Aviary to a colobus monkey enclosure. The scheme was successful and was later extended to allow anyone who received certain benefits to buy tickets for £3, about a tenth of the full price, leading to visits by thousands of families, and long queues which were controlled by requiring pre-booking and capping numbers. Some visitors who were not receiving benefits complained about the crowds. 

 the Zoo was trying to ensure that the £3 tickets were not cannibalising demand for full-price tickets. However, they intended to maintain the £3 scheme if further funding became available. The director general of the Zoological Society of London described the result of the scheme as a &quot;brilliant development&quot;, despite the queues and challenges.

==Notable past animals==

Throughout its history, the zoo has had many well-known residents. Those individuals could have been scientifically important or simply beloved by the public.

Old Martin was a large grizzly bear, the first in Britain, moved to the zoo with many other animals from the Royal Menagerie, Tower of London when it was closed in 1832.

The zoo was home to the only living quagga ever to be photographed before the species became extinct in the wild due to hunting in southern Africa in about 1870. Other now extinct species the zoo once held were the thylacine, the Falkland Islands Wolf, a pair of pink headed ducks, some Passenger pigeons, the Bubal hartebeest, the Syrian wild ass, the Northern Sumatran rhinoceros, the Javan tiger, the Schomburgk&#x27;s deer, the Pinta Island tortoise, the Caspian tiger, the Glaucous macaw, as well as the endlings of the norfolk kaka, the Partula turgida snail, and the Santa Lucian Pilorie.
Obaysch was the first hippopotamus to be seen in Europe since the Roman Empire and the first in England since prehistoric times. The hippo arrived at the London Zoo in May 1850 as a gift from the Ottoman Viceroy of Egypt in exchange for some greyhounds and deerhounds. Obaysch led to a doubling of the zoo&#x27;s visitors that year.

In 1865, Jumbo, the largest elephant known at the time, was transferred to the zoo from Jardin des Plantes in Paris. His name, possibly from &quot;Jambo&quot;, Swahili for &quot;hello&quot;, became an epithet for anything of large size, such as Boeing&#x27;s 747 Jumbo jet. Jumbo became a crowd favourite due to his size, and would give rides to children on his back, including those of Queen Victoria. The sale of Jumbo sent the citizens of London into a panic, and 100,000 schoolchildren wrote to the Queen begging her to stop the sale. He was sold to Phineas Barnum&#x27;s circus, the Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, in 1882, where he was later crushed by a locomotive and killed.
Winnipeg the Bear (or Winnie) was an American black bear given to the zoo in 1914 by a Canadian lieutenant, Harry Colebourn. A. A. Milne visited with his son Christopher Robin, and the boy was so enamoured with the bear Milne wrote the famous series of books for him entitled &quot;Winnie-the-Pooh&quot;. A 2004 film, &quot;A Bear Named Winnie&quot;, is based on the story of Winnie the bear, with Michael Fassbender playing Harry Colebourn.

Mo Koundje (&#x27;Mok&#x27;), a western lowland gorilla, was purchased by the zoo in 1932. A new gorilla house was designed for him by Berthold Lubetkin. Mok died of Bright&#x27;s disease in 1938. His skeleton and skin were purchased by Leeds Museums and Galleries and are on display in Leeds, UK at Leeds City Museum and Leeds Discovery Centre.
Guy, a western lowland gorilla, arrived at the zoo on Guy Fawkes Night (hence the name) 1947 from Paris Zoo and lived at the zoo until he died in 1978. Over his 32-year life, he became one of the zoo&#x27;s best-loved residents. After years of trying to find a mate, in 1969 five-year-old Lomie arrived from Chessington Zoo. They were kept separated for a year to adjust to each other until they were finally united. Although they got on well together, they never produced any offspring. In 1982 Guy was commemorated by a bronze statue in Barclay Court, sculpted by William Timym.

Dumbo (born 1948) was a female Indian elephant who resided at London Zoo during the 1950s and was renowned for her fondness for sweets. Her parents were killed by hunters, and she was flown from India to England, where she spent her adult life giving rides to the children. Dumbo was named after the eponymous Disney character because she was the first elephant to travel by aeroplane. In 1958, she was transferred to Moscow Zoo in return for four endangered snow leopards. At some point between 1962 and 1971, Dumbo was acquired by circus performer Dolly Jacobs, but by 1978 she had been sold to Hollywood circus producer Paul V. Kaye and was living in California with three other elephants.

On 27 November 1949, Brumas became the first polar bear to be successfully bred at the zoo, and immediately became a major attraction with the public. This led to the zoo&#x27;s annual attendance to rise to over 3 million in 1950 - a figure that has yet to be topped. Despite being a female bear, the press mistakenly reported her as a &#x27;he&#x27;, and this error was not corrected, leading the public to believe the bear was a male. Eighteen years later, on December 1, 1967, the zoo welcomed its second polar bear cub, a male. He was named Pipaluk (a Greenlandic Inuit feminine given name meaning &quot;little one&quot; or &quot;sweet little thing&quot;) but, in 1985, had to leave the zoo when the Mappin Terraces closed.
One of the zoo&#x27;s most famous giant pandas, Chi Chi, arrived in 1958. Although originally destined for an American zoo, Washington, D.C. had ceased all trade with communist China, and so Chi Chi was refused entry to the United States. In the interests of conservation, ZSL had stated they would not encourage the collection of wild pandas. However, when it was pointed out that Chi Chi had already been collected, her purchase was approved, and she immediately became the star attraction at London Zoo. As the only giant panda in the West, she was the inspiration for Sir Peter Scott&#x27;s design for the World Wildlife Fund logo. In July 1972, Chi Chi died and was publicly mourned. The zoo&#x27;s last giant panda was Ming Ming. She arrived in 1991 on a breeding loan from China. After unsuccessful breeding attempts with Berlin&#x27;s Zoo giant panda Bao Bao, it was decided that Ming Ming should return to China. As a result, the London Zoo has been without a giant panda since the end of October 1994. Zoo staff later suggested that Chinese zookeepers knew that she was infertile and lent her in order to hide how much more advanced Western husbandry techniques were compared to theirs.

On 31 January 1996, the last known &quot;Partula turgida&quot; land snail named &quot;Turgi&quot; died in his habitat. For four days in late August 2005, the zoo ran an exhibit entitled the Human zoo, which put eight humans on display in the Mappin Terraces. The exhibit aimed to demonstrate the basic nature of man as an animal and examine our impact on the animal kingdom.

==Architecture==
Since its earliest days, the zoo has prided itself on appointing leading architects to design its buildings. Today, it holds two Grade I and eight Grade II listed structures.

The initial grounds were laid out in 1828 by Decimus Burton, the zoo&#x27;s first official architect from 1826 to 1841, made famous for his work on the London Colosseum and Marble Arch. Burton&#x27;s work began with the Clock Tower in 1828 above what was then the llama house, which today is the first aid kiosk. In 1830, the East Tunnel, which linked the north and south parts of the zoo together for the first time, was completed, which also acted as a bomb shelter during the Second World War. Burton concluded his work in 1837 with the Giraffe House, which, due to its functional design, still remains in use as the zoo&#x27;s giraffe enclosure in the &quot;Into Africa&quot; exhibit.

The earliest surviving exhibit is the Ravens&#x27; Cage, an ornate ironwork aviary now retained as a monument. It was installed in 1829, soon after the zoo first opened. Its location on the grounds has changed over time, and several refurbishments have been required due to weather damage.

The Eastern Aviary, along the eastern boundary, currently holds parrots and birds of prey. It was built in 1863 with a hooped tubular steel frame. In 1989, further renovations were carried out on the exhibit using &quot;invisible&quot; wire.

The Stork and Ostrich House, built in 1896, can still be seen as holding pens behind the current Bird Safari exhibit. Victorian structures that have been demolished over time included the Lion House, Monkey House, Carnivore Terrace, and Elephant and Rhino House.

After Burton, Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell and John James Joass were appointed to design the Mappin Terraces. Completed in 1914, the Mappin Terraces imitates a mountain landscape to provide a naturalistic habitat for bears and other mountain wildlife. In 1933 the Round House, designed by Berthold Lubetkin&#x27;s Tecton Architectural Group to house gorillas, was one of the first modernist style buildings to be built in Britain. The following year the Penguin Pool also designed by Tecton, was opened; both now grade I listed. The Modernist dual concrete spiral ramps of the Penguin Pool have made it famous as a piece of modern architecture, but in 2004 the African penguins were moved out of the pool permanently following &#x27;bumblefoot&#x27; infections in the birds caused by micro-abrasions from walking on the concrete.

The Snowdon Aviary, built-in 1964 by Cedric Price, Lord Snowdon and Frank Newby, made pioneering use of aluminium and tension for support. A year later, the Casson Pavilion, designed by Sir Hugh Casson and Neville Conder, was opened as an elephant and rhinoceros house. The Pavilion was commissioned &quot;to display these massive animals in the most dramatic way&quot; and designed to evoke a herd of elephants gathered around a watering hole.

Many of these buildings are available on a private hire basis for events, as well as a number of the animal houses. The profits from the use of spaces at the zoo are re-invested directly back into the society.

==In popular culture==
===In film and television===
Many films and television programmes have used London Zoo as a location for filming.

* The Zoo and its Aquarium appear in Hitchcock&#x27;s 1936 film Sabotage.
* In 1947, Carol Reed took his film crew and actors Ralph Richardson, Michèle Morgan and Bobby Henrey to London Zoo to film location scenes there for &quot;The Fallen Idol&quot; (released in 1948). Scenes were filmed inside the lion house, the reptile house, and on the Mappin Terraces. Today, the scenes provide a historical view of what the zoo looked like in the immediate post-war years.
* A scene from the film &quot;The Pumpkin Eater&quot; (1964) with Anne Bancroft and James Mason was also set at the zoo.
* In 1967, part of Dudley Moore and Peter Cook&#x27;s movie Bedazzled was filmed at the zoo.
* The opening sequence for series 3 and 4 of the 1973 ITV/Thames television show &quot;Man About The House&quot; was filmed in the London Zoological Gardens.
* During &quot;An American Werewolf in London&quot; (1981), the lead character David Kessler (played by David Naughton) woke up naked in the wolves&#x27; enclosure. Several other animals are also visible, and the old caged enclosures of the tigers and apes are clearly visible.
* Part of the film &quot;Turtle Diary&quot; (1985), based on the novel by Russell Hoban and starring Ben Kingsley and Glenda Jackson, was also filmed here; the film follows a plan to help two of the turtles escape from the zoo.
* In the final scene from the film &quot;Withnail and I&quot; (1987), a sad Withnail is shown standing in the pouring rain next to the former wolf enclosure, declaiming the speech What a piece of work is a man from &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
* In 2000, the Burmese python scene from the film &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot; (2001) was filmed at the zoo&#x27;s Reptile House. In reality, the tank shown is typically home to smaller reptile species. A plaque beside the enclosure commemorates the event.

==See also==

==References==
==Further reading==
* Wilfrid Blunt, &quot;The Ark in the Park: The Zoo in the Nineteenth Century&quot; (Hamish Hamilton, 1976).

==External links==

* London Zoo
* Article and film about the London Zoo (archived 12 May 2019)
* London Zoo in the 19th century
* Zoo Village</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="0" end="10" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="32" end="46" title="London Zoo" label="ZSL London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="50" end="75" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoological Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="97" end="119" title="London Zoo" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="159" end="162" title="zoo" label="zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="181" end="187" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="265" end="281" title="science" label="scientific study"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="319" end="344" title="Tower of London#Royal Menagerie" label="Tower of London menagerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q220198" start="598" end="626" title="Zoological Society of London" label="Zoological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q739341" start="690" end="708" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="743" end="762" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="782" end="788" title="London Borough of Camden" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004584" start="794" end="813" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q373187" start="877" end="890" title="Whipsnade Zoo" label="Whipsnade Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="894" end="906" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281788" start="1089" end="1104" title="public aquarium" label="public aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q459886" start="1153" end="1172" title="children&amp;#x27;s zoo" label="children&amp;#x27;s zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="1434" end="1454" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Sir Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="1459" end="1475" title="Humphry Davy" label="Sir Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264724" start="1560" end="1568" title="apoplexy" label="apoplexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="1572" end="1578" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q332639" start="1638" end="1688" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q237286" start="1859" end="1871" title="Arabian oryx" label="Arabian oryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q139487" start="1873" end="1885" title="greater kudu" label="greater kudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="1888" end="1897" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45969" start="1918" end="1924" title="quagga" label="quagga"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="1929" end="1938" title="thylacine" label="thylacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="1966" end="1979" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="1991" end="2005" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="King George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="2086" end="2094" title="tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q934653" start="2207" end="2230" title="Peter Chalmers Mitchell" label="Peter Chalmers Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220254" start="2448" end="2459" title="Zoological Garden of Hamburg" label="Hamburg Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519560" start="2603" end="2620" title="Whipsnade" label="Whipsnade village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061380" start="2774" end="2789" title="Evelyn Cheesman" label="Evelyn Cheesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2857" end="2873" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187022" start="3812" end="3823" title="Phoenix Zoo" label="Phoenix Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="3825" end="3832" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139243" start="4166" end="4177" title="Chester Zoo" label="Chester Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23175" start="4304" end="4310" title="wombat" label="wombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q134964" start="4312" end="4327" title="Tasmanian devil" label="Tasmanian devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q275608" start="4331" end="4349" title="long-nosed potoroo" label="long-nosed potoroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896557" start="5092" end="5104" title="Molly Dineen" label="Molly Dineen"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="5388" end="5402" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="covid epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5623" end="5636" title="#Monkey Valley" label="Monkey Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q555640" start="5999" end="6011" title="Cedric Price" label="Cedric Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488648" start="6013" end="6024" title="Frank Newby" label="Frank Newby"/>
<link wikidata="Q335260" start="6029" end="6072" title="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon" label="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="6366" end="6377" title="primatarium" label="primatarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q628239" start="6476" end="6514" title="Mantled guereza" label="eastern black and white colobus monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="6552" end="6567" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q182347" start="6644" end="6656" title="Asiatic lion" label="Asiatic lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q337028" start="6777" end="6801" title="Gir Forest National Park" label="Gir Forest National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q721407" start="6903" end="6917" title="Gray langur" label="Hanuman langur"/>
<link wikidata="Q123900653" start="6920" end="6941" title="small Indian mongoose" label="small Indian mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q55111925" start="6948" end="6970" title="Rüppell&amp;#x27;s vulture" label="Rüppell&amp;#x27;s vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q191129" start="7065" end="7079" title="Sumatran tiger" label="Sumatran tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="7157" end="7174" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="7723" end="7728" title="rhino" label="rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="7734" end="7742" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="7895" end="7901" title="camels" label="camels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="7906" end="7916" title="porcupines" label="porcupines"/>
<link wikidata="Q809606" start="7983" end="7995" title="Bornean bearded pig" label="bearded pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192710" start="8000" end="8013" title="Malayan tapir" label="Malayan tapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q654370" start="8091" end="8104" title="red river hog" label="red river hog"/>
<link wikidata="Q232558" start="8110" end="8118" title="babirusa" label="babirusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q876500" start="8255" end="8278" title="western lowland gorilla" label="western lowland gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365754" start="8863" end="8883" title="Sooty mangabey" label="white-naped mangabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q724362" start="8889" end="8901" title="Diana monkey" label="Diana monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="8968" end="8972" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9012" end="9018" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21400774" start="9098" end="9118" title="Chapman&amp;#x27;s zebra" label="Chapman&amp;#x27;s zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183255" start="9121" end="9135" title="common warthog" label="common warthog"/>
<link wikidata="Q82037" start="9138" end="9143" title="okapi" label="okapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17592" start="9146" end="9160" title="common ostrich" label="common ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="9164" end="9171" title="giraffe" label="giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22110899" start="9174" end="9186" title="pygmy hippopotamus" label="pygmy hippos"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="9192" end="9208" title="African wild dog" label="African wild dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="9592" end="9602" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q752691" start="9666" end="9696" title="Linnaeus&amp;#x27;s two-toed sloth" label="Linnaeus&amp;#x27;s two-toed sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208486" start="9699" end="9718" title="golden lion tamarin" label="golden lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56116551" start="9721" end="9737" title="Coppery titi" label="red titi monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q781191" start="9739" end="9762" title="red-faced spider monkey" label="red-faced spider monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042139" start="9765" end="9784" title="big hairy armadillo" label="big hairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206273" start="9787" end="9809" title="Goeldi&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Goeldi&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q267514" start="9812" end="9829" title="southern tamandua" label="southern tamandua"/>
<link wikidata="Q775442" start="9831" end="9857" title="golden-headed lion tamarin" label="golden-headed lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q277794" start="9860" end="9879" title="red-footed tortoise" label="red-footed tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091763" start="9885" end="9905" title="Rodrigues flying fox" label="Rodrigues flying fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143192" start="10016" end="10030" title="Mohol bushbaby" label="Mohol bushbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259581" start="10032" end="10045" title="slender loris" label="slender loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q747610" start="10049" end="10067" title="West African potto" label="West African potto"/>
<link wikidata="Q912350" start="10070" end="10088" title="Malagasy giant rat" label="Malagasy giant rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q186778" start="10091" end="10098" title="aye-aye" label="aye-aye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10104" end="10119" title="Mexican tetra#Blind cave form" label="blind cave fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="10502" end="10506" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="10509" end="10516" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="10519" end="10524" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="10526" end="10530" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="10533" end="10541" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="10558" end="10567" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="10670" end="10673" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53462" start="10676" end="10688" title="red kangaroo" label="red kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q249024" start="10694" end="10714" title="red-necked wallaby" label="red-necked wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="10756" end="10764" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q443062" start="10908" end="10926" title="Philip Henry Gosse" label="Philip Henry Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="11172" end="11185" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="11199" end="11209" title="Mary of Teck" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q302677" start="11476" end="11480" title="rudd" label="rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387" start="11485" end="11497" title="European eel" label="European eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q301518" start="11617" end="11630" title="broad sea fan" label="broad sea fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134059" start="11633" end="11637" title="uaru" label="uaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="11643" end="11651" title="seahorse" label="seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="11699" end="11709" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q472616" start="11746" end="11755" title="clownfish" label="clownfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q73897" start="11757" end="11781" title="copperband butterflyfish" label="copperband butterflyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q278307" start="11786" end="11796" title="regal tang" label="regal tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="11866" end="11878" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q928382" start="11890" end="11909" title="red-bellied piranha" label="red-bellied piranha"/>
<link wikidata="Q214145" start="11912" end="11921" title="Pterophyllum" label="angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9948893" start="11923" end="11931" title="arapaima" label="arapaima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297913" start="11937" end="11960" title="ocellate river stingray" label="ocellate river stingray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312744" start="12244" end="12259" title="London Aquarium" label="London Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12501" end="12512" title="#Tiny Giants" label="Tiny Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="12994" end="12999" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="13002" end="13008" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="13015" end="13019" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900949" start="13033" end="13046" title="Kunekune" label="kunekune pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q844420" start="13082" end="13096" title="Cape porcupine" label="Cape porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q148462" start="13099" end="13119" title="South American coati" label="South American coati"/>
<link wikidata="Q732544" start="13126" end="13141" title="yellow mongoose" label="yellow mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q46212" start="13435" end="13443" title="aardvark" label="aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q134015" start="13486" end="13493" title="meerkat" label="meerkat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690717" start="13718" end="13740" title="Joan Beauchamp Procter" label="Joan Beauchamp Procter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622190" start="13745" end="13766" title="Sir Edward Guy Dawber" label="Sir Edward Guy Dawber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383035" start="13816" end="13828" title="Jamaican boa" label="Jamaican boa"/>
<link wikidata="Q272402" start="13830" end="13850" title="Philippine crocodile" label="Philippine crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q564443" start="13853" end="13870" title="Annam leaf turtle" label="Annam leaf turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q978690" start="13873" end="13891" title="Brachylophus fasciatus" label="Fiji banded iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q959172" start="13894" end="13916" title="northern caiman lizard" label="northern caiman lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q369667" start="13919" end="13929" title="puff adder" label="puff adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48186" start="13932" end="13942" title="king cobra" label="king cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q620592" start="13948" end="13964" title="emerald tree boa" label="emerald tree boa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61312" start="14073" end="14097" title="Chinese giant salamander" label="Chinese giant salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q22718" start="14100" end="14107" title="axolotl" label="axolotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q387319" start="14110" end="14126" title="African bullfrog" label="African bullfrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705408" start="14129" end="14149" title="Lake Oku clawed frog" label="Lake Oku clawed frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q654682" start="14152" end="14174" title="White&amp;#x27;s tree frog" label="White&amp;#x27;s tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q53750" start="14197" end="14213" title="poison dart frog" label="poison dart frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="14435" end="14449" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20014035" start="14479" end="14503" title="Galápagos giant tortoise" label="Galápagos giant tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431222" start="14594" end="14612" title="underfloor heating" label="underfloor heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504" start="14845" end="14858" title="Komodo dragon" label="Komodo dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="14883" end="14905" title="David Attenborough" label="Sir David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="15070" end="15080" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941" start="15092" end="15099" title="Skyfall" label="Skyfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="15150" end="15163" title="parthenogenic" label="parthenogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139243" start="15180" end="15191" title="Chester Zoo" label="Chester Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30034" start="15644" end="15661" title="western honey bee" label="western honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q882257" start="15664" end="15678" title="leafcutter ant" label="leafcutter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142349" start="15681" end="15697" title="emperor scorpion" label="emperor scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338293" start="15700" end="15718" title="Trichonephila edulis" label="golden orb weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197513" start="15720" end="15742" title="Trichonephila inaurata" label="Madagascar orb weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q300963" start="15744" end="15770" title="Brachypelma smithi" label="Mexican redknee tarantulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q617000" start="15772" end="15790" title="bird-eating spider" label="bird-eating spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q281634" start="15793" end="15806" title="desert locust" label="desert locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q26864" start="15809" end="15823" title="Aurelia aurita" label="moon jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296067" start="15825" end="15839" title="Partula (gastropod)" label="partula snails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090659" start="16415" end="16430" title="Great raft spider" label="fen raft spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q10670" start="16443" end="16460" title="golden orb weaver" label="golden orb weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q224151" start="16531" end="16547" title="Humboldt penguin" label="Humboldt penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274339" start="16564" end="16591" title="northern rockhopper penguin" label="northern rockhopper penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q373187" start="16643" end="16656" title="Whipsnade Zoo" label="Whipsnade Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185385" start="16867" end="16884" title="ring-tailed lemur" label="ring-tailed lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q575671" start="16890" end="16914" title="Lac Alaotra bamboo lemur" label="Lac Alaotra bamboo lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q186778" start="16941" end="16948" title="aye-aye" label="aye-aye"/>
<link wikidata="Q613836" start="16990" end="17012" title="lesser hedgehog tenrec" label="lesser hedgehog tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="17069" end="17079" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41505" start="17110" end="17116" title="loquat" label="loquat"/>
<link wikidata="Q158383" start="17121" end="17132" title="Chusan palm" label="Chusan palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388430" start="17184" end="17197" title="Noel Fielding" label="Noel Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q936756" start="17202" end="17216" title="Julian Barratt" label="Julian Barratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14159540" start="17220" end="17236" title="The Mighty Boosh" label="The Mighty Boosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q834329" start="17314" end="17342" title="black-capped squirrel monkey" label="black-capped squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955014" start="17744" end="17761" title="Parthenos sylvia" label="clipper butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q633535" start="17763" end="17784" title="Morpho peleides" label="blue morpho butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q167435" start="17786" end="17796" title="atlas moth" label="atlas moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q169449" start="17798" end="17812" title="Heliconius charithonia" label="zebra longwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662974" start="17814" end="17833" title="glasswing butterfly" label="glasswing butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697054" start="17838" end="17855" title="Heliconius melpomene" label="postman butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="17885" end="17896" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q245414" start="18276" end="18289" title="Northern bald ibis" label="waldrapp ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q308199" start="18293" end="18311" title="Abdim&amp;#x27;s stork" label="Abdim&amp;#x27;s stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q652266" start="18314" end="18325" title="great argus" label="great argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q795565" start="18329" end="18341" title="emerald dove" label="emerald dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q467996" start="18348" end="18360" title="scarlet ibis" label="scarlet ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62079997" start="18758" end="18785" title="blue-crowned laughingthrush" label="blue-crowned laughingthrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034953" start="18789" end="18804" title="collared trogon" label="collared trogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q601538" start="18807" end="18819" title="Socorro dove" label="Socorro dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q769898" start="18822" end="18840" title="red-crested turaco" label="red-crested turaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226445" start="18843" end="18859" title="splendid sunbird" label="splendid sunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q267565" start="18865" end="18886" title="red-and-yellow barbet" label="red-and-yellow barbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420686" start="18987" end="18997" title="Tim Hunkin" label="Tim Hunkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q998141" start="19300" end="19329" title="northern white-cheeked gibbon" label="northern white-cheeked gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q244277" start="19578" end="19602" title="Asian small-clawed otter" label="Asian small-clawed otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q134015" start="19638" end="19645" title="meerkat" label="meerkat"/>
<link wikidata="Q134015" start="19698" end="19705" title="meerkat" label="meerkat"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="19708" end="19713" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304677" start="19716" end="19740" title="European forest reindeer" label="European forest reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206273" start="19745" end="19765" title="Goeldi&amp;#x27;s monkey" label="Goeldi&amp;#x27;s monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q373187" start="19808" end="19821" title="Whipsnade Zoo" label="Whipsnade Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179863" start="20106" end="20122" title="greater flamingo" label="greater flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q199427" start="20151" end="20172" title="Eastern white pelican" label="Eastern white pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="20251" end="20265" title="Bactrian camel" label="Bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q838924" start="20268" end="20282" title="military macaw" label="military macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q463154" start="20285" end="20299" title="hyacinth macaw" label="hyacinth macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q476593" start="20302" end="20321" title="blue-throated macaw" label="blue-throated macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q575671" start="20327" end="20348" title="Alaotran gentle lemur" label="Alaotran gentle lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742662" start="20786" end="20816" title="National Lottery Heritage Fund" label="National Lottery Heritage Fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20832" end="20846" title="#Monkey Valley" label="Snowdon Aviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359025" start="20852" end="20866" title="colobus monkey" label="colobus monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="20964" end="20972" title="Benefit (social welfare)" label="benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q29021424" start="21778" end="21788" title="Old Martin" label="Old Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="21801" end="21813" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="21887" end="21919" title="Royal Menagerie, Tower of London" label="Royal Menagerie, Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q45969" start="21985" end="21991" title="quagga" label="quagga"/>
<link wikidata="Q239509" start="22042" end="22061" title="extinct in the wild" label="extinct in the wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="22080" end="22095" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="22164" end="22173" title="thylacine" label="thylacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q205935" start="22179" end="22200" title="Falkland Islands Wolf" label="Falkland Islands Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q597144" start="22212" end="22228" title="pink headed duck" label="pink headed duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="22236" end="22252" title="Passenger pigeon" label="Passenger pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210851" start="22259" end="22275" title="Bubal hartebeest" label="Bubal hartebeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q946292" start="22281" end="22296" title="Syrian wild ass" label="Syrian wild ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706886" start="22302" end="22330" title="Northern Sumatran rhinoceros" label="Northern Sumatran rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q200381" start="22336" end="22347" title="Javan tiger" label="Javan tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q749836" start="22353" end="22375" title="Schomburgk&amp;#x27;s deer" label="Schomburgk&amp;#x27;s deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045992" start="22381" end="22402" title="Pinta Island tortoise" label="Pinta Island tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q188535" start="22408" end="22421" title="Caspian tiger" label="Caspian tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q916785" start="22427" end="22441" title="Glaucous macaw" label="Glaucous macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376203" start="22458" end="22465" title="endling" label="endling"/>
<link wikidata="Q379051" start="22474" end="22486" title="norfolk kaka" label="norfolk kaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q309512" start="22492" end="22507" title="Partula turgida" label="Partula turgida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762153" start="22523" end="22543" title="Santa Lucian Pilorie" label="Santa Lucian Pilorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409992" start="22545" end="22552" title="Obaysch" label="Obaysch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="22567" end="22579" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127878" start="22741" end="22756" title="Khedive" label="Ottoman Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q831999" start="22888" end="22893" title="Jumbo" label="Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="22907" end="22915" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q730948" start="22967" end="22985" title="Jardin des Plantes" label="Jardin des Plantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="23039" end="23046" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="23124" end="23130" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="23138" end="23141" title="Boeing 747" label="747"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="23142" end="23151" title="Wide-body aircraft" label="Jumbo jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="23266" end="23280" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q223766" start="23433" end="23447" title="P. T. Barnum" label="Phineas Barnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="23467" end="23493" title="Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="23536" end="23546" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919415" start="23559" end="23576" title="Winnipeg (bear)" label="Winnipeg the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="23596" end="23615" title="American black bear" label="American black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="23655" end="23665" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667989" start="23667" end="23682" title="Harry Colebourn" label="Harry Colebourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207036" start="23684" end="23695" title="A. A. Milne" label="A. A. Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585866" start="23717" end="23734" title="Christopher Robin Milne" label="Christopher Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188574" start="23841" end="23856" title="Winnie-the-Pooh" label="Winnie-the-Pooh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47500777" start="23883" end="23902" title="A Bear Named Winnie" label="A Bear Named Winnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="23957" end="23975" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q876500" start="24034" end="24057" title="western lowland gorilla" label="western lowland gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q827997" start="24137" end="24154" title="Berthold Lubetkin" label="Berthold Lubetkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246646" start="24168" end="24189" title="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q69790303" start="24239" end="24266" title="Leeds Museums &amp;amp; Galleries" label="Leeds Museums and Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515923" start="24302" end="24319" title="Leeds City Museum" label="Leeds City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q69789812" start="24324" end="24346" title="Leeds Discovery Centre" label="Leeds Discovery Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622717" start="24348" end="24351" title="Guy the Gorilla" label="Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q876500" start="24355" end="24378" title="western lowland gorilla" label="western lowland gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="24402" end="24418" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="Guy Fawkes Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070642" start="24656" end="24671" title="Chessington Zoo" label="Chessington Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="24870" end="24876" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019427" start="24914" end="24927" title="William Timym" label="William Timym"/>
<link wikidata="Q591305" start="24961" end="24976" title="Indian elephant" label="Indian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40895" start="25230" end="25256" title="Dumbo" label="eponymous Disney character"/>
<link wikidata="Q613676" start="25348" end="25358" title="Moscow Zoo" label="Moscow Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30197" start="25389" end="25401" title="snow leopard" label="snow leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289333" start="25480" end="25492" title="Dolly Jacobs" label="Dolly Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25645" end="25651" title="List of non-fictional bears#Brumas" label="Brumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="25669" end="25679" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995742" start="26169" end="26176" title="Pipaluk" label="Pipaluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25355" start="26180" end="26197" title="Greenlandic language" label="Greenlandic Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33602" start="26386" end="26397" title="giant panda" label="giant panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923351" start="26400" end="26407" title="Chi Chi (giant panda)" label="Chi Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="26519" end="26528" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q731311" start="26928" end="26939" title="Peter Scott" label="Peter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="26962" end="26981" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q309512" start="27591" end="27606" title="Partula turgida" label="Partula turgida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569977" start="27740" end="27749" title="Human zoo" label="Human zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="27767" end="27772" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="28016" end="28025" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="28099" end="28116" title="Listed building" label="listed structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q714418" start="28164" end="28178" title="Decimus Burton" label="Decimus Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670259" start="28271" end="28287" title="London Colosseum" label="London Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q845529" start="28292" end="28303" title="Marble Arch" label="Marble Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28598" end="28614" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q934653" start="29621" end="29648" title="Peter Chalmers Mitchell" label="Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241552" start="29653" end="29669" title="John James Joass" label="John James Joass"/>
<link wikidata="Q17527468" start="29870" end="29881" title="Round House (London Zoo)" label="Round House"/>
<link wikidata="Q827997" start="29895" end="29912" title="Berthold Lubetkin" label="Berthold Lubetkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692833" start="29920" end="29946" title="Tecton Group" label="Tecton Architectural Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="29987" end="29996" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17527142" start="30060" end="30072" title="Penguin Pool, London Zoo" label="Penguin Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q244813" start="30267" end="30282" title="African penguin" label="African penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q555640" start="30474" end="30486" title="Cedric Price" label="Cedric Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q335260" start="30488" end="30500" title="Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon" label="Lord Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488648" start="30505" end="30516" title="Frank Newby" label="Frank Newby"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="30541" end="30550" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="30555" end="30562" title="tension (physics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216803" start="30627" end="30638" title="Hugh Casson" label="Hugh Casson"/>
<link wikidata="Q500488" start="31296" end="31304" title="Sabotage (1936 film)" label="Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q95143" start="31317" end="31327" title="Carol Reed" label="Carol Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q381285" start="31358" end="31374" title="Ralph Richardson" label="Ralph Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q234897" start="31376" end="31390" title="Michèle Morgan" label="Michèle Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935107" start="31395" end="31407" title="Bobby Henrey" label="Bobby Henrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349200" start="31462" end="31477" title="The Fallen Idol (film)" label="The Fallen Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257188" start="31728" end="31745" title="The Pumpkin Eater" label="The Pumpkin Eater"/>
<link wikidata="Q183532" start="31764" end="31777" title="Anne Bancroft" label="Anne Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q209186" start="31782" end="31793" title="James Mason" label="James Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="31838" end="31850" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="31855" end="31865" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q934251" start="31879" end="31888" title="Bedazzled (1967 film)" label="Bedazzled"/>
<link wikidata="Q467290" start="32085" end="32115" title="An American Werewolf in London" label="An American Werewolf in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q718200" start="32174" end="32188" title="David Naughton" label="David Naughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868433" start="32373" end="32385" title="Turtle Diary" label="Turtle Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353673" start="32422" end="32435" title="Russell Hoban" label="Russell Hoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q173158" start="32449" end="32461" title="Ben Kingsley" label="Ben Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182408" start="32466" end="32480" title="Glenda Jackson" label="Glenda Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756560" start="32617" end="32631" title="Withnail and I" label="Withnail and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991571" start="32756" end="32785" title="What a piece of work is a man" label="What a piece of work is a man"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="32797" end="32803" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716137" start="32826" end="32840" title="Burmese python" label="Burmese python"/>
<link wikidata="Q102438" start="32867" end="32912" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="33045" end="33051" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748438" start="33149" end="33162" title="Wilfrid Jasper Walter Blunt" label="Wilfrid Blunt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69842" wikidata="Q200229" url="?curid=69842" title="House of Savoy">
<text>The House of Savoy () is an Italian royal house (formally a dynasty) that was established in 1003 in the historical Savoy region. Through gradual expansions, the family grew in power, first ruling the County of Savoy, a small Alpine county northwest of Italy, and later gaining absolute rule of the Kingdom of Sicily. During the years 1713 to 1720, they were handed the Kingdom of Sardinia and would exercise direct rule from then onward as Piedmont–Sardinia, which was the legal predecessor state of the Kingdom of Italy, which in turn is the predecessor of the present-day Italian Republic.

From rule of a region on the French–Italian border, by the time of the abolition of monarchy in Italy, the dynasty&#x27;s realm grew to include nearly all of the Italian peninsula. Through its junior branch of Savoy-Carignano, the House of Savoy led the Italian unification in 1861, and ruled the Kingdom of Italy until 1946. They also briefly ruled the Kingdom of Spain during the 19th century. The Savoyard kings of Italy were Victor Emmanuel II, Umberto I, Victor Emmanuel III, and Umberto II. Umberto II reigned for only a few weeks, as the last king of Italy, before being deposed following the 1946 Italian institutional referendum, after which the Italian Republic was proclaimed.

== History ==
=== Early history ===
The name derives from the historical region of Savoy in the Alps between what is now France and Italy. Over time, the House of Savoy expanded its territory and influence through judicious marriages and international diplomacy. The house descended from Humbert I, Count of Sabaudia, also known as Umberto I &quot;Biancamano&quot; (1003–1047 or 1048). The ancestry of Humbert is uncertain, as contemporary documents make no mention of his father. His family was traditionally believed to have come from Saxony; more recent investigations into the 21st century pointed to the County of Vienne, where both Humbert and his relatives held extensive possessions, as a more plausible origin.
Although Sabaudia was originally a poor county, later counts were diplomatically skilled, and gained control over strategic mountain passes in the Alps. Two of Humbert&#x27;s sons were commendatory abbots at the Abbey of St. Maurice, Agaunum, on the river Rhône east of Lake Geneva, and Saint Maurice is still the patron of the House of Savoy. Humbert&#x27;s son, Otto of Savoy, succeeded to the title in 1051 after the death of his elder brother Amadeus I of Savoy. Otto married the Marchioness Adelaide of Turin, bringing the Marquessate of Susa, with the towns of Turin and Pinerolo, into the House of Savoy&#x27;s possession. They once had claims on the modern canton of Vaud, where they occupied the Château of Chillon in Switzerland; their access to it was cut by Geneva during the Protestant Reformation, after which it was conquered by the Canton of Bern. Meanwhile, Piedmont was later joined with Sabaudia, and the name evolved into &quot;Savoy&quot; ().

=== Expansion, retreat, and prosperity ===

By the time Amadeus VIII came to power in the late 14th century, the House of Savoy had gone through a series of gradual territorial expansions and he was elevated by Sigismund, the Holy Roman Emperor, to the Duke of Savoy in 1416. In 1494, Charles VIII of France passed through Savoy on his way to Italy and Naples, which initiated the Italian War of 1494–1495. During the outbreak of the Italian war of 1521–1526, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V stationed imperial troops in Savoy. In 1536, Francis I of France invaded Savoy and Piedmont, taking Turin by April of that year. Charles III Duke of Savoy, fled to Vercelli.

When Emmanuel Philibert came to power in 1553, most of his family&#x27;s territories were in French hands, so he offered to serve France&#x27;s leading enemy the House of Habsburg in the hope of recovering his lands. He served Philip II of Spain as Governor of the Netherlands (then part of the Seventeen Provinces) from 1555 to 1559. In this capacity, he led the Spanish invasion of northern France and won a victory in the battle of St. Quentin in 1557. He took advantage of various squabbles in Europe to slowly regain territory from both the French and the Spanish, including the city of Turin. He moved the capital of the duchy from Chambéry to Turin.

The 17th century brought about economic development to the Turin area and the House of Savoy took part in and benefitted from that. Charles Emmanuel II developed the port of Nice and built a road through the Alps towards France, and through skillful political manoeuvres the territorial expansion continued. In the early 18th century during the War of the Spanish Succession, future King Victor Amadeus II switched sides to assist the Habsburgs, and via the Treaty of Utrecht they rewarded him with large pieces of land in northeastern Italy and a Crown in Sicily. Savoy rule over Sicily lasted only seven years (1713–1720).

=== Kingdom of Italy ===

The crown of Sicily, the prestige of being kings at last, and the wealth of Palermo helped strengthen the House of Savoy further. In 1720, they were forced to exchange Sicily for the Kingdom of Sardinia as a result of the War of the Quadruple Alliance. On the mainland, the dynasty continued its expansionist policies as well. Through advantageous alliances during the War of the Polish Succession and War of the Austrian Succession, King Charles Emmanuel III gained new lands at the expense of the Austrian-controlled Duchy of Milan.

In 1792, Piedmont–Sardinia joined the First Coalition against the French First Republic. It was beaten in 1796 by Napoleon and forced to conclude the disadvantageous Treaty of Paris, giving the French army free passage through Piedmont. In 1798, Barthélemy Catherine Joubert occupied Turin and forced Charles Emmanuel IV to abdicate and leave for the island of Sardinia. In 1814, the kingdom was restored and enlarged with the addition of the former Republic of Genoa by the Congress of Vienna.
In the meantime, Italian nationalist figures like Giuseppe Mazzini were influencing popular opinion. Mazzini believed that Italian unification could only be achieved through a popular uprising. After the failure of the Revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states, the nationalists began to look to the Kingdom of Sardinia and its prime minister Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour as leaders of the unification movement. In 1848, King Charles Albert conceded a constitution known as the &quot;Statuto Albertino&quot; to Piedmont–Sardinia, which remained the basis of the kingdom&#x27;s legal system even after Italian unification was achieved and the Kingdom of Sardinia became the Kingdom of Italy in 1861.

The Kingdom of Italy was the first Italian state to include the Italian peninsula since the fall of the Roman Empire. When Victor Emmanuel was crowned King of Italy in 1861, his realm did not include the Venetia region (subject to Habsburg governance), Lazio (with Rome), Umbria, Marche, and Romagna (with the Papal town of Bologna). Yet the House of Savoy continued to rule Italy for several decades through the Italian independence wars as Italian unification proceeded and even as the First World War raged on in the early 20th century.

=== Massacres ===
In April 1655, based on perhaps false reports of resistance by the Waldensians, a Protestant religious minority, to a plan to resettle them in remote mountain valleys, Charles Emmanuel II ordered their general massacre, which became known as the Piedmontese Easter. The massacre was so brutal it aroused indignation throughout Europe. Oliver Cromwell, then ruler in England, began petitioning on behalf of the Waldensians, writing letters, raising contributions, calling a general fast in England, and threatening to send military forces to the rescue. The massacre prompted John Milton&#x27;s famous sonnet, &quot;On the Late Massacre in Piedmont&quot;.

In 1898, the Bava Beccaris massacre in Milan involved the use of cannons against unarmed protesters (including women and the elderly) during riots over the rising price of bread. King Umberto I of the House of Savoy congratulated General Fiorenzo Bava Beccaris for the massacre and decorated him with the medal of Great Official of Savoy Military Order, greatly outraging a large part of the public opinion. As a result, Umberto I was assassinated in July 1900 in Monza by Gaetano Bresci, the brother of one of the women massacred in the crowd, who had traveled back to Italy from the United States for the assassination. The king had previously been the target of failed assassination attempts by anarchists Giovanni Passannante and Pietro Acciarito.

=== Fascism and end of monarchy ===
When the First World War ended, the Treaty of Versailles fell short of what had been promised in the London Pact to Italy. As the economic conditions in Italy worsened after the war, popular resentment and along with it the seeds of Italian fascism began to grow and resulted in the March on Rome by Benito Mussolini. General Pietro Badoglio advised King Victor Emmanuel III that he could easily sweep Mussolini and his rag-tag Blackshirt army to one side but Victor Emmanuel decided to tolerate Mussolini and appointed him as prime minister of Italy on 28 October 1922. The king remained silent as Mussolini engaged in one abuse of power after another from 1924 onward, and did not intervene in 1925–1926 when Mussolini dropped all pretense of democracy. By the end of 1928, the king&#x27;s right to remove Mussolini from office was, at least theoretically, the only check on his power. Later, the king&#x27;s failure, in the face of mounting evidence, to move against the Mussolini regime&#x27;s abuses of power led to much criticism and had dire future consequences for Italy and for the monarchy itself.

After their invasion in 1935, Italy conquered Ethiopia in the Second Italo-Ethiopian War and Victor Emmanuel was crowned as Emperor of Ethiopia. He also added the Albanian crown 1939 but lost Ethiopia as part of the East African campaign in 1941; however, as Mussolini and the Axis powers failed in the Second World War in 1943, several members of the Italian court began putting out feelers to the Allies of World War II, who in turn let it be known that Mussolini had to go. After Mussolini received a vote of no confidence from the Fascist Grand Council on 24 July, Victor Emmanuel dismissed him from office, relinquished the Ethiopian and Albanian crowns, and appointed Pietro Badoglio as prime minister. On 8 September, the new government announced it had signed an armistice with the Allies five days earlier; however, Victor Emmanuel made another blunder when he and his government fled south to Brindisi, leaving his army without orders.

As the Allies and the Italian Resistance gradually chased the Nazis and fascists off the peninsula, it became apparent that Victor Emmanuel was too tainted by his earlier support of Mussolini to have any postwar role. Accordingly, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his powers to his son, Crown Prince Umberto, in April 1944. Rome was liberated two months later, and Victor Emmanuel transferred his remaining powers to Umberto and named him Lieutenant General of the Realm. Within a year, public opinion pushed for a referendum to decide between retaining the monarchy or becoming a republic. On 9 May 1946, in a last-ditch attempt to save the monarchy, Victor Emmanuel formally abdicated in favour of his son, who became Umberto II. It did not work as the 1946 Italian institutional referendum was won by republicans with 54% of the vote. Victor Emmanuel went into exile in Egypt, dying there a year later.

On 12 June 1946, the Kingdom of Italy formally came to an end as Umberto II transferred his powers to the prime minister Alcide de Gasperi and called for the Italian people to support the new republic. He then went into exile in Portugal, never to return; he died in 1983. The Constitution of the Italian Republic includes the entrenched clause that the republican form of government cannot be changed by constitutional amendment, thus forbidding any attempt to restore the monarchy short of adoption of an entirely new constitution. The Constitution of Italy also forbade male descendants of the House of Savoy from entering Italy. This provision was removed in 2002; as part of the deal to be allowed back into Italy, Vittorio Emanuele, the last claimant to the House of Savoy, renounced all claims to the throne. He died in 2024.

=== Controversies, damage claims against Italy, and internal disputes ===
The Residences of the Royal House of Savoy in Turin and the neighbourhood are protected as a World Heritage Site. Although the titles and distinctions of the Italian royal family are not legally recognised by the Italian Republic, the remaining members of the House of Savoy, like dynasties of other abolished monarchies, still use some of the various titles they acquired over the millennium of their reign prior to the republic&#x27;s establishment, including Duke of Savoy; Prince of Naples, previously conferred by Joseph Bonaparte to be hereditary on his children and grandchildren; Prince of Piedmont; and Duke of Aosta. Previously, the leadership of the House of Savoy was contested by two cousins: Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples, who used to claim the title of King of Italy, and Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta, who claimed the title of Duke of Savoy. Their rivalry was not always peaceful. On 21 May 2004, following a dinner held by King Juan Carlos I of Spain on the eve of the wedding of his son Felipe, Prince of Asturias, Vittorio Emanuele punched Amedeo twice in the face.

In 1969, Vittorio Emanuele made his unilateral declaration of kingship, arguing that by agreeing to submit to a referendum on his place as head of state, his father (Umberto II) had thereby abdicated. Vittorio Emanuele took this action after his father allegedly called for Amedeo to visit him in Portugal to name him his heir. Under his self-assumed powers as King of Italy, Vittorio Emanuele conferred the title of Duchess of Sant&#x27;Anna di Valdieri on his then-fiancée Marina Doria. In 1983, after the death of his father, with the support of the Italian Freemasonry (like many personalities of the Italian ruling class who promoted the repeal of the transitional provisions and the return to Italy, he was registered with Licio Gelli&#x27;s Masonic lodge Propaganda Due with membership number 1621), as well as scattered pieces of the Italian Monarchist Party, Vittorio Emanuele proclaimed himself King of Italy as Vittorio Emanuele IV and became the historical and political reference of the House of Savoy. In 2002, statements were published in which he accepted the end of the monarchy, and both Vittorio Emanuele and his son Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy swore loyalty to the Italian Republic and its president.

In 1997, Vittorio Emanuele said on TG2 that the antisemitic laws passed under Mussolini&#x27;s regime were &quot;not so bad&quot;. Vittorio Emanuele reconsidered his words the day after and spoke of a &quot;grave mistake&quot;, but he did not apologize. In 2002, with a statement issued from Geneva on the same day the Italian racial laws of 1938 had been given royal assent by the king, for the first time in the history of the House of Savoy, Vittorio Emanuele officially distanced himself from the antisemitic laws, and since then had tried to repair the damage by saying that the antisemitic laws had left &quot;an indelible stain&quot; and were the &quot;darkest chapter&quot; in his family&#x27;s history. The 2002 statement read: &quot;The date of 10 November, which until now represented for us the memory of an indelible stain on the history of the family, now constitutes, by a singular twist of fate, a new, fundamental stage towards the long-awaited return to the Homeland.&quot; When the Savoys returned to Italy in 2003, they were met with complaints that Vittorio Emanuele and his family had made no attempt at reconciliation with the Jewish community, which was not satisfied and continued to demand a &quot;clear sign that they have rejected that period of history&quot;. In an interview with the &quot;Corriere della Sera&quot;, the Union of Italian Jewish Communities president Amos Luzzatto stated: &quot;I&#x27;m not saying it was he who signed the racial laws in 1938. But, as a Savoy heir, [Vittorio Emanuele] has never distanced himself from them.&quot; On 27 January 2005, in a letter published by the &quot;Corriere della Sera&quot;, Vittorio Emanuele issued an apology to Italy&#x27;s Jewish population, asking forgiveness from the Italian Jewish community, and declaring that it was an error for the Italian royal family to have signed the racial laws of 1938.

On 20 September 2018, during a celebration for the 100th anniversary of the Great War, Emanuele Filiberto stated: &quot;The racial laws are a disgrace for Italy, for what happened.&quot; This was seen as a timid admission of guilt and was criticised by the local Jewish community. &quot;Shalom&quot;, the organ of the Jewish Community of Rome, commented: &quot;We don&#x27;t like the words of Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy because they are ambiguous... and they want to water down responsibility. The racial laws are first and foremost a disgrace—not for Italy—but first and foremost for the House of Savoy which allowed without batting an eyelid—just to give an example—that dozens of Jewish officers who had served during the First World War, and who had been awarded Medals of Military Valor and who held positions of great responsibility, were expelled from the Royal Army.&quot; In January 2021, ahead of Holocaust Memorial Day in Italy, Emanuele Filiberto wrote a letter to Italy&#x27;s Jewish community in which he said his family&#x27;s role in rubber-stamping Mussolini&#x27;s antisemitic laws caused &quot;a wound still open for the whole of Italy&quot;, that he and his relatives &quot;dissociate ourselves firmly&quot; from Victor Emmanuel III who approved Mussolini&#x27;s rise to power and gave the antisemitic laws royal assent, and asked for forgiveness for the king&#x27;s actions. The letter was dismissed by historians as &quot;too little too late&quot;, and was criticised by Jewish groups who condemned the family&#x27;s lengthy reluctance to acknowledge its role in the Holocaust. In the letter, Emanuele Filiberto stated: &quot;I condemn the 1938 racial laws, all of whose weight I still feel on my shoulders to this day, and with me the whole royal house ... they are a disgrace for the entire Royal House of Savoy. ... We firmly dissociate ourselves, an unacceptable document, a wound still open for the entire country.&quot; Emanuele Filiberto told TG5 that he was writing with &quot;an open heart&quot; a difficult letter whose contents &quot;may surprise you and that perhaps you did not expect&quot;, and the time had come &quot;once and for all&quot; to &quot;come to terms with the history and the past&quot; of the Savoy family.

Some of the activities, actions, and accusations of members of the House of Savoy, especially those of Vittorio Emanuele and his legal troubles, evoked media coverage disappointing to Italian royalists, including among its family members. Vittorio Emanuele was a business intermediary on behalf of Agusta and thanks to his friendship with Mohammad Reza Pahlavi concluded sales of helicopters between Italy, Iran, and other Arab countries. In the 1970s, he was investigated in Venice and Trento for international arms trafficking to some Middle Eastern countries under embargo. This case was later transferred to Rome but was later closed. Most notably, in November 1991, after thirteen years of legal proceedings, the Paris Assize Court acquitted Vittorio Emanuele of the fatal wounding and unintentional homicide in August 1978 of Dirk Hamer (who was shot and killed while asleep on a yacht off Cavallo), finding him guilty of unauthorised possession of a firearm during the incident; this proved to be his one and only conviction of all his legal troubles.

On 16 June 2006, Vittorio Emanuele was arrested in Varenna, as investigators said he had contacts with the Mafia, and imprisoned in Potenza on charges of political corruption and recruitment of prostitutes for clients of the Casinò di Campione of Campione d&#x27;Italia, from which it emerged the &quot;Vallettopoli&quot; scandal. After seven days in jail, Vittorio Emanuele was released and placed under house arrest instead; both Vittorio Emanuele and his family denied any wrongdoings. He was released from house arrest on 20 July but was required to remain within the territory of the Italian Republic; he was eventually acquitted of all charges, including that of criminal association aimed at corruption, gambling, forgery (&quot;against public administration, public faith, and property&quot;), exploitation of prostitution, and aiding and abetting, in the Savoiagate trial, and in February 2015 obtained €40,000 in damages for his time in jail.

When incarcerated in June 2006, Vittorio Emanuele was recorded admitting, with regard to the killing of Hamer, that &quot;I was in the wrong, but I put one over on those French judges&quot;, leading to a call from Hamer&#x27;s sister Birgit for Vittorio Emanuele to be retried in Italy for the killing; in response to this and his father&#x27;s arrest and charges in 2006, Emanuele Filiberto distanced himself from Vittorio Emanuele, saying that he does not share or support everything his father did, while Amedeo of Savoy stated that Vittorio Emanuele&#x27;s claims to the Headship of House Savoy were &quot;in presence of facts that can injure the Royal House&quot;. After a long legal fight, Birgit Hamer obtained the full video. The story was broken in the press by &quot;Il Fatto Quotidiano&quot; with an article by aristocratic journalist Beatrice Borromeo, who also wrote the preface for a book on the murder &quot;Delitto senza castigo&quot; by Birgit Hamer. Vittorio Emanuele sued the newspaper for defamation, claiming the video had been manipulated. In March 2015, a court judgement ruled in favour of &quot;Il Fatto Quotidiano&quot;. In August 2017, Italy&#x27;s Supreme Court of Cassation acquitted &quot;La Repubblica&quot; journalists Maurizio Crosetti and Ezio Mauro of a defamation lawsuit brought by Vittorio Emanuele, who had been referred to by Crosetti and Mauro as &quot;the one who used&quot; with ease the rifle at Cavallo, &quot;killing a man&quot;. Crosetti and Mauro, who was also sued for omitted control due to being the then editor-in-chief, had been convicted in the first-instance trial but were acquitted on appeal, a sentence that the Supreme Court of Cassation confirmed. In the summer of 2023, &quot;The Prince&quot;, a docuseries directed by Borromeo and focused on the death of Hamer, was released on Netflix. The docuseries concluded with Vittorio Emanuele declaring that he had no regrets and that he would do everything he had done in his life again &quot;except Cavallu&quot;, referencing the events at Cavallo.

In late 2007, lawyers representing Vittorio Emanuele and his son Emanuele Filiberto wrote a seven-page letter to then Italian president Giorgio Napolitano and Italian prime minister Romano Prodi seeking damages for their years in exile (€260 million without considering interest) and the return of their seized property after the war. This was confirmed during an interview on the Rai 3 popular affairs programme &quot;Ballarò&quot;, where Emanuele Filiberto also stated that the seized property including Roman landmarks, such as the Quirinale palace and Villa Ada, should be returned to the Savoy family. The Italian prime minister&#x27;s office released a statement stating that the Savoys are not owed any damages and suggesting that Italy may demand damages from the Savoys for their collusion with Mussolini and its wartime conduct. The Italian Constitution contains a clause stripping the Savoys of their wealth on exile. Emanuele Filiberto acknowledged that his fiancée, whose pregnancy was revealed at the time of the couple&#x27;s engagement, belonged to a more leftist milieu than his own, a fact that initially displeased his father. On 17 December 2017, the body of Victor Emmanuel III returned to Italy to be buried at the Sanctuary of Vicoforte in Piedmont.

Judicially separated since 1976, civilly divorced in 1982, and their marriage religiously annulled in 1987, Amedeo of Aosta&#x27;s first wife, Princess Claude of Orléans, revealed that she was aware that her husband fathered a child by another woman during their marriage. Aosta acknowledged paternity of another child, born out-of-wedlock in 2006 during his second marriage but agreed to contribute financially to the child&#x27;s care only after being directed to do so by court order. The patrilineal lineage of the House of Savoy was reduced to four males between 1996 and 2009. In 2008, Aimone of Savoy-Aosta married Princess Olga Isabelle of Greece, his second cousin, and they became the parents of sons Umberto and Amedeo, who were born respectively in 2009 and 2011. In 2019, Vittorio Emanuele issued a formal decree that modified the medieval law restricting succession to male heirs to place his granddaughter, Vittoria Cristina Chiara Adelaide Marie, in the line of succession. Prince Aimone declared the change illegitimate, meaning the title would remain in male succession and transfer to the Savoy-Aosta branch led by Aimone. As of 2022, the House of Savoy was in the process of trying to reclaim family jewels that have been owned by the Italian government since the abolition of the monarchy. Vittorio Emanuele died in February 2024, and the House of Savoy announced: &quot;Surrounded by his family, he passed away peacefully in Geneva.&quot;

== Orders of knighthood ==
The House of Savoy has held two dynastic orders since 1362, which were brought into the Kingdom of Italy as national orders. Although the kingdom ceased to exist in 1946, King Umberto II did not abdicate his role as &quot;fons honorum&quot; over the two dynastic orders over which the family has long held sovereignty and grand mastership. In the 21st century, following the dispute, both Prince Emanuele Filiberto and Prince Aimone claim to be hereditary Sovereign and Grand Master of the following orders of the House of Savoy:
* Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, founded in 1362.
* Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, founded in 1572.
In addition to these, Vittorio Emanuele claims sovereignty over two more orders:
* Civil Order of Savoy, founded in 1831.
* Order of the Crown of Italy, founded in 1868 and no longer bestowed; it was replaced by the Order of Merit of Savoy in 1988.

In February 2006, all three of Vittorio Emanuele&#x27;s sisters (Princess Maria Pia, Princess Maria Gabriella, and Princess Maria Beatrice) resigned from the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation and the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, alleging that memberships in the orders had been sold to unworthy candidates, a newfound practice they could not abide.

== List of rulers ==
=== Counts of Savoy ===
* Humbert I &quot;Biancamano&quot; (&quot;White Hand&quot;), Count 1003–1047/1048 ( 972/975–1047/48)
** Amadeus I, Count 1048–1051 (died c. 1052)
** Otto, Count 1051–1060 (c. 1020–1060)
*** Peter I, Count 1060–1078 (1048/49–1078)
*** Amadeus II, Count 1060–1080 (c. 1046–1080)
**** Humbert II, Count 1080–1103 (c. 1072–1103)
***** Amadeus III, Count 1103–1148 (c. 1095–1148)
****** Humbert III, Count 1148–1189 (1136–1189)
******* Thomas I, Count 1189–1233 (1178–1233)
******** Amadeus IV, Count 1233–1253 (1197–1253)
********* Boniface, Count 1253–1263 (1244-1263)
******** Peter II, Count 1263–1268 (1203–1268)
******** Philip I, Count 1268–1285 (1207–1285)
******** Thomas II, regent 1253–1259 (1199-1259)
********* Amadeus V, Count 1285–1323 (1249–1323)
********** Edward I, Count 1323–1329 (1284–1329)
********** Aimone, Count 1329–1343 (1291–1343)
*********** Amadeus VI, Count 1343–1383 (1334–1383)
************ Amadeus VII, Count 1383–1391 (1360–1391)
************* Amadeus VIII, Count 1391–1416 (1383–1451)
=== Dukes of Savoy ===

Source: 

* Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy 1416–1434, Antipope Felix V 1439–1449 (1383–1451), abdicated (from both)
** Louis I, Duke of Savoy 1434–1465 (1413–1465)
*** Amadeus IX, Duke of Savoy 1465–1472 (1435–1472)
**** Philibert I, Duke of Savoy 1472–1482 (1465–1482)
**** Charles I, Duke of Savoy 1482–1490 (1468–1490)
***** Charles (II) John Amadeus, Duke of Savoy 1490–1496 (1490–1496)
*** Philip II, Duke of Savoy 1496–1497 (1438–1497)
**** Philibert II, Duke of Savoy 1497–1504 (1480–1504)
**** Charles III, Duke of Savoy 1504–1553 (1486–1553)
***** Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy 1553–1580 (1528–1580)
****** Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy 1580–1630 (1562–1630)
******* Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy 1630–1637 (1587–1637)
******** Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy 1637–1638 (1632–1638)
******** Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy 1638–1675 (1634–1675)
********* Victor Amadeus II, Duke of Savoy 1675–1730, later King of Sicily then Sardinia (see below) (1666–1732), abdicated
******* Thomas Francis, 1st Prince of Carignano 1620–1656 (1596–1656), ancestor of all remaining dynasties
=== Kings of Sicily ===
* Victor Amadeus II, King of Sicily 1713–1720 (1666–1732)

=== Kings of Sardinia ===

Sources: 

* Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy 1580–1630 (1562–1630)
** Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy 1630–1637 (1587–1637)
*** Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy 1638–1675 (1634–1675)
**** Victor Amadeus II, King of Sardinia 1720–1730 (1666–1732), abdicated
***** Charles Emmanuel III, King of Sardinia 1730–1773 (1701–1773)
****** Victor Amadeus III, King of Sardinia 1773–1796 (1726-1796)
******* Charles Emmanuel IV, King of Sardinia 1796–1802 (1751–1819), abdicated
******* Victor Emmanuel I, King of Sardinia 1802–1821 (1759–1824), abdicated
******* Charles Felix, King of Sardinia 1821–1831 (1765–1831)
** Thomas Francis, 1st Prince of Carignano 1620–1656 (1596–1656)
*** Emmanuel Philibert, 2nd Prince of Carignano 1656–1709 (1628–1709)
**** Victor Amadeus I, 3rd Prince of Carignano 1709–1741 (1690–1741)
***** Louis Victor, 4th Prince of Carignano 1741–1778 (1721–1778)
****** Victor Amadeus II, 5th Prince of Carignano 1778–1780 (1743–1780)
******* Charles Emmanuel, 6th Prince of Carignano 1780–1800 (1770–1800)
******** Charles Albert, 7th Prince of Carignano 1800–1831, King of Sardinia 1831–1849 (1798–1849), abdicated
********* Victor Emmanuel II, King of Sardinia 1849–1861 (1820–1878)
=== Kings of Italy ===

Sources: 

* Victor Emmanuel II, King of Italy 1861–1878 (1820–1878)
** Umberto I, King of Italy 1878–1900 (1844–1900)
*** Victor Emmanuel III, King of Italy 1900–1946 (1869–1947), abdicated
**** Umberto II, King of Italy 1946 (1904–1983), deposed
=== Emperors of Ethiopia ===

* Victor Emmanuel III, Emperor of Ethiopia (1936–1941), contested by Emperor in exile Haile Selassie I

=== Kings of Albania ===

* Victor Emmanuel III, King of Albania (1939–1943)

=== Kings of Spain ===

* Amadeo I, King of Spain (1870–1873), son of Victor Emmanuel II

=== World War II Croatia ===
In 1941, in the fascist puppet state Independent State of Croatia, Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta, grandson of Amadeo I of Spain, was formally named as the king under the name Tomislav II; he never ruled in practice as he remained residing in Italy, and formally abdicated in 1943 when Italy ended participation with the Axis Powers.

===Cyprus, Jerusalem, and Armenia===
In 1396, the title and privileges of the final king of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, Levon V, were transferred to James I, his cousin and king of Cyprus. The title of King of Armenia was thus united with the titles of King of Cyprus and King of Jerusalem. The title was held to the modern day by the House of Savoy.

== Family tree ==

Male-line, legitimate, non-morganatic members of the house who either lived to adulthood, or who held a title as a child, are included. Heads of the house are in bold.

* Humbert I, Count of Savoy, c. 972/975–1047/1048
** Amadeus I, Count of Savoy, died c. 1052
*** Humbert, died before 1052
*** Aymon, Bishop of Belley
** Aymon, Bishop of Sion, died 1054/1055
** Burchard (bishop of Aosta), died c. 1068
** Otto, Count of Savoy, c. 1020–1060
*** Peter I, Count of Savoy, c. 1048/49–1078
*** Amadeus II, Count of Savoy, c. 1050–1080
**** Humbert II, Count of Savoy, 1065–1103
***** Amadeus III, Count of Savoy, 1095–1148
****** Humbert III, Count of Savoy, 1136–1189
******* Thomas, Count of Savoy, 1178–1233
******** Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy, 1197–1253
********* Boniface, Count of Savoy, 1244-1263
******** Thomas, Count of Flanders, 1199-1259
********* Thomas III of Piedmont, 1246-1282
********** Philip I of Piedmont, 1278-1334
*********** James of Piedmont, 1315-1367
************ Philip II of Piedmont, died 1368
************ Amadeus, Prince of Achaea, 1363-1402
************ Louis of Piedmont, 1364-1418
*********** Amadeus, Bishop of Maurienne, died 1376
*********** Thomas, Bishop of Turin, died 1360
*********** Edward, Archbishop of Tarentaise, died 1395
*********** Aymon, died 1398
********* Amadeus V, Count of Savoy, 1252–1323
********** Edward, Count of Savoy, 1284–1329
********** Aymon, Count of Savoy, 1291–1343
*********** Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy, 1334–1383
************ Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy, 1360–1391
************* Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy, 1383–1451
************** Amadeus of Savoy, 1412-1431
************** Louis, Duke of Savoy, 1413–1465
*************** Amadeus IX, Duke of Savoy, 1435–1472
**************** Philibert I, Duke of Savoy, 1465–1482
**************** Charles I, Duke of Savoy, 1468–1490
***************** Charles II, Duke of Savoy, 1489–1496
*************** Louis of Cyprus, 1436-1482
*************** Philip II, Duke of Savoy, 1438–1497
**************** Philibert II, Duke of Savoy, 1480–1504
**************** Charles III, Duke of Savoy, 1486–1553
***************** Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, 1528–1580
****************** Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, 1562–1630
******************* Philip Emmanuel, Prince of Piedmont, 1586-1605
******************* Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy, 1587–1637
******************** Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy, 1632–1638
******************** Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy, 1634–1675
********************* Victor Amadeus II, 1666–1732
********************** Victor Amadeus, Prince of Piedmont, 1699-1715
********************** Charles Emmanuel III, 1701–1773
*********************** Victor Amadeus III, 1726-1796
************************ Charles Emmanuel IV, 1751–1819
************************ Victor Emmanuel I, 1759–1824
************************ Prince Maurice, Duke of Montferrat, 1762-1799
************************ Charles Felix of Sardinia, 1765–1831
************************ Prince Joseph, Count of Asti, 1766-1802
*********************** Prince Benedict, Duke of Chablais, 1741-1808
******************* Emmanuel Philibert of Savoy, 1588-1624
******************* Prince Maurice of Savoy, 1593-1657
******************* Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano, 1596–1656
******************** Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano, 1628–1709
********************* Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano, 1690–1741
********************** Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano, 1721–1778
*********************** Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano, 1743–1780
************************ Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano, 1770–1800
************************* Charles Albert of Sardinia, 1798–1849
************************** Victor Emmanuel II, 1820–1878
*************************** Humbert I of Italy, 1844–1900
**************************** Victor Emmanuel III, 1869–1947
***************************** Humbert II of Italy, 1904–1983
****************************** Victor Emmanuel, Prince of Naples, 1937-2024
******************************* Emmanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince of Venice, born 1972
*************************** Amadeus I of Spain, 1845–1890
**************************** Prince Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Aosta, 1869-1931
***************************** Prince Amadeus, Duke of Aosta, 1898-1942
***************************** Prince Aymon, Duke of Aosta, 1900-1948
****************************** Prince Amadeus, Duke of Aosta, 1943-2021
******************************* Aymon of Savoy-Aosta, born 1967
******************************** Prince Humbert of Savoy-Aosta, born 2009
******************************** Prince Amadeus Michael of Savoy-Aosta, born 2011
**************************** Prince Victor Emmanuel, Count of Turin, 1870-1946
**************************** Prince Louis Amadeus, Duke of the Abruzzi, 1873-1933
**************************** Prince Humbert, Count of Salemi, 1889-1918
*************************** Prince Oddone, Duke of Montferrat, 1846-1866
************************** Prince Ferdinand, Duke of Genoa, 1822-1855
*************************** Prince Thomas, Duke of Genoa, 1854-1931
**************************** Prince Ferdinand, Duke of Genoa, 1884-1963
**************************** Prince Philibert, Duke of Genoa, 1895-1990
**************************** Prince Adalbert, Duke of Bergamo, 1898-1982
**************************** Prince Eugene, Duke of Genoa, 1906-1996
*********************** Eugene, Count of Villafranca, 1753-1785
********************* Thomas Philip Gaston of Savoy, 1692-1715
******************** Prince Joseph Emmanuel of Savoy, Count of Soissons, 1631-1656
******************** Eugene Maurice, Count of Soissons, 1635-1673
********************* Louis Thomas, Count of Soissons, 1657-1702
********************** Thomas Emmanuel, Prince of Savoy-Carignan, 1687-1729
*********************** Eugene John, Count of Soissons, 1714-1734
********************** Prince Maurice of Savoy, 1690–1710
********************** Prince Eugene of Savoy, 1692–1712
********************* Philip, Abbot of Soissons, 1659–1693
********************* Louis Jules, Knight of Savoy, 1660–1683
********************* Prince Eugene of Savoy, 1663-1736
**************** Philip, Duke of Nemours, 1490-1533
***************** James of Savoy, Duke of Nemours, 1531-1585
****************** Charles Emmanuel of Savoy, Duke of Nemours, 1567-1595
****************** Henry I, Duke of Nemours, 1572-1632
******************* Louis I, Duke of Nemours, 1615-1641
******************* Charles Amadeus, Duke of Nemours, 1624-1652
******************* Henry II, Duke of Nemours, 1625-1659
*************** Peter, Archbishop of Tarentasia, 1440–1458
*************** Janus, Count of Faucigny and Geneva, 1440-1491
*************** John Louis, Bishop of Geneva, 1447-1482
*************** Jacques of Savoy, Count of Romont, 1450-1486
*************** Francis, Archbishop of Auch, 1454–1490
************** Philip of Savoy, Count of Geneva, 1417-1444
********* Louis I of Vaud, 1250-1302
********** Louis II of Vaud, c. 1290-1348
******** Aymon, Lord of Chablais, died 1237
******** William of Savoy, died 1239
******** Amadeus, Bishop of Maurienne
******** Peter II, Count of Savoy, 1203–1268
******** Philip I, Count of Savoy, 1207–1285
******** Boniface of Savoy (bishop), 1207-1270
****** John
****** Peter
****** William
***** William, Bishop of Liège
***** Umberto
***** Reginald
***** Guy, abbot of Namur
*** Otto

== Titles of the Crown of Sardinia ==

The titles of the Crown of Sardinia were the following: &quot;VITTORIO AMEDEO III, per la grazia di Dio Re di Sardegna, Cipro, Gerusalemme e Armenia; Duca di Savoia, Monferrato, Chablais, Aosta e Genevese; Principe di Piemonte ed Oneglia; Marchese in Italia, di Saluzzo, Susa, Ivrea, Ceva, Maro, Oristano, Sezana; Conte di Moriana, Nizza, Tenda, Asti, Alessandria, Goceano; Barone di Vaud e di Faucigny; Signore di Vercelli, Pinerolo, Tarantasia, Lumellino, Val di Sesia; Principe e Vicario perpetuo del Sacro Romano Impero in Italia.&quot; The English translation is: &quot;Victor Amadeus III, by the Grace of God, King of Sardinia, Cyprus, Jerusalem, Armenia, Duke of Savoy, Montferrat, Chablais, Aosta, and Genevois, Prince of Piedmont and Oneglia, Marquis (of the Holy Roman Empire) in Italy, of Saluzzo, Susa, Ivrea, Ceva, Maro, Oristano, Sezana, Count of Maurienne, Nice, Tende, Asti, Alessandria, Goceano, Baron of Vaud and Faucigny, Lord of Vercelli, Pinerolo, Tarentaise, Lumellino, Val di Sesia, [and] Prince and perpetual Vicar of the Holy Roman Empire in Italy.&quot;

== Titles of the Crown of Italy ==
The titles of the Crown of Italy were the following: &quot;Victor Emmanuel II, by the Grace of God and the Will of the Nation, King of Italy, King of Sardinia, Cyprus, Jerusalem, Armenia, Duke of Savoy, Count of Maurienne, Marquis (of the Holy Roman Empire) in Italy; Prince of Piedmont, Carignano, Oneglia, Poirino, Trino; Prince and Perpetual Vicar of the Holy Roman Empire; Prince of Carmagnola, Montmélian with Arbin and Francin, Prince bailiff of the Duchy of Aosta, Prince of Chieri, Dronero, Crescentino, Riva di Chieri and Banna, Busca, Bene, Brà, Duke of Genoa, Monferrat, Aosta, Duke of Chablais, Genevois, Duke of Piacenza, Marquis of Saluzzo (Saluces), Ivrea, Susa, del Maro, Oristano, Cesana, Savona, Tarantasia, Borgomanero and Cureggio, Caselle, Rivoli, Pianezza, Govone, Salussola, Racconigi con Tegerone, Migliabruna e Motturone, Cavallermaggiore, Marene, Modane e Lanslebourg, Livorno Ferraris, Santhià Agliè, Centallo e Demonte, Desana, Ghemme, Vigone, Count of Barge, Villafranca, Ginevra, Nizza, Tenda, Romont, Asti, Alessandria, del Goceano, Novara, Tortona, Bobbio, Soissons, Sant&#x27;Antioco, Pollenzo, Roccabruna, Tricerro, Bairo, Ozegna, delle Apertole, Baron of Vaud and del Faucigni, Lord of Vercelli, Pinerolo, della Lomellina, della Valle Sesia, del marchesato di Ceva, Overlord of Monaco, Roccabruna, and 11/12th of Menton, Noble patrician of Venice, [and] patrician of Ferrara.&quot; These titles as of 1859 were used during the unified Kingdom of Italy, which lasted from 1861 to 1946.

== See also ==
* History of Savoy
* List of consorts of Savoy
* List of Italian queens
* List of rulers of Savoy
* List of Sardinian consorts

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Official website of the House of Savoy (in Italian)
* Official website of the Prince of Naples (in Italian)
* Ordini Dinastici della Real Casa Savoia (in Italian)
* Brief history of the House with a picture of coat-of-arms (in English)
* Genealogy of recent members of the House (in English)
* Titles of the rulers of Savoy and Sardinia (in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="4" end="18" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="60" end="67" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="116" end="121" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232887" start="201" end="216" title="County of Savoy" label="County of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="233" end="239" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="299" end="316" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q55599391" start="370" end="389" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1324–1720)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="441" end="458" title="Piedmont–Sardinia" label="Piedmont–Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="480" end="497" title="predecessor state" label="predecessor state"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="505" end="521" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602944" start="575" end="591" title="History of the Italian Republic" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="665" end="686" title="abolition of monarchy" label="abolition of monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="756" end="773" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q691626" start="804" end="819" title="Savoy-Carignano" label="Savoy-Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="848" end="867" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821150" start="948" end="964" title="History of Spain (1808–1874)" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="1023" end="1041" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="1043" end="1052" title="Umberto I" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="1054" end="1073" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="1079" end="1089" title="Umberto II" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="1144" end="1157" title="king of Italy" label="king of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="1194" end="1231" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="1379" end="1383" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q451436" start="1571" end="1599" title="Humbert I, Count of Sabaudia" label="Humbert I, Count of Sabaudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127606612" start="1892" end="1908" title="County of Vienne" label="County of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473124" start="2012" end="2020" title="Sabaudia (Savoy)" label="Sabaudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="2057" end="2063" title="Count" label="counts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="2150" end="2154" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q334174" start="2215" end="2244" title="Abbey of St. Maurice, Agaunum" label="Abbey of St. Maurice, Agaunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="2259" end="2264" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="2273" end="2284" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q316599" start="2290" end="2303" title="Saint Maurice" label="Saint Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q451377" start="2367" end="2380" title="Otto of Savoy" label="Otto of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451893" start="2450" end="2468" title="Amadeus I of Savoy" label="Amadeus I of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="2511" end="2516" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q426488" start="2531" end="2550" title="Marquessate of Susa" label="Marquessate of Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="2668" end="2682" title="canton of Vaud" label="canton of Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q372647" start="2708" end="2726" title="Château of Chillon" label="Château of Chillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="2773" end="2779" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2791" end="2813" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11911" start="2851" end="2865" title="Canton of Bern" label="Canton of Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="2878" end="2886" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="3024" end="3036" title="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy" label="Amadeus VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="3179" end="3188" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="3194" end="3212" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="3253" end="3275" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355145" start="3349" end="3373" title="Italian War of 1494–1495" label="Italian War of 1494–1495"/>
<link wikidata="Q698281" start="3402" end="3426" title="Italian War of 1521–1526" label="Italian war of 1521–1526"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="3451" end="3460" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q444189" start="3590" end="3615" title="Charles III, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles III Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76508" start="3641" end="3659" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy" label="Emmanuel Philibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="3798" end="3815" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="3863" end="3881" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="3931" end="3950" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066129" start="4061" end="4082" title="Battle of St. Quentin (1557)" label="battle of St. Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165090" start="4274" end="4282" title="Chambéry" label="Chambéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q355755" start="4426" end="4445" title="Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="4468" end="4472" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="4639" end="4668" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="4682" end="4699" title="Victor Amadeus II" label="Victor Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="4752" end="4769" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094422" start="4859" end="4881" title="Savoy rule over Sicily" label="Savoy rule over Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="4989" end="4994" title="King" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="5022" end="5029" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="5129" end="5148" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221941" start="5168" end="5197" title="War of the Quadruple Alliance" label="War of the Quadruple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="5315" end="5343" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="5348" end="5378" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q312670" start="5385" end="5405" title="Charles Emmanuel III" label="Charles Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="5445" end="5453" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="5465" end="5479" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Duchy of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="5520" end="5535" title="First Coalition" label="First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="5548" end="5569" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5596" end="5604" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q249691" start="5648" end="5663" title="Treaty of Paris (1796)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q128743" start="5728" end="5756" title="Barthélemy Catherine Joubert" label="Barthélemy Catherine Joubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q175544" start="5783" end="5802" title="Charles Emmanuel IV" label="Charles Emmanuel IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="5843" end="5851" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="5932" end="5949" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="5957" end="5975" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="5994" end="6013" title="Italian nationalist" label="Italian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="6027" end="6043" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="6100" end="6119" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="6153" end="6169" title="popular uprising" label="popular uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400365" start="6196" end="6237" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states" label="Revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="6277" end="6296" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="6320" end="6350" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="6405" end="6419" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q598854" start="6463" end="6480" title="Statuto Albertino" label="Statuto Albertino"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="6652" end="6668" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6783" end="6795" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="6802" end="6817" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209857" start="6883" end="6890" title="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia" label="Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="6932" end="6937" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="6951" end="6957" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="6959" end="6965" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="6971" end="6978" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="6989" end="6994" title="Holy See" label="Papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="7003" end="7010" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7167" end="7182" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="7305" end="7316" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="7320" end="7330" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q355755" start="7406" end="7425" title="Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411500" start="7484" end="7502" title="Piedmontese Easter" label="Piedmontese Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="7573" end="7588" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="7813" end="7824" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091402" start="7853" end="7885" title="On the Late Massacre in Piedmont" label="On the Late Massacre in Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q687490" start="7907" end="7929" title="Bava Beccaris massacre" label="Bava Beccaris massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="8078" end="8087" title="Umberto I" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q967174" start="8132" end="8154" title="Fiorenzo Bava Beccaris" label="Fiorenzo Bava Beccaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="8358" end="8363" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q378693" start="8367" end="8381" title="Gaetano Bresci" label="Gaetano Bresci"/>
<link wikidata="Q83655" start="8603" end="8623" title="Giovanni Passannante" label="Giovanni Passannante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258200" start="8628" end="8644" title="Pietro Acciarito" label="Pietro Acciarito"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8692" end="8707" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="8719" end="8739" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="8784" end="8795" title="London Pact" label="London Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="8916" end="8931" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="8966" end="8979" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="8983" end="8999" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="9009" end="9024" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="9038" end="9057" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="9111" end="9121" title="Blackshirt" label="Blackshirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="9210" end="9233" title="prime minister of Italy" label="prime minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="9774" end="9782" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="9854" end="9880" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Second Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="10008" end="10029" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="10069" end="10080" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10095" end="10111" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="10191" end="10213" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330482" start="10327" end="10348" title="Fascist Grand Council" label="Fascist Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="10466" end="10481" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="10695" end="10703" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="10761" end="10779" title="Italian Resistance" label="Italian Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="10801" end="10806" title="Nazis" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840799" start="11181" end="11212" title="Lieutenant General of the Realm" label="Lieutenant General of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="11257" end="11267" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="11323" end="11331" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="11462" end="11472" title="Umberto II" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="11497" end="11534" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="11615" end="11620" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="11714" end="11724" title="Umberto II" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="11770" end="11787" title="Alcide de Gasperi" label="Alcide de Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="11878" end="11886" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="11926" end="11962" title="Constitution of the Italian Republic" label="Constitution of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="11976" end="11993" title="entrenched clause" label="entrenched clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="12054" end="12078" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="12169" end="12181" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="12369" end="12386" title="Victor Emmanuel, Prince of Naples" label="Vittorio Emanuele"/>
<link wikidata="Q461272" start="12561" end="12599" title="Residences of the Royal House of Savoy" label="Residences of the Royal House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="12650" end="12669" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726" start="13076" end="13092" title="Joseph Bonaparte" label="Joseph Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q114698418" start="13145" end="13163" title="Prince of Piedmont" label="Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q429367" start="13169" end="13182" title="Duke of Aosta" label="Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="13263" end="13298" title="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples" label="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q452039" start="13350" end="13378" title="Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta (1943–2021)" label="Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="13507" end="13520" title="Juan Carlos I" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="13567" end="13593" title="Felipe, Prince of Asturias" label="Felipe, Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q439868" start="14123" end="14135" title="Marina Doria" label="Marina Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080480" start="14201" end="14220" title="Italian Freemasonry" label="Italian Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q551521" start="14377" end="14388" title="Licio Gelli" label="Licio Gelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q954078" start="14410" end="14424" title="Propaganda Due" label="Propaganda Due"/>
<link wikidata="Q125721" start="14784" end="14811" title="Emanuele Filiberto, Prince of Venice and Piedmont" label="Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079306" start="14905" end="14908" title="TG2" label="TG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="14918" end="14929" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="15189" end="15208" title="Italian racial laws" label="Italian racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="15232" end="15244" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q309135" start="16190" end="16209" title="Corriere della Sera" label="Corriere della Sera"/>
<link wikidata="Q620027" start="16221" end="16256" title="Union of Italian Jewish Communities" label="Union of Italian Jewish Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090928" start="16267" end="16280" title="Amos Luzzatto" label="Amos Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605053" start="16629" end="16643" title="Italian Jewish" label="Italian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="16698" end="16718" title="Italian royal family" label="Italian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844309" start="17668" end="17690" title="Holocaust Memorial Day" label="Holocaust Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="18346" end="18359" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q600545" start="18733" end="18736" title="TG5" label="TG5"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="19212" end="19221" title="royalists" label="royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q398845" start="19318" end="19324" title="Agusta" label="Agusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="19359" end="19380" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="19496" end="19502" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="19507" end="19513" title="Trento" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="19632" end="19636" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258000" start="19744" end="19756" title="Assize Court" label="Assize Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="19811" end="19833" title="unintentional homicide" label="unintentional homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514187" start="19852" end="19862" title="Dirk Hamer" label="Dirk Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q292271" start="19916" end="19923" title="Cavallo (island)" label="Cavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42776" start="20131" end="20138" title="Varenna" label="Varenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543" start="20212" end="20219" title="Potenza" label="Potenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="20234" end="20254" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661810" start="20305" end="20323" title="Casinò di Campione" label="Casinò di Campione"/>
<link wikidata="Q244207" start="20327" end="20349" title="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="20749" end="20769" title="criminal association" label="criminal association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051087" start="21811" end="21830" title="Il Fatto Quotidiano" label="Il Fatto Quotidiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637234" start="21880" end="21897" title="Beatrice Borromeo" label="Beatrice Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135541" start="22210" end="22236" title="Supreme Court of Cassation (Italy)" label="Supreme Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85329" start="22253" end="22266" title="La Repubblica" label="La Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062838" start="22307" end="22317" title="Ezio Mauro" label="Ezio Mauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="22874" end="22881" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220" start="23226" end="23244" title="Giorgio Napolitano" label="Giorgio Napolitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q38484" start="23272" end="23284" title="Romano Prodi" label="Romano Prodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="23360" end="23368" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q643447" start="23471" end="23476" title="Rai 3" label="Rai 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="23625" end="23634" title="Quirinale" label="Quirinale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000387" start="23646" end="23655" title="Villa Ada" label="Villa Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471751" start="24327" end="24349" title="Sanctuary of Vicoforte" label="Sanctuary of Vicoforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626864" start="24507" end="24533" title="Princess Claude of Orléans" label="Princess Claude of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="24856" end="24867" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031618" start="24956" end="24977" title="Aimone di Savoia Aosta (born 1967)" label="Aimone of Savoy-Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502204" start="24986" end="25018" title="Princess Olga Isabelle of Greece" label="Princess Olga Isabelle of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q75789352" start="25286" end="25325" title="Vittoria Cristina Chiara Adelaide Marie" label="Vittoria Cristina Chiara Adelaide Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031618" start="25354" end="25367" title="Aimone di Savoia Aosta (born 1967)" label="Prince Aimone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391128" start="25885" end="25900" title="Dynastic order" label="dynastic orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884636" start="26075" end="26087" title="fons honorum" label="fons honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q567417" start="26385" end="26428" title="Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation" label="Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422957" start="26449" end="26484" title="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus" label="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206967" start="26586" end="26606" title="Civil Order of Savoy" label="Civil Order of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276941" start="26627" end="26654" title="Order of the Crown of Italy" label="Order of the Crown of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206967" start="26719" end="26742" title="Order of Merit of Savoy" label="Order of Merit of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="26784" end="26801" title="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples" label="Vittorio Emanuele"/>
<link wikidata="Q922418" start="26818" end="26836" title="Princess Maria Pia of Bourbon-Parma" label="Princess Maria Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117878" start="26838" end="26862" title="Princess Maria Gabriella of Savoy" label="Princess Maria Gabriella"/>
<link wikidata="Q933448" start="26868" end="26891" title="Princess Maria Beatrice of Savoy" label="Princess Maria Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q451436" start="27168" end="27177" title="Humbert I of Savoy" label="Humbert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q451893" start="27270" end="27279" title="Amadeus I of Savoy" label="Amadeus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q451377" start="27315" end="27319" title="Otto of Savoy" label="Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q548171" start="27356" end="27363" title="Peter I of Savoy" label="Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q451920" start="27400" end="27410" title="Amadeus II of Savoy" label="Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q553289" start="27448" end="27458" title="Humbert II of Savoy" label="Humbert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q451940" start="27497" end="27508" title="Amadeus III of Savoy" label="Amadeus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q664561" start="27548" end="27559" title="Humbert III of Savoy" label="Humbert III"/>
<link wikidata="Q548051" start="27597" end="27605" title="Thomas I of Savoy" label="Thomas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q451949" start="27644" end="27654" title="Amadeus IV of Savoy" label="Amadeus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q723611" start="27694" end="27702" title="Boniface, Count of Savoy" label="Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q723562" start="27741" end="27749" title="Peter II, Count of Savoy" label="Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q548285" start="27788" end="27796" title="Philip I, Count of Savoy" label="Philip I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29152" start="27835" end="27844" title="Thomas, Count of Flanders" label="Thomas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q451989" start="27885" end="27894" title="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q739378" start="27935" end="27943" title="Edward, Count of Savoy" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q547610" start="27984" end="27990" title="Aimone, Count of Savoy" label="Aimone"/>
<link wikidata="Q451995" start="28032" end="28042" title="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q451998" start="28085" end="28096" title="Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="28140" end="28152" title="Antipope Felix V" label="Amadeus VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="28218" end="28230" title="Antipope Felix V" label="Amadeus VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q451408" start="28322" end="28329" title="Louis, Duke of Savoy" label="Louis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q373236" start="28371" end="28381" title="Amadeus IX, Duke of Savoy" label="Amadeus IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q461459" start="28424" end="28435" title="Philibert I, Duke of Savoy" label="Philibert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460215" start="28478" end="28487" title="Charles I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q520508" start="28531" end="28556" title="Charles II, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles (II) John Amadeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461667" start="28598" end="28607" title="Philip II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q221263" start="28650" end="28662" title="Philibert II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philibert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q444189" start="28705" end="28716" title="Charles III, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q76508" start="28760" end="28778" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy" label="Emmanuel Philibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q318091" start="28823" end="28841" title="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q356145" start="28887" end="28903" title="Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy" label="Victor Amadeus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q472186" start="28950" end="28966" title="Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy" label="Francis Hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q355755" start="29013" end="29032" title="Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="29080" end="29097" title="Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia" label="Victor Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q426677" start="29202" end="29216" title="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano" label="Thomas Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="29327" end="29344" title="Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia" label="Victor Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="29603" end="29620" title="Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia" label="Victor Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312670" start="29678" end="29698" title="Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia" label="Charles Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q312681" start="29746" end="29764" title="Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia" label="Victor Amadeus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q175544" start="29813" end="29832" title="Charles Emmanuel IV of Sardinia" label="Charles Emmanuel IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q175250" start="29892" end="29909" title="Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia" label="Victor Emmanuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q312683" start="29969" end="29982" title="Charles Felix of Sardinia" label="Charles Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q426677" start="30026" end="30040" title="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano" label="Thomas Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349136" start="30092" end="30110" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano" label="Emmanuel Philibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254102" start="30163" end="30179" title="Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano" label="Victor Amadeus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431176" start="30233" end="30245" title="Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano" label="Louis Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q783222" start="30300" end="30317" title="Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano" label="Victor Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707152" start="30373" end="30389" title="Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano" label="Charles Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="30446" end="30460" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="30557" end="30575" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="30653" end="30671" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="30712" end="30721" title="Umberto I of Italy" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="30763" end="30782" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="30836" end="30846" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="30920" end="30939" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="31004" end="31020" title="Haile Selassie I" label="Haile Selassie I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="31050" end="31069" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="31126" end="31134" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="31256" end="31284" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="31286" end="31314" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="31328" end="31345" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeo I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="31393" end="31404" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="Tomislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="31538" end="31549" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="31648" end="31675" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718640" start="31677" end="31684" title="Levon V of Armenia" label="Levon V"/>
<link wikidata="Q546626" start="31706" end="31713" title="James I of Cyprus" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q451436" start="32099" end="32124" title="Humbert I, Count of Savoy" label="Humbert I, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451893" start="32150" end="32175" title="Amadeus I, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus I, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12951128" start="32292" end="32318" title="Burchard (bishop of Aosta)" label="Burchard (bishop of Aosta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q451377" start="32336" end="32356" title="Otto, Count of Savoy" label="Otto, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q548171" start="32375" end="32398" title="Peter I, Count of Savoy" label="Peter I, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451920" start="32420" end="32446" title="Amadeus II, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus II, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553289" start="32466" end="32492" title="Humbert II, Count of Savoy" label="Humbert II, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451940" start="32510" end="32537" title="Amadeus III, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus III, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q664561" start="32556" end="32583" title="Humbert III, Count of Savoy" label="Humbert III, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q548051" start="32603" end="32625" title="Thomas, Count of Savoy" label="Thomas, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451949" start="32646" end="32672" title="Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q723611" start="32694" end="32718" title="Boniface, Count of Savoy" label="Boniface, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29152" start="32739" end="32764" title="Thomas, Count of Flanders" label="Thomas, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525226" start="32786" end="32808" title="Thomas III of Piedmont" label="Thomas III of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365386" start="32831" end="32851" title="Philip I of Piedmont" label="Philip I of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136844" start="32875" end="32892" title="James of Piedmont" label="James of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137546" start="32963" end="32988" title="Amadeus, Prince of Achaea" label="Amadeus, Prince of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137558" start="33013" end="33030" title="Louis of Piedmont" label="Louis of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q451989" start="33236" end="33261" title="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739378" start="33284" end="33306" title="Edward, Count of Savoy" label="Edward, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q547610" start="33329" end="33350" title="Aymon, Count of Savoy" label="Aymon, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451995" start="33374" end="33400" title="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451998" start="33425" end="33452" title="Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="33478" end="33505" title="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy" label="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451408" start="33575" end="33595" title="Louis, Duke of Savoy" label="Louis, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q373236" start="33623" end="33648" title="Amadeus IX, Duke of Savoy" label="Amadeus IX, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461459" start="33677" end="33703" title="Philibert I, Duke of Savoy" label="Philibert I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460215" start="33732" end="33756" title="Charles I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q520508" start="33786" end="33811" title="Charles II, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles II, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q672446" start="33839" end="33854" title="Louis of Cyprus" label="Louis of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461667" start="33882" end="33906" title="Philip II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philip II, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221263" start="33935" end="33962" title="Philibert II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philibert II, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q444189" start="33991" end="34017" title="Charles III, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles III, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76508" start="34047" end="34080" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy" label="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318091" start="34111" end="34144" title="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56842953" start="34176" end="34211" title="Philip Emmanuel, Prince of Piedmont" label="Philip Emmanuel, Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q356145" start="34243" end="34274" title="Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy" label="Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q472186" start="34307" end="34338" title="Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy" label="Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q355755" start="34371" end="34405" title="Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel II, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="34439" end="34456" title="Victor Amadeus II" label="Victor Amadeus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775598" start="34491" end="34525" title="Victor Amadeus, Prince of Piedmont" label="Victor Amadeus, Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q312670" start="34560" end="34580" title="Charles Emmanuel III" label="Charles Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q312681" start="34616" end="34634" title="Victor Amadeus III" label="Victor Amadeus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q175544" start="34671" end="34690" title="Charles Emmanuel IV" label="Charles Emmanuel IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q175250" start="34727" end="34744" title="Victor Emmanuel I" label="Victor Emmanuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852613" start="34781" end="34815" title="Prince Maurizio, Duke of Montferrat" label="Prince Maurice, Duke of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q312683" start="34852" end="34877" title="Charles Felix of Sardinia" label="Charles Felix of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770095" start="34914" end="34942" title="Prince Giuseppe, Count of Asti" label="Prince Joseph, Count of Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446617" start="34978" end="35011" title="Prince Benedetto, Duke of Chablais" label="Prince Benedict, Duke of Chablais"/>
<link wikidata="Q947511" start="35043" end="35070" title="Emmanuel Philibert of Savoy (1588–1624)" label="Emmanuel Philibert of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q610738" start="35102" end="35125" title="Prince Maurice of Savoy" label="Prince Maurice of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q426677" start="35157" end="35192" title="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano" label="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349136" start="35225" end="35264" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano" label="Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254102" start="35298" end="35335" title="Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano" label="Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431176" start="35370" end="35403" title="Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano" label="Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q783222" start="35439" end="35477" title="Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano" label="Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707152" start="35514" end="35551" title="Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano" label="Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="35589" end="35615" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="35654" end="35672" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="35712" end="35730" title="Umberto I of Italy" label="Humbert I of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="35771" end="35790" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="35832" end="35851" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Humbert II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="35894" end="35927" title="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples" label="Victor Emmanuel, Prince of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q125721" start="35971" end="36016" title="Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy, Prince of Venice" label="Emmanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="36056" end="36074" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeus I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q445106" start="36115" end="36155" title="Prince Emanuele Filiberto, Duke of Aosta" label="Prince Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q431121" start="36197" end="36226" title="Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta" label="Prince Amadeus, Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="36268" end="36295" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="Prince Aymon, Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q452039" start="36338" end="36367" title="Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta (1943–2021)" label="Prince Amadeus, Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031618" start="36411" end="36431" title="Aimone di Savoia Aosta (born 1967)" label="Aymon of Savoy-Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279887" start="36628" end="36666" title="Prince Vittorio Emanuele, Count of Turin" label="Prince Victor Emmanuel, Count of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320618" start="36707" end="36748" title="Prince Luigi Amedeo, Duke of the Abruzzi" label="Prince Louis Amadeus, Duke of the Abruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278120" start="36789" end="36820" title="Prince Umberto, Count of Salemi" label="Prince Humbert, Count of Salemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880827" start="36860" end="36893" title="Prince Oddone, Duke of Montferrat" label="Prince Oddone, Duke of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q459441" start="36932" end="36963" title="Prince Ferdinando, Duke of Genoa (1822–1855)" label="Prince Ferdinand, Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253617" start="37003" end="37031" title="Prince Tommaso, Duke of Genoa" label="Prince Thomas, Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627819" start="37072" end="37103" title="Prince Ferdinando, Duke of Genoa (1884–1963)" label="Prince Ferdinand, Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627383" start="37144" end="37175" title="Prince Filiberto, Duke of Genoa" label="Prince Philibert, Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343210" start="37216" end="37248" title="Prince Adalberto, Duke of Bergamo" label="Prince Adalbert, Duke of Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627406" start="37289" end="37317" title="Prince Eugenio, Duke of Genoa" label="Prince Eugene, Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089695" start="37353" end="37381" title="Eugenio, Count of Villafranca" label="Eugene, Count of Villafranca"/>
<link wikidata="Q941798" start="37560" end="37593" title="Eugene Maurice, Count of Soissons" label="Eugene Maurice, Count of Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q554113" start="37627" end="37658" title="Louis Thomas, Count of Soissons" label="Louis Thomas, Count of Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052540" start="37693" end="37734" title="Thomas Emmanuel, Prince of Savoy-Carignan" label="Thomas Emmanuel, Prince of Savoy-Carignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059672" start="37770" end="37800" title="Eugene Jean, Count of Soissons" label="Eugene John, Count of Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="38070" end="38092" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005044" start="38121" end="38144" title="Philip, Duke of Nemours" label="Philip, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579854" start="38174" end="38205" title="Jacques de Savoie, Duke of Nemours" label="James of Savoy, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045624" start="38236" end="38278" title="Charles Emmanuel de Savoie, Duke of Nemours" label="Charles Emmanuel of Savoy, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307501" start="38309" end="38333" title="Henri I, Duke of Nemours" label="Henry I, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539003" start="38365" end="38389" title="Louis I, Duke of Nemours" label="Louis I, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q647664" start="38421" end="38453" title="Charles Amadeus, Duke of Nemours" label="Charles Amadeus, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236361" start="38485" end="38510" title="Henri II, Duke of Nemours" label="Henry II, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q118703" start="38716" end="38749" title="Jacques of Savoy, Count of Romont" label="Jacques of Savoy, Count of Romont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262278" start="38885" end="38900" title="Louis I of Vaud" label="Louis I of Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239452" start="38923" end="38939" title="Louis II of Vaud" label="Louis II of Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q600156" start="39007" end="39023" title="William of Savoy" label="William of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q723562" start="39082" end="39106" title="Peter II, Count of Savoy" label="Peter II, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q548285" start="39127" end="39151" title="Philip I, Count of Savoy" label="Philip I, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174361" start="39172" end="39198" title="Boniface of Savoy (bishop)" label="Boniface of Savoy (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q312681" start="39960" end="39978" title="Victor Amadeus III" label="Victor Amadeus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111770" start="39980" end="39999" title="by the Grace of God" label="by the Grace of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q845435" start="40001" end="40017" title="King of Sardinia" label="King of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="40019" end="40025" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="40027" end="40036" title="King of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="40038" end="40045" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070615" start="40047" end="40060" title="Duke of Savoy" label="Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370469" start="40062" end="40072" title="List of rulers of Montferrat" label="Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q869650" start="40074" end="40082" title="Chablais" label="Chablais"/>
<link wikidata="Q429367" start="40084" end="40089" title="Duke of Aosta" label="Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q570659" start="40095" end="40103" title="Genevois (province)" label="Genevois"/>
<link wikidata="Q114698418" start="40105" end="40123" title="Prince of Piedmont" label="Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119652" start="40128" end="40135" title="Oneglia" label="Oneglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="40137" end="40144" title="Marquis" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="40153" end="40170" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20454" start="40185" end="40192" title="Saluzzo" label="Saluzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q426488" start="40194" end="40198" title="March of Turin" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9409" start="40200" end="40205" title="Ivrea" label="Ivrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19944" start="40207" end="40211" title="Ceva" label="Ceva"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="40219" end="40227" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q9249" start="40229" end="40235" title="Cesana Torinese" label="Sezana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991320" start="40237" end="40255" title="Count of Maurienne" label="Count of Maurienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="40257" end="40261" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q236609" start="40263" end="40268" title="Tende" label="Tende"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122" start="40270" end="40274" title="Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088" start="40276" end="40287" title="Alessandria" label="Alessandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279624" start="40289" end="40296" title="Count of Goceano" label="Goceano"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="40298" end="40303" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="40307" end="40311" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q917751" start="40316" end="40324" title="Faucigny" label="Faucigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="40326" end="40330" title="Lord" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990" start="40334" end="40342" title="Vercelli" label="Vercelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9573" start="40344" end="40352" title="Pinerolo" label="Pinerolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q818032" start="40354" end="40364" title="Moûtiers" label="Tarentaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248224" start="40366" end="40375" title="Lomellina" label="Lumellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401675" start="40377" end="40389" title="Valsesia" label="Val di Sesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="40418" end="40423" title="Vicar" label="Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="40560" end="40578" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="40628" end="40641" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991320" start="40704" end="40722" title="Count of Maurienne" label="Count of Maurienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="40769" end="40775" title="Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="40779" end="40787" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182" start="40789" end="40798" title="Carignano, Piedmont" label="Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q10194" start="40809" end="40816" title="Poirino" label="Poirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q25213" start="40818" end="40823" title="Trino, Piedmont" label="Trino"/>
<link wikidata="Q9187" start="40888" end="40898" title="Carmagnola" label="Carmagnola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061877" start="40900" end="40910" title="Montmélian" label="Montmélian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222363" start="40916" end="40921" title="Arbin, Savoie" label="Arbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q600866" start="40926" end="40933" title="Francin" label="Francin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848450" start="40942" end="40949" title="bailiff" label="bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367" start="40966" end="40971" title="Aosta" label="Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9269" start="40983" end="40989" title="Chieri" label="Chieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q20025" start="40991" end="40998" title="Dronero" label="Dronero"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036" start="41000" end="41011" title="Crescentino" label="Crescentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q10219" start="41013" end="41027" title="Riva presso Chieri" label="Riva di Chieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390" start="41039" end="41044" title="Busca, Piedmont" label="Busca"/>
<link wikidata="Q18365" start="41046" end="41050" title="Bene Vagienna" label="Bene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18382" start="41052" end="41055" title="Bra, Italy" label="Brà"/>
<link wikidata="Q429327" start="41057" end="41070" title="Duke of Genoa" label="Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q869650" start="41098" end="41106" title="Chablais" label="Chablais"/>
<link wikidata="Q570659" start="41108" end="41116" title="Genevois (province)" label="Genevois"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="41126" end="41134" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q20454" start="41147" end="41154" title="Saluzzo" label="Saluzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9409" start="41166" end="41171" title="Ivrea" label="Ivrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9249" start="41199" end="41205" title="Cesana Torinese" label="Cesana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13320" start="41207" end="41213" title="Savona" label="Savona"/>
<link wikidata="Q818032" start="41215" end="41225" title="Moûtiers" label="Tarantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22111" start="41227" end="41238" title="Borgomanero" label="Borgomanero"/>
<link wikidata="Q22197" start="41243" end="41251" title="Cureggio" label="Cureggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9210" start="41253" end="41260" title="Caselle Torinese" label="Caselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10231" start="41262" end="41268" title="Rivoli, Piedmont" label="Rivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9569" start="41270" end="41278" title="Pianezza" label="Pianezza"/>
<link wikidata="Q20096" start="41280" end="41286" title="Govone" label="Govone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159" start="41288" end="41297" title="Salussola" label="Salussola"/>
<link wikidata="Q20376" start="41299" end="41308" title="Racconigi" label="Racconigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19927" start="41348" end="41364" title="Cavallermaggiore" label="Cavallermaggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20132" start="41366" end="41372" title="Marene" label="Marene"/>
<link wikidata="Q537113" start="41374" end="41380" title="Modane" label="Modane"/>
<link wikidata="Q752477" start="41383" end="41394" title="Lanslebourg" label="Lanslebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136" start="41396" end="41412" title="Livorno Ferraris" label="Livorno Ferraris"/>
<link wikidata="Q25206" start="41414" end="41421" title="Santhià" label="Santhià"/>
<link wikidata="Q8971" start="41422" end="41427" title="Agliè" label="Agliè"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933" start="41429" end="41437" title="Centallo" label="Centallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20013" start="41440" end="41447" title="Demonte" label="Demonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q25050" start="41449" end="41455" title="Desana" label="Desana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22458" start="41457" end="41463" title="Ghemme" label="Ghemme"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350" start="41465" end="41471" title="Vigone" label="Vigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354" start="41482" end="41487" title="Barge, Piedmont" label="Barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10351" start="41489" end="41500" title="Villafranca Piemonte" label="Villafranca"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="41502" end="41509" title="Geneva" label="Ginevra"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="41511" end="41516" title="Nice" label="Nizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q236609" start="41518" end="41523" title="Tende" label="Tenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q67103" start="41525" end="41531" title="Romont" label="Romont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122" start="41533" end="41537" title="Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088" start="41539" end="41550" title="Alessandria" label="Alessandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279624" start="41552" end="41563" title="Count of Goceano" label="del Goceano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046" start="41565" end="41571" title="Novara" label="Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q17686" start="41573" end="41580" title="Tortona" label="Tortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11498" start="41582" end="41588" title="Bobbio" label="Bobbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q167152" start="41590" end="41598" title="Soissons" label="Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q286709" start="41600" end="41617" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco"/>
<link wikidata="Q264149" start="41619" end="41627" title="Pollenzo" label="Pollenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20412" start="41629" end="41639" title="Roccabruna" label="Roccabruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212" start="41641" end="41649" title="Tricerro" label="Tricerro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9014" start="41651" end="41656" title="Bairo" label="Bairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9529" start="41658" end="41664" title="Ozegna" label="Ozegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q917751" start="41704" end="41712" title="Faucigny" label="Faucigni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="41714" end="41718" title="Lord" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990" start="41722" end="41730" title="Vercelli" label="Vercelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9573" start="41732" end="41740" title="Pinerolo" label="Pinerolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248224" start="41748" end="41757" title="Lomellina" label="Lomellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401675" start="41765" end="41776" title="Valsesia" label="Valle Sesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19944" start="41796" end="41800" title="Ceva" label="Ceva"/>
<link wikidata="Q419722" start="41802" end="41810" title="Overlord" label="Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="41814" end="41820" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="41822" end="41832" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roccabruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="41849" end="41855" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="41863" end="41872" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="41876" end="41882" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="41903" end="41910" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395158" start="42039" end="42055" title="History of Savoy" label="History of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613355" start="42058" end="42083" title="List of consorts of Savoy" label="List of consorts of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993642" start="42086" end="42108" title="List of Italian queens" label="List of Italian queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070615" start="42111" end="42134" title="List of rulers of Savoy" label="List of rulers of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613355" start="42137" end="42163" title="List of Sardinian consorts" label="List of Sardinian consorts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69844" wikidata="Q628065" url="?curid=69844" title="Herbert Dingle">
<text>Herbert Dingle (2 August 1890 – 4 September 1978) was an English physicist and philosopher of science, who served as president of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1951 to 1953. He is best known for his opposition to Albert Einstein&#x27;s special theory of relativity and the protracted controversy that this provoked.

==Biography==
Dingle was born in London, but spent his early years in Plymouth, where he was taken following the death of his father, and where he attended Plymouth Science, Art and Technical Schools. Due to lack of money, he left school at the age of 14 and found employment as a clerk, a job which he held for 11 years. At age 25 he won a scholarship to the Imperial College, London, from which he graduated in 1918. In that same year, Dingle married Alice Westacott who later gave birth to a son. As a Quaker, Dingle was exempt from military service during World War I. He took a position as a Demonstrator in the Physics Department, and devoted himself to the study of spectroscopy (following his mentor Alfred Fowler), especially its applications in astronomy. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1922.

Dingle was a member of the British government eclipse expeditions of 1927 (Colwyn Bay) and 1932 (Montreal), both of which failed to make any observations due to overcast skies. He spent most of 1932 at the California Institute of Technology as a Rockefeller Foundation Scholar. There he met the theoretical cosmologist R. C. Tolman, and studied relativistic cosmology.

Dingle became a professor of Natural Philosophy at Imperial College in 1938, and was a professor of History and Philosophy of Science at University College London from 1946 until his retirement in 1955. Thereafter he held the customary title of Professor Emeritus from that institution. He was one of the founders of the British Society for the History of Science, and served as President from 1955 to 1957. He founded what later became the British Society for the Philosophy of Science as well as its journal, the &quot;British Journal for The Philosophy of Science&quot;.

Dingle was the author of &quot;Modern Astrophysics&quot; (1924) and &quot;Practical Applications of Spectrum Analysis&quot; (1950). He also wrote the essay &quot;Relativity for All&quot; (1922) and the monograph &quot;The Special Theory of Relativity&quot; (1940). A collection of Dingle&#x27;s lectures on the history and philosophy of science was published in 1954. He also took an interest in English literature, and published &quot;Science and Literary Criticism&quot; in 1949, and &quot;The Mind of Emily Brontë&quot; in 1974.

==Controversies==
Dingle participated in two very public scientific controversies. The first of these took place during the 1930s and was triggered by Dingle&#x27;s criticism of E. A. Milne&#x27;s cosmological model and the associated theoretical methodology, which Dingle considered overly speculative and not based on empirical data. A. S. Eddington was another target of Dingle&#x27;s criticism, and the ensuing debate eventually involved nearly every prominent astrophysicist and cosmologist in Britain. Dingle characterized his opponents as &quot;traitors&quot; to the scientific method, and called them &quot;the modern Aristotelians&quot; because he believed their theorizing was based on rationalism rather than empiricism. Some other scientists, notably Willem de Sitter, while not endorsing Dingle&#x27;s more extreme rhetoric, nevertheless agreed with Dingle that the cosmological models of Milne, Eddington, and others were overly speculative. However, most modern cosmologists subsequently accepted the validity of the hypothetico-deductive method of Milne.

The second dispute began in the late 1950s, following Dingle&#x27;s retirement and centered on the theory of special relativity.
Initially Dingle argued that, contrary to the usual understanding of the famous twin paradox, special relativity did not predict unequal aging of twins, one of whom makes a high-speed voyage and returns to Earth. However, Dingle then came to realize and acknowledge that his understanding of the problem had been mistaken. He then began to argue that special relativity was empirically wrong in its predictions, although experimental evidence showed he was mistaken about this. Ultimately, Dingle re-focused his criticism to claim that special relativity was logically inconsistent, declaring that special relativity &quot;unavoidably requires that A works more slowly than B and B more slowly than A – which it requires no super-intelligence to see is impossible.&quot; Hence he asserted that the well-known reciprocity of the Lorentz transformation is self-evidently impossible. As Whitrow explained in his obituary for Dingle, this is not correct, as it rests on Dingle&#x27;s mistaken assumption that the conflicting ratios of event times used by Dingle are invariants.

Dingle carried on a highly public and contentious campaign to get this conclusion accepted by the scientific community, mostly through letters to the editors of various scientific periodicals, including &quot;Nature&quot;. Dozens of scientists responded with answers to Dingle&#x27;s claims, explaining why the reciprocity of the Lorentz transformation does not entail any logical inconsistency, but Dingle rejected all the explanations. This culminated in his 1972 book, &quot;Science at the Crossroads&quot; in which Dingle stated that &quot;a proof that Einstein&#x27;s special theory of relativity is false has been advanced; and ignored, evaded, suppressed and, indeed, treated in every possible way except that of answering it, by the whole scientific world.&quot; He also warned: &quot;Since this theory is basic to practically all physical experiments, the consequences if it is false, modern atomic experiments being what they are, may be immeasurably calamitous.&quot;
The consensus in the physics community is that Dingle&#x27;s objections to the logical consistency of special relativity were unfounded. According to Max Born, &quot;Dingle&#x27;s objections are just a matter of superficial formulation and confusion.&quot;

==Selected publications==
*&quot;Values of and the Christoffel symbols for a line element of considerable generality&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America&quot; 19(5): 559–563 
*With J. H. Sheldon: 

==References==
==External links==
*What Happened to Dingle?
*Herbert Dingle and the Twins</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q628065" start="0" end="14" title="Herbert Dingle" label="Herbert Dingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="134" end="160" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414160" start="201" end="215" title="Criticism of the theory of relativity" label="his opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="219" end="234" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="242" end="270" title="special theory of relativity" label="special theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="356" end="362" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="393" end="401" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="683" end="699" title="Imperial College" label="Imperial College"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="701" end="707" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="828" end="834" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="883" end="894" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="996" end="1008" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q520882" start="1031" end="1044" title="Alfred Fowler" label="Alfred Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="1203" end="1210" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q527467" start="1232" end="1242" title="Colwyn Bay" label="Colwyn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1254" end="1262" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="1363" end="1397" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q714440" start="1476" end="1488" title="Richard C. Tolman" label="R. C. Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="1515" end="1524" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="1556" end="1574" title="Natural Philosophy" label="Natural Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="1664" end="1689" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="1772" end="1790" title="Professor Emeritus" label="Professor Emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q441192" start="2813" end="2824" title="Arthur Milne" label="E. A. Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="2971" end="2986" title="Arthur Stanley Eddington" label="A. S. Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="3398" end="3414" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="3816" end="3834" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33539" start="3916" end="3928" title="twin paradox" label="twin paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="4664" end="4686" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="6040" end="6048" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528061" start="6385" end="6398" title="Joseph Harold Sheldon" label="J. H. Sheldon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69845" wikidata="Q58303" url="?curid=69845" title="William Dobson">
<text>William Dobson (4 March 1611 (baptised); 28 October 1646 (buried)) was a portraitist and one of the first significant English painters, praised by his contemporary John Aubrey as &quot;the most excellent painter that England has yet bred&quot;. He died relatively young and his final years were disrupted by the English Civil War.

== Biography ==


Dobson was born in London, the son of a lawyer also called William Dobson. He was baptised at St Andrew&#x27;s Holborn. He was apprenticed to William Peake and probably later joined the studio of Francis Cleyn. There is a claim that his father was a decorative artist, but this may be a misreading of the single known quote about Dobson Sr, by the antiquarian John Aubrey, which states that William senior assisted Francis Bacon with the designs of Verulam House but &quot;he spending his estate upon women, necessity forced his son ... to be the most excellent painter that England hath yet bred&quot;.

Dobson is believed to have had access to the Royal Collection and to have copied works by Titian and Anthony van Dyck, the court painter of King Charles I of England. The colour and texture of Dobson&#x27;s work was influenced by Venetian art, but Van Dyck&#x27;s style had little apparent influence on Dobson. The story that Van Dyck himself discovered Dobson when he noticed one of the young artist&#x27;s pictures in a London shop window is not supported by any evidence, nor do we know how he gained his introduction to the King, who had Dobson paint himself, his sons and members of the court.
Little is known of Dobson&#x27;s career in the 1630s, but when Van Dyck died in 1641, the opportunity arose for him to gain royal commissions from King Charles. He is said to have become serjeant painter to the king and groom of the privy chamber. However, this claim comes from only one old and as yet unverified source. During the English Civil War Dobson was based at the Royalist centre of Oxford and painted many leading Cavaliers. His portrait of the future Charles II as Prince of Wales at the age of around twelve is a notable baroque composition, and perhaps his finest work. He also painted at least the head of Duke of York, as well as portraits of leading Royalists such as Charles Lucas and John Byron, 1st Baron Byron, Prince Rupert of the Rhine and Prince Maurice.

== Works ==

Around sixty of Dobson&#x27;s works survive, mostly half-length portraits dating from 1642 or later. The thick impasto of his early work gave way to a mere skim of paint, perhaps reflecting a wartime scarcity of materials. After Oxford fell to the Parliamentarians, in June 1646, Dobson returned to London. Now without patronage, he was briefly imprisoned for debt and died in poverty at the age of thirty-five.

Ellis Waterhouse described Dobson as &quot;the most distinguished purely British painter before Hogarth&quot;, and in the view of Waldemar Januszczak he was &quot;the first British born genius, the first truly dazzling English painter&quot;.

There are examples of Dobson&#x27;s work at the National Gallery, the National Gallery of Scotland, Tate Britain, the National Portrait Gallery, the National Maritime Museum, Queen&#x27;s House in Greenwich, the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool, the Ferens Art Gallery in Hull, the Courtauld Institute of Art, the Dulwich Picture Gallery in London, in several English country houses including notably Alnwick Castle where Dobson&#x27;s self-portrait with Nicholas Lanier and Charles Cotterell is displayed, at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven, CT, USA, and at the Dunedin Public Art Gallery in New Zealand.

The 2011 anniversary of his birth was marked by exhibitions, a &#x27;Dobson Trail&#x27; listing his paintings on a website, and a BBC television profile by Januszczak, &quot;The Lost Genius of British Art: William Dobson&quot;.

== Personal life ==

He was married twice, first to Elizabeth, whose surname is unknown, as is the date of their marriage. She was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 26 September 1634. On 18 December 1637 he married Judith Sander, who survived him.

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* R. F. Jones, &quot;William Dobson: The King&#x27;s Painter&quot;, Tyger&#x27;s Head Books, 2016
* Malcolm Rogers, &quot;William Dobson, 1611–46&quot;, 1983, National Portrait Gallery Exhibition Catalogue, ISBN 0904017532
* John Aubrey, &quot;Brief Lives&quot;.
* Waldemar Januszczak, &quot;The first great British painter?&quot;, Tate, 17, Spring 1999, p. 62.

== External links ==

* United Kingdom National Portrait Gallery — William Dobson
* Tate Collection — William Dobson
* William Dobson 1611-1646, Biography, Paintings, Dobson Art Trail</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58303" start="0" end="14" title="William Dobson" label="William Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="73" end="84" title="portraitist" label="portraitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q356317" start="164" end="175" title="John Aubrey" label="John Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="312" end="329" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="432" end="440" title="baptised" label="baptised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592413" start="444" end="468" title="St Andrew Holborn (church)" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859812" start="492" end="505" title="William Peake" label="William Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906847" start="546" end="559" title="Francis Cleyn" label="Francis Cleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q356317" start="710" end="721" title="John Aubrey" label="John Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="765" end="778" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260221" start="799" end="812" title="Verulam House, St Albans (17th century)" label="Verulam House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459037" start="1000" end="1016" title="Royal Collection" label="Royal Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="1045" end="1051" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="1056" end="1072" title="Anthony van Dyck" label="Anthony van Dyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1100" end="1120" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1185" end="1193" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454939" start="1741" end="1757" title="serjeant painter" label="serjeant painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610265" start="1774" end="1800" title="groom of the privy chamber" label="groom of the privy chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1887" end="1904" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="1929" end="1937" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1948" end="1954" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="1980" end="1988" title="Cavalier" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2018" end="2028" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="2032" end="2047" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="2089" end="2096" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="2176" end="2188" title="James II of England" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045747" start="2258" end="2285" title="John Byron, 1st Baron Byron" label="John Byron, 1st Baron Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="2287" end="2313" title="Prince Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q69737" start="2318" end="2332" title="Prince Maurice von Simmern" label="Prince Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545200" start="2459" end="2466" title="impasto" label="impasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="2596" end="2611" title="roundhead" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051533" start="2761" end="2777" title="Ellis Waterhouse" label="Ellis Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="2857" end="2864" title="William Hogarth" label="Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961415" start="2891" end="2910" title="Waldemar Januszczak" label="Waldemar Januszczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="3052" end="3068" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q942713" start="3074" end="3102" title="National Gallery of Scotland" label="National Gallery of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="3104" end="3116" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="3122" end="3147" title="National Portrait Gallery (London)" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199924" start="3153" end="3177" title="National Maritime Museum" label="National Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q564981" start="3179" end="3197" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s House" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536471" start="3216" end="3234" title="Walker Art Gallery" label="Walker Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444068" start="3253" end="3271" title="Ferens Art Gallery" label="Ferens Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q734266" start="3285" end="3311" title="Courtauld Institute of Art" label="Courtauld Institute of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241163" start="3317" end="3340" title="Dulwich Picture Gallery" label="Dulwich Picture Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="3363" end="3384" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320427" start="3404" end="3418" title="Alnwick Castle" label="Alnwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q711411" start="3458" end="3473" title="Nicholas Lanier" label="Nicholas Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828151" start="3478" end="3495" title="Charles Cotterell" label="Charles Cotterell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352575" start="3517" end="3544" title="Yale Center for British Art" label="Yale Center for British Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314986" start="3579" end="3605" title="Dunedin Public Art Gallery" label="Dunedin Public Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3753" end="3756" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="3993" end="4016" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="4303" end="4328" title="National Portrait Gallery (London)" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q914059" start="4388" end="4399" title="Brief Lives" label="Brief Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961415" start="4409" end="4428" title="Waldemar Januszczak" label="Waldemar Januszczak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69847" wikidata="Q187149" url="?curid=69847" title="Umberto II of Italy">
<text>Umberto II (; 15 September 190418 March 1983) was the last King of Italy. Umberto&#x27;s reign lasted for 34 days, from 9 May 1946 until his formal deposition on 12 June 1946, although he had been the &quot;de facto&quot; head of state since 1944. Due to his short reign, he was nicknamed the May King ().

Umberto was the third child and only son among the five children of Victor Emmanuel III of Italy and Elena of Montenegro. As heir apparent to the throne, he received a customary military education and pursued a military career afterwards. In 1940, he commanded an army group during the brief Italian invasion of France shortly before the French capitulation. In 1942, he was promoted to Marshal of Italy but was otherwise inactive as an army commander during much of the Second World War. Umberto turned against the war following Italian defeats at Stalingrad and El Alamein, and tacitly supported the ouster of Benito Mussolini.

In 1944, Victor Emmanuel, compromised by his association with Italian fascism and desperate to repair the monarchy&#x27;s image, transferred most of his powers to Umberto. He transferred his remaining powers to Umberto later in 1944 and named him Lieutenant General (&quot;Luogotenente&quot;) of the Realm; while retaining the title of King. As the country prepared for the 1946 Italian institutional referendum on the continuation of the Italian monarchy, Victor Emmanuel abdicated his throne in favour of Umberto, in the hope that his exit might bolster the monarchy. The June 1946 referendum saw voters voting to abolish the monarchy, and Italy was declared a republic days later. Umberto departed the country; he and other male members of the House of Savoy were barred from returning. He lived out the rest of his life in exile in Cascais, on the Portuguese Riviera. He died in Geneva Cantonal Hospital in 1983.

==Early life==
Umberto was born at the Castle of Racconigi in Piedmont. He was the third child and the only son of King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy and his wife, Jelena of Montenegro. As such, he was heir apparent from birth since the Italian throne was limited to male descendants. He was accorded the title Prince of Piedmont, which the Royal Decree formalised on 29 September 1904.

During the crisis of May 1915, when Victor Emmanuel III decided to break the terms of the Triple Alliance by declaring war on the Austro-Hungarian Empire, he found himself in a quandary as the Italian Parliament was against declaring war; several times, the king discussed abdication, with the throne to pass to the 2nd Duke of Aosta instead of Umberto. The British historian Denis Mack Smith wrote that it is not entirely clear why Victor Emmanuel was prepared to sacrifice his 10-year-old son&#x27;s right to succeed to the throne in favour of the Duke of Aosta.

Umberto was brought up in an authoritarian and militaristic household and was expected to &quot;show an exaggerated deference to his father&quot;; both in private and public, Umberto always had to get down on his knees and kiss his father&#x27;s hand before being allowed to speak, even as an adult, and he was expected to stand to attention and salute whenever his father entered a room. Umberto was given the formal military education of a Savoyard prince and like the other Savoyard princes before him, Umberto received an education that was notably short on politics; Savoyard monarchs customarily excluded politics from their heirs&#x27; education with the expectation that they would learn about the art of politics when they inherited the throne.

Umberto was the first cousin of King Alexander I of Yugoslavia. In a 1959 interview, Umberto told the Italian newspaper &quot;La Settimana Incom Illustrata&quot; that in 1922 his father had felt that appointing Benito Mussolini as prime minister was a &quot;justifiable risk&quot;.

==Career as Prince of Piedmont==
===State visit to South America, 1924===

As Prince of Piedmont, Umberto visited South America, between July and September 1924. With his preceptor, Bonaldi, he went to Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina and Chile. This trip was part of the political plan of Fascism to link the Italian people living outside of Italy with their mother country and the interests of the regime. In Brazil, visits were scheduled to the national capital Rio de Janeiro and the State of São Paulo, where the largest Italian colony in the country lived. However, a major rebellion broke out on 5 July 1924, when Umberto had already departed from Europe, imposing a change in the Royal tour. The prince had to stop in Salvador, the capital of Bahia, to supply the ships, going directly to the other countries of South America. On his return, Umberto could only be received in Salvador again. Governor Góis Calmon, the Italian colony and other entities warmly welcomed the heir to the Italian Throne.

===Military positions and attempted assassination===

Umberto was educated for a military career and in time became the commander-in-chief of the Northern Armies, and then the Southern ones. This role was merely formal, the &quot;de facto&quot; command belonging to his father, King Victor Emmanuel III, who jealously guarded his power of supreme command from &quot;Il Duce&quot;, Benito Mussolini. By mutual agreement, Umberto and Mussolini always kept a distance. In 1926, Mussolini passed a law allowing the Fascist Grand Council to decide the succession, though in practice he admitted the prince would succeed his father.

An attempted assassination took place in Brussels on 24 October 1929, the day of the announcement of his betrothal to Princess Marie José. Umberto was about to lay a wreath on the Tomb of the Belgian Unknown Soldier at the foot of the &quot;Colonne du Congrès&quot; when, with a cry of &#x27;Down with Mussolini!&#x27;, Fernando de Rosa fired a single shot that missed him.

De Rosa was arrested and, under interrogation, claimed to be a member of the Second International who had fled Italy to avoid arrest for his political views. His trial was a major political event, and although he was found guilty of attempted murder, he was given a light sentence of five years in prison. This sentence caused a political uproar in Italy and a brief rift in Belgian-Italian relations, but in March 1932 Umberto asked for a pardon for de Rosa, who was released after having served slightly less than half his sentence and was eventually killed in the Spanish Civil War.

===Visit to Italian Somaliland===

In 1928, after the colonial authorities in Italian Somaliland built Mogadishu Cathedral (&quot;Cattedrale di Mogadiscio&quot;), Umberto made his first publicised visit to Mogadishu, the territory&#x27;s capital. Umberto made his second publicised visit to Italian Somaliland in October 1934.

===Marriage and issue===
Umberto was married in the city of Rome on 8 January 1930 to Princess Marie José of Belgium (1906–2001), the daughter of King Albert I of the Belgians and his wife, Queen Elisabeth (&quot;née&quot; Duchess Elisabeth in Bavaria).

They had four children:
*Princess Maria Pia (born 1934)
*Prince Vittorio Emanuele (1937–2024)
*Princess Maria Gabriella (born 1940)
*Princess Maria Beatrice (born 1943)
===Under the Fascist Regime===
Following the Savoyards&#x27; tradition (&quot;Only one Savoy reigns at a time&quot;), Umberto was kept apart from active politics until he was named Lieutenant General of the Realm. He made an exception when Adolf Hitler asked for a meeting. This was not considered proper, given the international situation; thereafter, Umberto was more rigorously excluded from political events. In 1935, Umberto supported the war against the Ethiopian Empire, which he called a &quot;legitimate war&quot; that even Giovanni Giolitti would have supported had he still been alive. Umberto wanted to serve in the Ethiopian war, but was prevented from doing so by his father, who did, however, allow four royal dukes to serve in East Africa. Umberto conformed to his father&#x27;s expectations and behaved like an army officer; the prince obediently got down on his knees to kiss his father&#x27;s hand before speaking. However, Umberto privately resented what he regarded as a deeply humiliating relationship with his cold and emotionally distant father. Umberto&#x27;s attitude toward the Fascist regime varied: at times, he mocked the more pompous aspects of Fascism and his father for supporting such a regime, while at other times, he praised Mussolini as a great leader.

===Italian expansion during the Second World War===

Umberto shared his father&#x27;s fears that Mussolini&#x27;s policy of alliance with Nazi Germany was reckless and dangerous, but he made no move to oppose Italy becoming one of the Axis powers. When Mussolini decided to enter the Second World War in June 1940, Umberto hinted to his father that he should use the royal veto to block the Italian declarations of war on Britain and France, but was ignored. After the war, Umberto criticised the decision to enter the war, saying that Victor Emmanuel was too much under &quot;Mussolini&#x27;s spell&quot; in June 1940 to oppose it. Following Italy&#x27;s entry into the war, Umberto ostensibly commanded &quot;Army Group West&quot;, made up of the First, Fourth and the Seventh Army (kept in reserve), which attacked French forces during the Italian invasion of France. Umberto was appointed to this position by his father, who wanted the expected Italian victory to also be a victory for the House of Savoy, as the King feared Mussolini&#x27;s ambitions. A few hours after France signed an armistice with Germany on 21 June 1940, the Italians invaded France. The Italian offensive was a complete fiasco, with Umberto&#x27;s reputation as a general only being saved by the fact that the already defeated French signed an armistice with Italy on 24 June 1940. Thus, he could present the offensive as a victory. The Italian plans called for the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; to reach the Rhone river valley, which the Italians came nowhere close to reaching, having penetrated only a few kilometres into France.

After the capitulation of France, Mussolini kept Umberto inactive as an Army commander. In the summer of 1940, Umberto was to command a planned invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Still, Mussolini subsequently cancelled the invasion of Yugoslavia in favour of invading the Kingdom of Greece. In June 1941, supported by his father, Umberto strongly lobbied to be given command of the Italian expeditionary force sent to the Soviet Union, saying that, as a Catholic, he fully supported Operation Barbarossa and wanted to do battle with the &quot;godless communists&quot;. Mussolini refused the request, and instead gave Umberto the responsibility of training the Italian forces scheduled to participate in Operation Hercules, the planned Axis invasion of Malta. On 29 October 1942, he was awarded the rank of Marshal of Italy (&quot;Maresciallo d&#x27;Italia&quot;). During October–November 1942, in the Battle of El Alamein, the Italo-German force was defeated by the British Eighth Army, marking the end of Axis hopes of conquering Egypt. The Axis retreated back into Libya. In November 1942, as part of the Battle of Stalingrad, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, which saw the Soviets annihilate much of the Italian expeditionary force in Russia and encircle the German 6th Army. The disastrous Italian defeats at Stalingrad and El Alamein turned Umberto against the war and led him to conclude that Italy must sign an armistice before it was too late. In late 1942, Umberto had his cousin, the 4th Duke of Aosta, visit Switzerland to contact the British consulate in Geneva, where he passed on a message to London that the King was willing to sign an armistice with the Allies in exchange for a promise that he be allowed to keep his throne.

===Attempts at armistice===

In 1943, Marie José, Princess of Piedmont, involved herself in vain attempts to arrange a separate peace treaty between Italy and the United States. Her interlocutor from the Vatican was Giovanni Battista Monsignor Montini, a senior Papal diplomat who later became Pope Paul VI. Her attempts were not sponsored by her father-in-law, the King, and Umberto was not (directly at least) involved in them. Victor Emmanuel III was anti-clerical, distrusting the Catholic Church, and wanted nothing to do with a peace attempt made through Papal intermediaries. More importantly, Victor Emmanuel was proudly misogynistic, holding women in complete contempt as the King believed it to be a scientific fact that the brains of women were significantly less developed than the brains of men. Victor Emmanuel simply did not believe that Marie José was competent to serve as a diplomat. For all these reasons, the King vetoed Marie José&#x27;s peace attempt. After her failure – she never met the American agents – she was sent with her children to Sarre, in the Aosta Valley, and isolated from the political life of the Royal House.

In the first half of 1943, as the war continued to go badly for Italy, several senior Fascist officials, upon learning that the Allies would never sign an armistice with Mussolini, began to plot his overthrow with the support of the King. Adding to their worries were a number of strikes in Milan starting on 5 March 1943, with the workers openly criticising both the war and the Fascist regime which had led Italy into the war, leading to fears in Rome that Italy was on the brink of revolution. The strike wave in Milan quickly spread to the industrial city of Turin, where the working class likewise denounced the war and Fascism. The fact that during the strikes in Milan and Turin, Italian soldiers fraternised with the striking workers, who used slogans associated with the banned Socialist and Communist parties, deeply worried Italy&#x27;s conservative establishment. By this point, the successive Italian defeats had so psychologically shattered Mussolini that he become close to being catatonic, staring into space for hours on end and saying the war would soon turn around for the Axis because it had to, leading even his closest admirers to become disillusioned and to begin looking for a new leader. Umberto was seen as supportive of these efforts to depose Mussolini, but as Ciano (who had turned against Mussolini by this point) complained in his diary, the prince was far too passive, refusing to make a move or even state his views unless his father expressed his approval first.

On 10 July 1943, in Operation Husky, the Allies invaded Sicily. Just before the invasion of Sicily, Umberto had gone on an inspection tour of the Italian forces in Sicily and reported to his father that the Italians had no hope of holding Sicily. Mussolini had assured the King that the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; could hold Sicily, and the poor performance of the Italian forces defending Sicily helped to persuade the King to finally dismiss Mussolini, as Umberto informed his father that &quot;Il Duce&quot; had lied to him. On 16 July 1943, the visiting Papal Assistant Secretary of State told the American diplomats in Madrid that King Victor Emmanuel III and Prince Umberto were now hated by the Italian people even more than Mussolini. By this time, many Fascist &quot;gerarchi&quot; had become convinced that it was necessary to depose Mussolini to save the Fascist system, and on the night of 24–25 July 1943, at a meeting of the Fascist Grand Council, a motion introduced by the &quot;gerarca&quot; Dino Grandi to take away Mussolini&#x27;s powers was approved by a vote of 19 to 8. The fact that the majority of the Fascist Grand Council voted for the motion showed just how disillusioned the Fascist &quot;gerarchi&quot; had become with Mussolini by the summer of 1943. The intransigent and radical group of Fascists led by the &quot;gerarchi&quot; Roberto Farinacci, who wanted to continue the war, were only a minority, while the majority of the &quot;gerarchi&quot; supported Grandi&#x27;s call to jettison Mussolini as the best way of saving Fascism.

On 25 July 1943, Victor Emmanuel III finally dismissed Mussolini and appointed Marshal Pietro Badoglio, 1st Duke of Addis Abeba, as prime minister with secret orders to negotiate an armistice with the Allies. Baron Raffaele Guariglia, the Italian ambassador to Spain, contacted British diplomats to begin the negotiations. Badoglio went about the negotiations halfheartedly while allowing many German forces to enter Italy. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that Badoglio as prime minister &quot;...did almost everything as stupidly and slowly as possible&quot;, as he dragged out the secret peace talks going on in Lisbon and Tangier, being unwilling to accept the Allied demand for unconditional surrender. During the secret armistice talks, Badoglio told Count Pietro d&#x27;Acquarone that he thought he might get better terms if Victor Emmanuel abdicated in favour of Umberto, complaining that the armistice terms that the King wanted were unacceptable to the Allies. D&#x27;Acquarone told Badoglio to keep his views to himself as the King was completely unwilling to abdicate, all the more so as he believed that Umberto was unfit to be monarch.

===Partition of Italy===
On 17 August 1943, Sicily was taken and the last Axis forces crossed over to the Italian mainland. On 3 September 1943, the British Eighth Army landed on the Italian mainland at Reggio Calabria while the U.S. 5th Army landed at Salerno on 9 September 1943, a few hours after it was announced that Italy had signed an armistice. Adolf Hitler had other plans for Italy, and in response to the Italian armistice ordered Operation Achse on 8 September 1943, as the Germans turned against their Italian allies and occupied all of the parts of Italy not taken by the Allies. In response to the German occupation of Italy, neither Victor Emmanuel nor Marshal Pietro Badoglio made any effort at organised resistance; they instead issued vague instructions to the Italian military and civil servants to do their best and fled Rome during the night of 8–9 September 1943. Not trusting his son, Victor Emmanuel had told Umberto nothing about his attempts to negotiate an armistice nor about his plans to flee Rome if the Germans should occupy it. For the first time in his life, Umberto openly criticised his father, saying the King of Italy should not be fleeing Rome and only reluctantly obeyed his father&#x27;s orders to go south with him towards the Allied lines. The King and the rest of the Royal Family fled Rome via a car to Ortona to board a corvette, the &quot;Baionetta&quot;, that took them south. A small riot occurred at the Ortona dock as about 200 senior-ranking Italian military officers, who had abandoned their commands and unexpectedly showed up, begged the King to take them with him. Almost all of them were refused permission to board, making the struggle to get to the head of the queue pointless. With the exceptions of Marshal Enrico Caviglia, General Calvi di Bergolo and General Antonio Sorice, the Italian generals simply abandoned their posts on the night of 8–9 September to try to flee south, which greatly facilitated the German take-over, as the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; was left without senior leadership. On the morning of 9 September 1943, Umberto arrived with Victor Emmanuel and Badoglio in Brindisi.

In September 1943, Italy was partitioned between the south of Italy, administered by the Italian government with an Allied Control Commission (ACC) having supervisory powers, while Germany occupied northern and central Italy with a puppet Italian Social Republic (popularly called the Salò Republic), headed by Mussolini holding nominal power. By 16 September 1943, a line had formed across Italy with everything to the north held by the Germans and to the south by the Allies. Because of what Weinberg called the &quot;extraordinary incompetence&quot; of Badoglio, who, like Victor Emmanuel, had not anticipated Operation Achse until it was far too late, thousands of Italian soldiers with no leadership were taken prisoner by the Germans without resisting in the Balkans, France and Italy itself, to be taken off to work as slave labour in factories in Germany, an experience that many did not survive. How Victor Emmanuel mishandled the armistice was to become almost as controversial in Italy as his support for Fascism. Under the terms of the armistice, the ACC had the ultimate power with the Royal Italian Government in the south, being in many ways a similar position to the Italian Social Republic under the Germans. However, as the British historian James Holland noted, the crucial difference was that: &quot;In the south, Italy was now moving closer towards democracy&quot;. In the part of Italy under the control of the ACC, which issued orders to the Italian civil servants, freedom of the press, association and expression were restored along with other civil rights and liberties.

During 1943–45, the Italian economy collapsed with much of the infrastructure destroyed, inflation rampant, the black market becoming the dominant form of economic activity, and food shortages reducing much of the population to the brink of starvation in both northern and southern Italy. In 1943–44, the cost of living in southern Italy skyrocketed by 321%, while it was estimated that people in Naples needed 2,000 calories per day to survive while the average Neapolitan was doing well if they consumed 500 calories a day in 1943–44. Naples in 1944 was described as a city without cats or dogs which had all been eaten by the Neapolitans, while much of the female population of Naples turned to prostitution to survive. As dire as the economic situation was in southern Italy, food shortages and inflation were even worse in northern Italy as the Germans carried out a policy of ruthless economic exploitation. Since the war in which Mussolini had involved Italy in 1940 had become such an utter catastrophe for the Italian people by 1943, it had the effect of discrediting all those associated with the Fascist system, including Victor Emmanuel. In late 1943, Victor Emmanuel stated that he felt he bore no responsibility for Italy&#x27;s plight, for appointing Mussolini as prime minister in 1922 and for entering the war in 1940. This further increased his unpopularity and led to demands that he abdicate at once.

In northern Italy, a guerrilla war began against the fascists, both Italian and German, with most of the guerrilla units fighting under the banner of the National Liberation Committee (&quot;Comitato di Liberazione Nazionale&quot;-CLN), who were very strongly left-wing and republican. Of the six parties that made up the CLN, the Communists, the Socialists and the Action Party were republican; the Christian Democrats and the Labour Party were ambiguous on the &quot;institutional question&quot;, and only the Liberal Party was committed to preserving the monarchy, though many individual Liberals were republicans. Only a minority of the partisan bands fighting for the CLN were monarchists, and a prince of the House of Savoy led none. After the war, Umberto claimed that he wanted to join the partisans, and only his wartime duties prevented him from doing so. The Italian Royal Court relocated itself to Brindisi in the south of Italy after fleeing Rome. In the fall of 1943, many Italian monarchists, like Benedetto Croce and Count Carlo Sforza, pressed for Victor Emmanuel III to abdicate and for Umberto to renounce his right to the succession in favour of his 6-year-old son, with a regency council to govern Italy as the best hope of saving the monarchy. Count Sforza tried to interest the British members of the ACC in this plan, calling Victor Emmanuel a &quot;despicable weakling&quot; and Umberto &quot;a pathological case&quot;, saying neither was qualified to rule Italy. However, given the unwillingness of the King to abdicate, nothing came of it.

At a meeting of the leading politicians from the six revived political parties on 13 January 1944 in Bari, the demand was made that the ACC should force Victor Emmanuel to abdicate to &quot;wash away the shame of the past&quot;. Beyond removing Victor Emmanuel, which everyone at the Congress of Bari wanted, the Italian politicians differed, with some calling for a republic to be proclaimed at once, some willing to see Umberto succeed to the throne, others wanting Umberto to renounce his claim to the throne in favour of his son, and finally those who were willing to accept Umberto as &quot;Luogotenente Generale del Regno&quot; () to govern in place of his father. Since northern and central Italy were still occupied by Germany, it was finally decided at the Bari conference that the &quot;institutional question&quot; should be settled only once all of Italy was liberated, so all of the Italian people could have their say.

===Outing and appointment as regent===

In the Salò Republic, Mussolini returned to his original republicanism and, as part of his attack on the House of Savoy, Fascist newspapers in the area under the control of the Italian Social Republic &quot;outed&quot; Umberto, calling him &quot;Stellassa&quot; (&quot;Ugly Starlet&quot; in the Piedmontese language). The Fascist newspapers reported in a lurid, sensationalist, and decidedly homophobic way Umberto&#x27;s various relationships with men as a way of discrediting him. It was after Umberto was &quot;outed&quot; by the Fascist press in late 1943 that the issue of his homosexuality came to widespread public notice.

As the Allies freed more and more of Italy from the Salò Republic, it became apparent that Victor Emmanuel was too tainted by his previous support of Fascism to have any further role. A sign of how unpopular the House of Savoy had become was that on 28 March 1944, when the Italian Communist leader Palmiro Togliatti returned to Italy after a long exile in the Soviet Union, he did not press for an immediate proclamation of a republic. Togliatti wanted the monarchy to continue as the best way of winning the Communists&#x27; support after the war. For the same reason, Count Sforza wanted a republic as soon as possible, arguing the House of Savoy was far too closely associated with Fascism to enjoy moral legitimacy, and the only hope of establishing a liberal democracy in Italy after the war was a republic. By this point, the government of Pietro Badoglio was so unpopular with the Italian people that Umberto was willing to accept the support of any party with a mass following, even the Communists. The fact that contrary to expectations, Togliatti and Badoglio got along very well, led to widespread fears amongst liberal-minded Italians that a Togliatti-Badoglio duumvirate might emerge, forming an alliance between what rapidly was becoming Italy&#x27;s largest mass party and the military. The power and influence of Badoglio&#x27;s government, based in Salerno, was very limited, but the entry of the Communists, followed by representatives of the other anti-Fascist parties, into the Cabinet of that government in April 1944 marked the moment when, as the British historian David Ellwood noted, &quot;...anti-Fascism had compromised with the traditional state and the defenders of Fascism, and the Communist Party had engineered this compromise. A quite new phase in Italy&#x27;s liberation was opening&quot;. Besides the &quot;institutional question&quot;, the principle responsibility of the Royal Italian Government was the reconstruction of the liberated areas of Italy. As the Allies pushed northwards, aside from the damage caused by the fighting, the retreating Germans systematically destroyed all of the infrastructure, leading to a humanitarian disaster in the liberated parts. Umberto, together with the rest of his father&#x27;s government, spent time attempting to have humanitarian aid delivered.

Under intense pressure from Robert Murphy and Harold Macmillan of the ACC at a meeting on 10 April 1944, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his powers to Umberto. The King bitterly told Lieutenant-General Sir Noel Mason-MacFarlane that Umberto was unqualified to rule, and that handing power over to him was equivalent to letting the Communists come to power. However, events had moved beyond Victor Emmanuel&#x27;s ability to control. After Rome was liberated in June, Victor Emmanuel transferred his remaining constitutional powers to Umberto, naming his son Lieutenant General of the Realm. However, Victor Emmanuel retained the title and position of King. During his period as Regent, Umberto saw his father only three times, partly out of a bid to distance himself and partly because of tensions between father and son. Mack Smith wrote that Umberto was: &quot;More attractive and outgoing than his father, he was even more a soldier at heart, and completely inexperienced as a politician...In personality-less astute and intelligent than his father...less obstinate, he was far more open, affable and ready to learn&quot;.

As Regent, Umberto initially made a poor impression on almost everyone as he surrounded himself with Fascist-era generals as his advisers, spoke of the military as the basis of his power, frequently threatened to sue for libel anyone who made even the slightest critical remarks about the House of Savoy, and asked the ACC to censor the press to prevent the criticism of himself or his father. The British Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, wrote after meeting Umberto, in a message to London, that he was &quot;the poorest of poor creatures&quot;, and his only qualification for the throne was that he had more charm than his charmless father. The historian and philosopher Benedetto Croce, a minister in Badoglio&#x27;s cabinet, called Umberto &quot;entirely insignificant&quot; as he found the Prince of Piedmont to be shallow, vain, superficial, and of low intelligence, and alluding to his homosexuality stated his private life was &quot;tainted by scandal&quot;.

The diplomat and politician Count Carlo Sforza wrote in his diary that Umberto was utterly unqualified to be King as he called the prince &quot;a stupid young man who knew nothing of the real Italy&quot; and &quot;he had been as closely associated with fascism as his father. In addition he is weak and dissipated, with a degenerate and even oriental disposition inherited from his Balkan mother&quot;. Sam Reber, an American official with the ACC, who had known Umberto before the war, met the prince in Naples in early 1944 and wrote he found him &quot;greatly improved. The Balkan playboy period was over. But he has a weak face and, to judge by first meeting, has not, I should say, the personality to inspire confidence and devotion in others&quot;. More damaging, Victor Emmanuel let it be known that he regretted handing over his powers to his son, and made clear that he felt that Umberto was unfit to succeed him as part of a bid to take back his lost powers.

After Togliatti and the Communists entered Badoglio&#x27;s cabinet, taking the oaths of loyalty to Umberto in the so-called &quot;Svolta di Salerno&quot; (&quot;Salerno turn&quot;), the leaders of the other anti-Fascist parties felt they had no choice but to join the cabinet as to continue to boycott it might lead Italy to be open to Communist domination. The other parties entered the cabinet on 22 April 1944 to preempt the Communists who joined the cabinet on 24 April. The Christian Democratic leader Alcide De Gasperi believed in 1944 that a popular vote would ensure a republic immediately, and sources from the Vatican suggested to him that only 25% of Italians favoured continuing the monarchy. The Catholic Church was in favour of Umberto, who, unlike his father, was a sincere Catholic who it was believed would keep the Communists out of power. However, De Gasperi admitted that though the monarchy was a conservative institution, &quot;it was difficult to answer the argument that the monarchy had done little to serve the interests of the country or people during the past thirty years&quot;.

Umberto&#x27;s relations with the Allies were strained by his insistence that after the war, Italy should keep all of its colonial empire, including Ethiopia and the parts of Yugoslavia that Mussolini had annexed in 1941. Both the British and Americans told Umberto that Ethiopia had its independence restored in 1941 and would not revert to Italian rule, while the Allies had promised that Yugoslavia would be restored to its pre-war frontiers after the war. Umberto later stated that he would have never signed the peace treaty of 1947 under which Italy renounced its empire. On 15 April 1944, in an interview with &quot;The Daily Express&quot;, Umberto stated his hope that Italy would become a full Allied power, expressing his wish that the &quot;Regia Marina&quot; would fight in the Pacific against the Japanese Empire and the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; would march alongside the other Allied armies in invading Germany. In the same interview, Umberto stated that he wanted post-war Italy to have a government &quot;patterned on the British monarchy, and at the same time incorporating as much of America&#x27;s political framework as possible&quot;. Umberto admitted that, in retrospect, his father had made grave mistakes as King and criticised Victor Emmanuel for a suffocating childhood, where he was never permitted to express his personality or hold views of his own. In the same interview, Umberto stated that he hoped to make Italy a democracy by executing &quot;the vastest education programme Italy has ever seen&quot; to eliminate illiteracy in Italy once and for all.

A few days later, on 19 April 1944, Umberto in an interview with &quot;The Times&quot; complained that the ACC was too liberal in giving Italians too much freedom, as the commissioners &quot;seemed to expect the Italian people to run before they could walk&quot;. In the same interview, Umberto demanded the ACC censor the Italian press to end the criticism of the Royal Family, and claimed he had no choice but to support Mussolini because otherwise he would have been disinherited. Finally, Umberto made the controversial statement that Mussolini &quot;at first had the full support of the nation&quot; in bringing Italy into the war in June 1940. Victor Emmanuel III had only signed the declarations of war because &quot;there was no sign that the nation wanted it otherwise. No single voice was raised in protest. No demand was made for summoning parliament&quot;. The interview with &quot;The Times&quot; caused a storm of controversy in Italy, with many Italians objecting to Umberto&#x27;s claim that the responsibility for Italy entering the war rested with ordinary Italians and his apparent ignorance of the difficulties of holding public protests under the Fascist regime in 1940. Sforza wrote in his diary of his belief that Victor Emmanuel, &quot;that little monster&quot;, had put Umberto up to the interview to discredit his son. Croce wrote:&quot;The Prince of Piedmont for twenty-two years has never shown any sign of acting independently of his father. Now he is simply repeating his father&#x27;s arguments. He chooses to do this at the very moment when, having been designated lieutenant of the kingdom, he ought to be overcoming doubt and distrust as I personally hoped he would succeed in doing. To me it seems unworthy to try to unload the blame and errors of royalty on the people. I, an old monarchist, am therefore especially grieved when I see the monarchs themselves working to discredit the monarchy&quot;. Various Italian politicians had attempted to persuade the Allies to revise the armistice of 1943 in Italy&#x27;s favour because there was a difference between the Fascist regime and the Italian people. Umberto&#x27;s statement that the House of Savoy bore no responsibility when he asserted that the Italian people had been of one mind with Mussolini in June 1940, was widely seen as weakening the case for revising the armistice.

===Liberation and republicanism===
Most of the Committee of National Liberation (CLN) leaders operating underground in the north tended to lean in a republican direction. Still, they were willing to accept Umberto temporarily out of the belief that his personality and widespread rumours about his private life would ensure that he would not last long as either Lieutenant General of the Realm or as King, should his father abdicate. After the liberation of Rome on 6 June 1944, the various Italian political parties all applied strong pressure on Umberto to dismiss Pietro Badoglio as prime minister, as the Duke had loyally served the Fascist regime until the Royal coup on 25 July 1943, which resulted in the social democrat Ivanoe Bonomi being appointed prime minister. On 5 June 1944, Victor Emmanuel formally gave up his powers to Umberto, finally recognising his son as Lieutenant General of the Realm. After the liberation of Rome, Umberto received a warm welcome from ordinary people when he returned to the Eternal City. Mack Smith cautioned that the friendly reception that Umberto received in Rome may have been due to him being a symbol of normalcy after the harsh German occupation as opposed to genuine affection for the prince. During the German occupation, much of the Roman population had lived on the brink of starvation, young people had been arrested on the streets to be taken off to work as slave labourers in Germany, while the Fascist &quot;Milizia&quot;, together with the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and SS, had committed numerous atrocities. Badoglio, by contrast, was greeted with widespread hostility when he returned to Rome, being blamed by many Italians as the man, together with the King, who was responsible for abandoning Rome to the Germans without a fight in September 1943.

Umberto had ordered Badoglio to bring members of the Committee of National Liberation (CLN) into his cabinet after the liberation of Rome to broaden his basis of support and ensure national unity by preventing the emergence of a rival government. Umberto moved into the Quirinal Palace, while at The Grand Hotel, the Rome branch of the CLN met with the cabinet. Speaking on behalf of the CLN in general, the Roman leadership of the CLN refused to join the cabinet as long as Badoglio headed it but indicated that Bonomi was an acceptable choice as prime minister for them. Lieutenant-General Sir Noel Mason-MacFarlane of the ACC visited the Quirinal Palace and convinced Umberto to accept Bonomi as prime minister because the Crown needed to bring the CLN into the government, which required sacrificing Badoglio. As Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin were willing to see Badoglio continue as prime minister, seeing him as a force for order, Umberto could have held out for him. However, as part of his efforts to distance himself from Fascism, Umberto agreed to appoint Bonomi as prime minister. Reflecting the tense &quot;institutional question&quot; of republic vs. monarchy, Umberto, when swearing in the Bonomi cabinet, allowed the ministers to take either their oaths to himself as the Lieutenant General of the Realm or to the Italian state; Bonomi himself chose to take his oath to Umberto while the rest of his cabinet chose to take their oaths only to the Italian state. Churchill especially disapproved of the replacement of Badoglio with Bonomi, complaining that, in his view, Umberto was being used by &quot;a group of aged and hungry politicians trying to intrigue themselves into an undue share of power&quot;. Through the Allied occupation, the Americans were far more supportive of Italian republicanism than the British, with Churchill in particular believing the Italian monarchy was the only institution that was capable of preventing the Italian Communists from coming to power after the war.

Unlike the conservative Badoglio, the social democrat Bonomi started to move Italian politics in an increasingly democratic direction as he argued that King Victor Emmanuel III, who had only turned against Mussolini when it was clear that the war was lost, was unfit to continue as monarch. On 25 June 1944, the Bonomi government, which like Badoglio&#x27;s government, ruled by Royal Decree as there was no parliament in Italy, had a Royal Decree issued in Umberto&#x27;s name promising a Constituent Assembly for Italy after the war. As Umberto continued as regent, he surprised many, after his rocky start in the spring of 1944, with greater maturity and judgement than was expected. Croce advised him to make a break with his father by choosing his advisers from the democratic parties, and it was due to Croce&#x27;s influence that Umberto appointed Falcone Lucifero, a socialist lawyer, as Minister of the Royal House. Lucifero suggested reforms, which were implemented, such as reducing the number of aristocrats and generals at the Royal Court, while bringing in people from all the regions of Italy instead of just Piedmont to make the Royal Court more representative of Italy.

Umberto, in September 1944, vetoed an attempt by the Bonomi government to start an investigation of who was responsible for abandoning Rome in September 1943 as he feared that it would show his father was a coward. The same month, Badoglio, who was kept on as an adviser by Umberto, made an offer to the British and the Americans on behalf of the regent in September 1944 for Italy to be governed by a triumvirate consisting of himself, Bonomi and another former prime minister, Vittorio Orlando, which purged the prefects in the liberated areas who were &quot;agents of Togliatti and Nenni&quot; with Fascist-era civil servants. Badoglio also spoke of Umberto&#x27;s desire not to lose any territory after the war to Greece, Yugoslavia and France. Badoglio&#x27;s offer was rejected as Admiral Ellery W. Stone of the ACC was opposed to Umberto&#x27;s plans to have Bonomi share power with Badoglio and Orlando, seeing this as upsetting the delicately achieved political consensus for no other reason than to increase the Crown&#x27;s power.

In October 1944, Umberto, in an interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot;, stated that he favoured a referendum to decide whether Italy was to be a republic or a monarchy instead of having the &quot;institutional question&quot; decided by the national assembly that would write Italy&#x27;s post-war constitution. Umberto&#x27;s interview caused controversy as the republican parties widely feared that a referendum would be rigged, especially in the south of Italy. In the same interview, Umberto mentioned his belief that, after the war, monarchies all over the world would move towards the left, and stated that under his leadership Italy would go leftwards &quot;in an ordered, liberal way&quot; as he understood &quot;the weight of the past is the monarchy&#x27;s greatest handicap&quot;, which he would resolve by a &quot;radical revision&quot; of the &quot;Statuto Albertino&quot;. Umberto spoke favourably of Togliatti as he was &quot;clever, agreeable, and easy to discuss problems with&quot;. In private, Umberto said he found Togliatti &quot;to be a very congenial companion whose intelligence he respected, but was afraid that he suited his conversation according to his company&quot;.

By late 1944, the question of whether the CLN or the Crown represented the Italian people came to a head. On 25 November 1944, Bonomi resigned as prime minister, saying he could not govern owing to his difficulties with the CLN, and as the politicians could not agree on a successor. Umberto used the impasse to reassert the Crown&#x27;s powers. The crisis ended on 12 December 1944 with Umberto appointing a new government under Bonomi consisting of ministers from four parties, the most important of which were the Communists and the Christian Democrats. In response to objections from the CLN, Bonomi, in practice, accepted their claim that they represented the Italian people rather than the Crown, while still swearing an oath of loyalty to Umberto as the Lieutenant General of the Realm when he took the prime minister&#x27;s oath. An attempt by Umberto to have Churchill issue a public statement in favour of the monarchy led Macmillan to warn Umberto to try to be more politically neutral as regent. However, Churchill, during a visit to Rome in January 1945, called Umberto &quot;a far more impressive figure than the politicians&quot;. As a gesture to promote national unity after the traumas of the war, in June 1945, Umberto appointed as prime minister, a prominent guerrilla leader, Ferruccio Parri.

In December 1945, Umberto appointed a new, more conservative government under Alcide De Gasperi. One of the first acts of the new government was to announce the High Commission for Sanctions Against Fascism would cease operating as of 31 March 1946 and to start purging from the liberated areas of northern Italy civil servants appointed by the CLN, restoring the career civil servants who had served the Fascist regime back to their former posts. Over the opposition of the left-wing parties who wanted the &quot;institutional question&quot; resolved by the Constituent Assembly, De Gasperi announced that a referendum would be held to decide the &quot;institutional question&quot;. At the same time, Italian women were given the right to vote and to hold official office for the first time, again over the opposition of the left-wing parties, who viewed Italian women as more conservative than their menfolk, and believed that female suffrage would benefit the monarchist side in the referendum. The monarchists favoured putting off the referendum as long as possible out of the hope that a return to normalcy would cause the Italians to take a more favourable view of their monarchy, while the republicans wanted a referendum as soon as possible, hoping that wartime radicalisation would work in their favour.

==King of Italy==

Umberto earned widespread praise for his role in the following three years, with the Italian historian Giuseppe Mammarella calling Umberto a man &quot;whose Fascist past was less compromising&quot; than that of Victor Emmanuel and who, as Lieutenant General of the Realm, showed certain &quot;progressive&quot; tendencies. In April 1946, a public opinion poll of registered members of the conservative Christian Democratic party showed that 73% were republicans, a poll that caused immense panic in the monarchist camp. The American historian Norman Kogan cautioned the poll was of Christian Democratic members, which was not the same thing as Christian Democratic voters who tended to be &quot;...rural, female, or generally apolitical&quot;. Nonetheless, the poll led to appeals from Umberto to the ACC to postpone the referendum, leading to the reply that the De Gasperi cabinet had set the date for the referendum, not the ACC. The possibility of losing the referendum also led to the monarchists to appeal to Victor Emmanuel to finally abdicate. De Gasperi and the other Christian Democratic leaders refused to take sides in the referendum, urging Christian Democratic voters to follow their consciences when it came time to vote.

In the belated hope of influencing public opinion ahead of a referendum on the continuation of the monarchy, Victor Emmanuel formally abdicated in favour of Umberto on 9 May 1946 and left for Egypt. Before departing for Egypt, Victor Emmanuel saw Umberto for the last time, saying farewell in a cold, emotionless way. The Catholic Church saw the continuation of the monarchy as the best way of keeping the Italian left out of power, and during the referendum campaign, Catholic priests used their pulpits to warn that &quot;all the pains of hell&quot; were reserved for those who voted for a republic. The Catholic Church presented the referendum not as a question of republic vs monarchy, but instead as a question of Communism vs Catholicism, warning to vote for a republic would be to vote for the Communists. On the day before the referendum, 1 June 1946, Pope Pius XII, in a sermon on St. Peter&#x27;s Square, said in what was widely seen as endorsing Umberto: &quot;What is the problem? The problem is whether one or the other of those nations, of those two Latin sisters [elections were taking place in France on the same day] with several thousands of years of civilisation, will continue to lean against the solid rock of Christianity;... or on the contrary, do they want to hand over the fate of their future to the impossible omnipotence of a secular state without extraterrestrial ideals, without religion, and without God. One of these two alternatives shall occur according to whether the names of the champions or the destroyers of Christian civilization emerge victorious from the urns&quot;. Umberto believed that the support from the Catholic Church would be decisive and that he would win the referendum by a narrow margin. The De Gasperi cabinet accepted Umberto as King, but refused to accept the standard appellation for Italian kings &quot;by the Grace of God and the will of the people&quot;.

In northern Italy, which had been the scene of the guerrilla struggle against the Italian Social Republic and the Germans, much of the population had been radicalised by the struggle, and feelings were very much against the monarchy. Kogan wrote Victor Emmanuel&#x27;s flight from Rome was &quot;bitterly remembered&quot; in the &quot;Nord&quot; as an act of cowardice and betrayal by the King who abandoned his people to the German occupation without a fight. The socialist leader Sandro Pertini warned Umberto not to campaign in Milan as otherwise he would be lynched by the Milanese working class if he should appear in that city. Republican cartoonists mercilessly mocked Umberto&#x27;s physical quirks, as the American historian Anthony Di Renzo wrote that he was: &quot;Tall, stiff, and balding, he had smooth, clean-shaven blue cheeks, thin lips, and a weak chin. Dressed in military uniform as First Marshal of the Empire, decorated with the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, he seemed more like a majordomo than a king. On the campaign trail, Umberto was received with much more friendliness in the south of Italy than in the north. People in the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot; loved their King, who on the campaign trail in Sicily showed an encyclopedic knowledge of Sicilian villages which greatly endeared him to the Sicilians. Umberto&#x27;s principal arguments for retaining the monarchy were it was the best way to revive Italy as a great power; it was the only institution capable of holding Italy together by checking regional separatism; and it would uphold Catholicism against anti-clericalism. The republicans charged that Umberto had done nothing to oppose Fascism, with his major interest being his &quot;glittering social life&quot; in the high society of Rome and Turin, and that as a general knew that Italy was unready for war in 1940, but did not warn Mussolini against entering the war.

Mack Smith wrote that &quot;some of the more extreme monarchists&quot; expressed doubts about the legitimacy of the referendum, claiming that millions of voters, many of them pro-monarchist, were unable to vote because they had not yet been able to return to their local areas to register. Nor had the issue of Italy&#x27;s borders been settled definitively, so the voting rights of those in disputed areas had not been satisfactorily clarified. Other allegations were made about voter manipulation, and even the issue of how to interpret the votes became controversial, as it appeared that not just a majority of those validly voting but of those votes cast (including spoiled votes), was needed to reach an outcome in the event the monarchy lost by a tight margin.

On the 2 June 1946 referendum, which saw the participation of almost 90% of voters, over 54% majority voted to make Italy a republic. The conservative, rural &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot; (southern Italy) region voted solidly for the monarchy while the more urbanised and industrialised &quot;Nord&quot; (northern Italy) voted equally firmly for a republic. In northern Italy, which had been ruled by the Italian Social Republic, the charges of homosexuality made against Umberto had an impact on the voters, causing at least some conservatives to vote for the republic. From his exile in Egypt, where King Farouk had welcomed him as a guest, Victor Emmanuel expressed no surprise at the result of the referendum as he always viewed Umberto as a failure who was unfit to be King, and claimed that the monarchists would have won the referendum if only he had not abdicated. Umberto himself had expected to win the referendum and was deeply shocked when the majority of his subjects chose a republic.

The republic was formally proclaimed four days later, ending Umberto&#x27;s brief (effective 12 June) 34-day reign as King. Umberto at first refused to accept what he called &quot;the outrageous illegality&quot; of the referendum and took his deposition badly. In his last official statement as King, Umberto refused to accept the republic, saying he was the victim of a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; by his ministers and the referendum had been rigged against him. In response, De Gasperi, who became Acting President, replied in a press statement: &quot;We must strive to understand the tragedy of someone who, after inheriting a military defeat and a disastrous complicity with dictatorship, tried hard in recent months to work with patience and goodwill towards a better future. But this final act of the thousand-year-old House of Savoy must be seen as part of our national catastrophe; it is an expiation, an expiation forced upon all of us, even those who have not shared directly in the guilt of the dynasty&quot;. Some monarchists advocated using force to prevent a republic from being proclaimed, even at the risk of a civil war, but Mack Smith wrote that: &quot;Common sense and patriotism saved Umberto from accepting such counsel&quot;. Umberto rejected the advice that he should go to Naples, proclaim a rival government to start a civil war in which the Army would presumably side with the House of Savoy, under the grounds that &quot;My House united Italy. I will not divide it&quot;. The monarchy of the House of Savoy formally ended on 12 June 1946. Prime Minister Alcide de Gasperi assumed office as Italy&#x27;s interim Head of State. At about 3 pm on 13 June 1946, Umberto left the Quirinal Palace for the last time with the servants assembled in the courtyard to see him off, and many were in tears. At Ciampino Airport in Rome, as Umberto boarded the aeroplane that was to take him to Lisbon, a &quot;carabiniere&quot; grabbed him by the hand and said: &quot;Your Majesty, we will never forget you!&quot;

==In exile==
Umberto II lived for 37 years in exile, in Cascais, on the Portuguese Riviera. He never set foot in his native land again; the 1948 constitution of the Italian Republic not only forbade amending the constitution to restore the monarchy but, until 2002, barred all male heirs to the defunct Italian throne from returning to Italian soil. Female members of the Savoy family were not barred, except former queen consorts. 

Together with their four children, they took part in the ship tour organized by Queen Frederica and her husband King Paul of Greece in 1954, which became known as the “Cruise of the Kings” and was attended by over 100 royals from all over Europe. Since the ship tour began in Naples, the family could only board in Corfu, Greece, as they were not allowed to set foot on Italian soil. On this trip their daughter Princess Maria Pia met her future husband Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia.

Relations between Umberto and Marie José grew more strained during their exile, and in effect, their marriage broke up, with Marie José moving to Switzerland. At the same time, Umberto remained in Portugal, though, as Catholics, the couple did not divorce.

At the time when Umberto was dying, in 1983, President Sandro Pertini wanted the Italian Parliament to allow Umberto to return to his native country. Umberto II died in Geneva and was interred in Hautecombe Abbey, which for centuries was the burial place of the members of the House of Savoy.

==Titles, styles and honours==
===Titles and styles===
* 15 September 1904 – 29 September 1904: &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; Prince Umberto of Savoy
* 29 September 1904 – 9 May 1946: &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; The Prince of Piedmont
* 9 May 1946 – 12 June 1946: &quot;His Majesty&quot; The King of Italy
* 12 June 1946 – 18 March 1983: &quot;His Majesty&quot; King Umberto II of Italy

Umberto was granted the traditional title of Prince of Piedmont at birth. This was formalised by Royal Decree on 29 September 1904.

===Honours===
====National honours====
* SS Principe Umberto, a passenger and cargo ship built in 1908, named after him, sunk in 1916.

====Foreign honours====
==Ancestry==
===Patrilineal ancestry===
# Humbert I of Savoy, 980–1047
# Otto of Savoy, 1015–1057
# Amadeus II of Savoy, 1039–1080
# Humbert II of Savoy, 1070–1103
# Amadeus III of Savoy, 1095–1148
# Humbert III of Savoy, 1135–1189
# Thomas I of Savoy, 1176–1233
# Thomas II, Count of Piedmont, 1199–1259
# Amadeus V, Count of Savoy, 1251–1323
# Aimone, Count of Savoy, 1291–1343
# Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy, 1334–1383
# Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy, 1360–1391
# Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy, 1383–1451
# Louis, Duke of Savoy, 1402–1465
# Philip II, Duke of Savoy, 1438–1497
# Charles III, Duke of Savoy, 1486–1553
# Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, 1528–1580
# Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, 1562–1630
# Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano, 1596–1656
# Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano, 1628–1709
# Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano, 1690–1741
# Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano, 1721–1778
# Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano, 1743–1780
# Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano, 1770–1800
# Charles Albert of Sardinia, 1798–1849
# Victor Emmanuel II of Italy, 1820–1878
# Umberto I of Italy, 1844–1900
# Victor Emmanuel III of Italy, 1869–1947
# Umberto II of Italy, 1904–1983

==See also==
* List of shortest reigning monarchs of all time

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* Genealogy of recent members of the House of Savoy
* Website with Information on Italian Royal news stories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="0" end="10" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="59" end="72" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="222" end="235" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="293" end="301" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="May King"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="375" end="403" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181530" start="408" end="427" title="Elena of Montenegro" label="Elena of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q698178" start="599" end="625" title="Italian invasion of France" label="Italian invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189651" start="694" end="710" title="Marshal of Italy" label="Marshal of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="778" end="794" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="856" end="866" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="871" end="881" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="919" end="935" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="1000" end="1015" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840799" start="1211" end="1223" title="Luogotenente" label="Luogotenente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="1312" end="1349" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="1377" end="1393" title="Italian monarchy" label="Italian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273059" start="1774" end="1781" title="Cascais" label="Cascais"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261201" start="1790" end="1808" title="Portuguese Riviera" label="Portuguese Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1821" end="1827" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q19851" start="1895" end="1914" title="Castle of Racconigi" label="Castle of Racconigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="1918" end="1926" title="Piedmont (Italy)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="1976" end="2004" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181530" start="2019" end="2039" title="Jelena of Montenegro" label="Jelena of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="2057" end="2070" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q114698418" start="2166" end="2184" title="Prince of Piedmont" label="Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q153867" start="2333" end="2348" title="Triple Alliance (1882)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2373" end="2396" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365546" start="2436" end="2454" title="Parliament of the Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q445106" start="2555" end="2576" title="Prince Emanuele Filiberto, Duke of Aosta (1869–1931)" label="the 2nd Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604679" start="2619" end="2635" title="Denis Mack Smith" label="Denis Mack Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="3596" end="3626" title="King Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="King Alexander I of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="3775" end="3791" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q114698418" start="3925" end="3943" title="Prince of Piedmont" label="Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q499143" start="4018" end="4027" title="preceptor" label="preceptor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4151" end="4189" title="Italian diaspora#Americas" label="Italian people living outside of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="4306" end="4320" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="4329" end="4347" title="State of São Paulo" label="State of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745716" start="4415" end="4430" title="São Paulo Revolt of 1924" label="major rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="4567" end="4575" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="4592" end="4597" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q714189" start="5216" end="5223" title="Il Duce" label="Il Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="5231" end="5247" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330482" start="5361" end="5382" title="Fascist Grand Council" label="Fascist Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5519" end="5527" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q600633" start="5719" end="5737" title="Colonne du Congrès" label="Colonne du Congrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742900" start="5798" end="5814" title="Fernando de Rosa" label="Fernando de Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="5930" end="5950" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="6293" end="6299" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="6420" end="6437" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="6518" end="6536" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Italian Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q962672" start="6543" end="6562" title="Mogadishu Cathedral" label="Mogadishu Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="6646" end="6655" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q863048" start="6854" end="6862" title="Princess" label="Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q72919" start="6863" end="6884" title="Marie José of Belgium" label="Marie José of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55008046" start="6914" end="6943" title="Albert I of the Belgians" label="King Albert I of the Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q235186" start="6958" end="6973" title="Elisabeth of Bavaria, Queen of Belgium" label="Queen Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="7012" end="7019" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q922418" start="7048" end="7066" title="Princess Maria Pia of Bourbon-Parma" label="Princess Maria Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="7080" end="7104" title="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples" label="Prince Vittorio Emanuele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117878" start="7118" end="7142" title="Princess Maria Gabriella of Savoy" label="Princess Maria Gabriella"/>
<link wikidata="Q933448" start="7156" end="7179" title="Princess Maria Beatrice of Savoy" label="Princess Maria Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840799" start="7373" end="7404" title="Luogotenente" label="Lieutenant General of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7432" end="7444" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="7652" end="7668" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q297190" start="7725" end="7742" title="Giovanni Giolitti" label="Giovanni Giolitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="7820" end="7833" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Ethiopian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8622" end="8634" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="8719" end="8730" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8768" end="8784" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028047" start="9233" end="9238" title="Italian First Army" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q109448204" start="9240" end="9246" title="Italian Fourth Army" label="Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032215" start="9255" end="9267" title="Italian Seventh Army" label="Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q698178" start="9327" end="9353" title="Italian invasion of France" label="Italian invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="9934" end="9948" title="Regio Esercito" label="Regio Esercito"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="10253" end="10274" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="10332" end="10342" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="10369" end="10386" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10519" end="10531" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="10580" end="10600" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q705332" start="10800" end="10818" title="Operation Hercules" label="Operation Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q243842" start="10849" end="10854" title="British Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189651" start="10903" end="10919" title="Marshal of Italy" label="Marshal of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564977" start="10998" end="11018" title="Battle of El Alamein" label="Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="11071" end="11082" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="11128" end="11133" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="11164" end="11169" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="11204" end="11224" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="11230" end="11238" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155008" start="11248" end="11264" title="Operation Uranus" label="Operation Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="11342" end="11348" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="11598" end="11615" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="4th Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="11671" end="11677" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12010" end="12023" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="12051" end="12058" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q854905" start="12081" end="12090" title="Monsignor" label="Monsignor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="12141" end="12153" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12332" end="12347" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="12408" end="12413" title="Papal" label="Papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="12476" end="12488" title="misogynistic" label="misogynistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35440" start="12911" end="12916" title="Sarre, Italy" label="Sarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="12925" end="12937" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="13288" end="13293" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="13560" end="13565" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q501571" start="13992" end="14001" title="catatonic" label="catatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="14515" end="14530" title="Operation Husky" label="Operation Husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="14551" end="14557" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="14788" end="14802" title="Regio Esercito" label="Regio Esercito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="15119" end="15125" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330482" start="15434" end="15455" title="Fascist Grand Council" label="Fascist Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q353201" start="15504" end="15515" title="Dino Grandi" label="Dino Grandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q707580" start="15856" end="15873" title="Roberto Farinacci" label="Roberto Farinacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189651" start="16142" end="16149" title="Marshal of Italy" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="16150" end="16190" title="Pietro Badoglio, 1st Duke of Addis Abeba" label="Pietro Badoglio, 1st Duke of Addis Abeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="16272" end="16277" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929097" start="16278" end="16296" title="Raffaele Guariglia" label="Raffaele Guariglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="16324" end="16329" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="16510" end="16526" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="16702" end="16709" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3904342" start="16833" end="16862" title="Pietro d&amp;#x27;Acquarone" label="Count Pietro d&amp;#x27;Acquarone"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="17384" end="17395" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="17430" end="17445" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="17480" end="17487" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="17580" end="17592" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q714259" start="17669" end="17684" title="Operation Achse" label="Operation Achse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189651" start="17896" end="17903" title="Marshal of Italy" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="17904" end="17919" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51256" start="18575" end="18581" title="Ortona" label="Ortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633097" start="18607" end="18628" title="Italian corvette Baionetta (1942)" label="&amp;quot;Baionetta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q955197" start="18995" end="19010" title="Enrico Caviglia" label="Enrico Caviglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620236" start="19049" end="19063" title="Antonio Sorice" label="Antonio Sorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="19374" end="19382" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="19624" end="19647" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209153" start="20645" end="20658" title="James Holland (author)" label="James Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q547858" start="22559" end="22588" title="National Liberation Committee" label="National Liberation Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="23315" end="23323" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192348" start="23418" end="23433" title="Benedetto Croce" label="Benedetto Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="23438" end="23443" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q463243" start="23444" end="23456" title="Carlo Sforza" label="Carlo Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="24074" end="24078" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24569" end="24600" title="Luogotenente#Kingdom of Sardinia and Kingdom of Italy" label="Luogotenente Generale del Regno"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="24954" end="24967" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Salò Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="25052" end="25066" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085" start="25242" end="25262" title="Piedmontese language" label="Piedmontese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="25585" end="25591" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="25630" end="25643" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Salò Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="25728" end="25735" title="National Fascist Party" label="Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310158" start="25877" end="25894" title="Palmiro Togliatti" label="Palmiro Togliatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25939" end="25951" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="26425" end="26440" title="Pietro Badoglio, 1st Duke of Addis Abeba" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="26945" end="26952" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000858" start="27933" end="27946" title="Robert Daniel Murphy" label="Robert Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="27951" end="27967" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="28092" end="28110" title="Lieutenant General (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309811" start="28111" end="28136" title="Noel Mason-MacFarlane" label="Sir Noel Mason-MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28467" end="28498" title="Luogotenente#LGR" label="Lieutenant General of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="28560" end="28564" title="King" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="29461" end="29473" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q192348" start="29709" end="29724" title="Benedetto Croce" label="Benedetto Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="30032" end="30037" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q463243" start="30038" end="30050" title="Carlo Sforza" label="Carlo Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="31481" end="31498" title="Alcide De Gasperi" label="Alcide De Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="31683" end="31698" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="32205" end="32220" title="Italian Empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="32232" end="32240" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="32258" end="32268" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="32706" end="32723" title="The Daily Express" label="The Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q855186" start="32835" end="32847" title="Regia Marina" label="Regia Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="32893" end="32908" title="Japanese Empire" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="32923" end="32937" title="Regio Esercito" label="Regio Esercito"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="33742" end="33751" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q313717" start="36767" end="36780" title="Ivanoe Bonomi" label="Ivanoe Bonomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="37544" end="37553" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="37564" end="37566" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="38117" end="38132" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="38420" end="38438" title="Lieutenant General (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309811" start="38439" end="38464" title="Noel Mason-MacFarlane" label="Sir Noel Mason-MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738597" start="40714" end="40730" title="Falcone Lucifero" label="Falcone Lucifero"/>
<link wikidata="Q297793" start="41526" end="41542" title="Vittorio Orlando" label="Vittorio Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365234" start="41842" end="41857" title="Ellery W. Stone" label="Ellery W. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="42143" end="42161" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q598854" start="42958" end="42975" title="Statuto Albertino" label="Statuto Albertino"/>
<link wikidata="Q471315" start="44589" end="44604" title="Ferruccio Parri" label="Ferruccio Parri"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="44685" end="44702" title="Alcide De Gasperi" label="Alcide De Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="47238" end="47284" title="Italian constitutional referendum, 1946" label="referendum on the continuation of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="48037" end="48050" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83425" start="48067" end="48090" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="49047" end="49059" title="Grace of God" label="Grace of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233" start="49577" end="49591" title="Sandro Pertini" label="Sandro Pertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201444" start="49997" end="50024" title="First Marshal of the Empire" label="First Marshal of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="50268" end="50279" title="Mezzogiorno" label="Mezzogiorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="51947" end="51958" title="Mezzogiorno" label="Mezzogiorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="52379" end="52390" title="King Farouk" label="King Farouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="53020" end="53030" title="abolished monarchy" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="53154" end="53170" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="54297" end="54311" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="54359" end="54376" title="Alcide de Gasperi" label="Alcide de Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="54416" end="54429" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="54479" end="54494" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132616" start="54601" end="54617" title="Ciampino Airport" label="Ciampino Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="54684" end="54690" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q273059" start="54861" end="54868" title="Cascais" label="Cascais"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261201" start="54877" end="54895" title="Portuguese Riviera" label="Portuguese Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q719039" start="55221" end="55235" title="queen consort" label="queen consorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q61351" start="55319" end="55334" title="Frederica of Hanover" label="Queen Frederica"/>
<link wikidata="Q155394" start="55356" end="55370" title="Paul of Greece" label="Paul of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003203" start="55407" end="55426" title="Cruise of the Kings" label="Cruise of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="55515" end="55521" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="55554" end="55559" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q922418" start="55651" end="55669" title="Princess Maria Pia of Bourbon-Parma" label="Princess Maria Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242035" start="55693" end="55723" title="Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia (1924–2016)" label="Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="55872" end="55883" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="55923" end="55931" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="56029" end="56038" title="President of the Italian Republic" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233" start="56039" end="56053" title="Sandro Pertini" label="Sandro Pertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="56065" end="56083" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="56153" end="56159" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q63524" start="56180" end="56196" title="Hautecombe Abbey" label="Hautecombe Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="56261" end="56275" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114698418" start="56498" end="56516" title="Prince of Piedmont" label="Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q114698418" start="56715" end="56733" title="Prince of Piedmont" label="Prince of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922006" start="56844" end="56863" title="SS Principe Umberto" label="SS Principe Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q451436" start="57005" end="57023" title="Humbert I of Savoy" label="Humbert I of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451377" start="57036" end="57049" title="Otto of Savoy" label="Otto of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451920" start="57063" end="57082" title="Amadeus II of Savoy" label="Amadeus II of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553289" start="57096" end="57115" title="Humbert II of Savoy" label="Humbert II of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451940" start="57129" end="57149" title="Amadeus III of Savoy" label="Amadeus III of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q664561" start="57163" end="57183" title="Humbert III of Savoy" label="Humbert III of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q548051" start="57197" end="57214" title="Thomas I of Savoy" label="Thomas I of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29152" start="57228" end="57256" title="Thomas II, Count of Piedmont" label="Thomas II, Count of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q451989" start="57270" end="57295" title="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q547610" start="57309" end="57331" title="Aimone, Count of Savoy" label="Aimone, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451995" start="57345" end="57371" title="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451998" start="57385" end="57412" title="Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="57426" end="57453" title="Antipope Felix V" label="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451408" start="57467" end="57487" title="Louis, Duke of Savoy" label="Louis, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461667" start="57501" end="57525" title="Philip II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philip II, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q444189" start="57539" end="57565" title="Charles III, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles III, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76508" start="57579" end="57612" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy" label="Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318091" start="57626" end="57659" title="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q426677" start="57673" end="57708" title="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano" label="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349136" start="57722" end="57761" title="Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano" label="Emmanuel Philibert, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254102" start="57775" end="57812" title="Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano" label="Victor Amadeus I, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431176" start="57826" end="57859" title="Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano" label="Louis Victor, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q783222" start="57873" end="57911" title="Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano" label="Victor Amadeus II, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707152" start="57925" end="57962" title="Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano" label="Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="57976" end="58002" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="58016" end="58043" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="58057" end="58075" title="Umberto I of Italy" label="Umberto I of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="58089" end="58117" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639464" start="58178" end="58224" title="List of shortest reigning monarchs of all time" label="List of shortest reigning monarchs of all time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="69851" wikidata="Q3368242" url="?curid=69851" title="Dom Tower of Utrecht">
<text>The Dom Tower ( ) of Utrecht is the tallest church tower in the Netherlands, at 112.32 metres (368,5 feet) in height. It is considered the symbol of Utrecht. The tower was part of St. Martin&#x27;s Cathedral, also known as the Dom Church, and was built between 1321 and 1382, to a design by John of Hainaut. The cathedral was never fully completed due to lack of money. Since the unfinished nave collapsed in 1674, the Dom tower has been a freestanding tower. The tower stands at the spot where the city of Utrecht originated almost 2,000 years ago.

==Design and construction==
Its construction led preacher Geert Groote to protest against the vanity of such an immense project, suggesting it was too tall, too expensive and all but aesthetic.

The tower consists of two square blocks, topped by a much lighter lantern. One of the most striking features is the absence of visible buttresses. Upon completion in 1382 the tower stood 109 metres tall. However the height was increased during the restorations in 1910, to its present height of 112.5 metres.

The Dom tower was a multifunctional building. In addition to being a belfry, it contained a private chapel of the Bishop of Utrecht on the first floor. It also served as a watchtower; the tower guard was housed on the second floor of the lower square block.

== Carillonneurs of the Dom Tower of Utrecht ==
The Dom tower has a carillon in its building. There were many operators of the Carillon spanning from the 16th century to now.

Here is a list of all the carillonneurs that played in the Dom tower:
==Bells==

The Dom Tower has an exceptional peal of fourteen ringing bells, weighing 32 tonnes in total. In 1505 Geert van Wou, then the most famous bell-founder of the Netherlands, made a harmonious peal of thirteen bells. The seven smallest bells, sold in 1664 to finance the new carillon, were replaced in 1982 with new bells by Eijsbouts. The largest bell, the &quot;Salvator&quot;, has a weight of 8,200 kg and a diameter of 227 cm. Together with the fourteenth bell, they form the largest existing homogeneous group of medieval bells. The cathedral&#x27;s bells are still rung by hand by members of the Utrecht Bellringers Guild.

In 1625, Jacob van Eyck became carillon player of the Dom Tower. In 1664, a new carillon was installed by Juriaan Sprakel of Zutphen, with a mechanism consisting of 35 chimes, made by the brothers Pieter and François Hemony. In 1972 the carillon was restored and extended to 50 bells. The current player is Małgosia Fiebig

==Storm damage==
The cathedral&#x27;s nave was never completely finished, and on the night of August 1, 1674, a tornado destroyed this part of the cathedral, but the tower was undamaged.

The remaining section of the church and the tower were never reconnected, and the Domplein Square now separates the two structures. In the summer of 2004, however, a mock nave was constructed out of scaffolding to commemorate the missing link. The floorplan of the missing section is shown by the multicoloured paving of the square.

In 1836 the top floor of the tower was heavily damaged in a storm and demolition of the tower was seriously considered. However, it was subsequently restored, a process which took five years.

==Tourism and weddings==
The tower has its own visitor centre, RonDom (which refers to both the Dutch word &quot;rond&quot; or &quot;rondom&quot;, meaning around or surrounding and the name of the church - emphasised by the capital D), which is located in the square. As well as stocking a range of souvenirs, they organise a number of activities centred on the tower, including regular guided tours which allow people to climb the 465 steps to the top of the Dom Tower. On a clear day it is possible to see both Amsterdam and Rotterdam. The booking office for guided tours is located in the square at the foot of the tower.
It is also possible to get married in the tower.

==Radio DOM (1999)==
Radio DOM was an automatic radio-station located on the Dom tower in Utrecht, which from 3 June 1999 until 3 October 1999 broadcast an audio &#x27;soundscape&#x27; based on the sounds of the city of Utrecht. Radio DOM got its inputs from six computer-controlled surveillance microphones installed at a height of 80 metres on the Dom tower, which constantly scanned the central area of the city. The sound signals picked up by these microphones were algorithmically combined into a continuously varying soundscape which was broadcast 24 hours a day by an FM radio transmitter installed on the Dom tower.

Broadcast on 102.3 MHz FM, Radio DOM was part of the exhibition Panorama 2000, organised by the Centraal Museum in Utrecht.

==Local planning restrictions==
Until recently, the unwritten rule in evaluating planning applications in the city of Utrecht was that no building could be built that exceeded the Dom Tower in height. This restriction seems to have been dispensed for plans in the developing suburban area in the west of Utrecht (Leidsche Rijn) and a skyscraper of 262 metres in height has been proposed, challenging this long-standing tradition. The plans for this tower, however, were cancelled in 2010 due to the economic crisis.

== Replica ==
A replica of the Dom Tower has been constructed in the Dutch themed amusement park; Huis Ten Bosch (theme park) at Sasebo, Nagasaki, Japan. Google Street View

== Panoramas ==

==See also==
* List of carillons
* List of tallest structures built before the 20th century

==References==
==External links==
* Utrechts Klokkenluiders Gilde
* Utrechtse Klokkenspel Vereniging
* Webcam Live Domtoren Utrecht
* How the tower was built (Dutch, but with useful illustrations)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3368242" start="4" end="13" title="Dom Tower of Utrecht" label="Dom Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="21" end="28" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q224969" start="36" end="56" title="List of tallest church buildings" label="tallest church tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q936545" start="180" end="207" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Utrecht" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q467242" start="609" end="621" title="Geert Groote" label="Geert Groote"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="881" end="889" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1170" end="1187" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Utrecht#Roman Catholic archbishops after Restoration of the Episcopal Hierarchy" label="Bishop of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="1383" end="1391" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="1517" end="1529" title="carillonneur" label="carillonneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q336971" start="1674" end="1687" title="Geert van Wou" label="Geert van Wou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196631" start="1893" end="1902" title="Royal Eijsbouts bell foundry" label="Eijsbouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q499608" start="2207" end="2221" title="Jacob van Eyck" label="Jacob van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="2229" end="2237" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535" start="2323" end="2330" title="Zutphen" label="Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q141451" start="2395" end="2421" title="Pieter and François Hemony" label="Pieter and François Hemony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2505" end="2520" title="Małgosia Fiebig" label="Małgosia Fiebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="2560" end="2564" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="2634" end="2641" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="4382" end="4397" title="Algorithm" label="algorithmically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="4487" end="4495" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="4496" end="4507" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q260913" start="4633" end="4648" title="Centraal Museum" label="Centraal Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352681" start="4975" end="4988" title="Leidsche Rijn" label="Leidsche Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="5161" end="5176" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191845" start="5277" end="5304" title="Huis Ten Bosch (theme park)" label="Huis Ten Bosch (theme park)"/>
<link wikidata="Q328000" start="5308" end="5314" title="Sasebo, Nagasaki" label="Sasebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608841" start="5385" end="5402" title="List of carillons" label="List of carillons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178424" start="5405" end="5461" title="List of tallest structures built before the 20th century" label="List of tallest structures built before the 20th century"/>
</links>
</doc>
