<doc id="66186" wikidata="Q1865480" url="?curid=66186" title="Bastille">
<text>The Bastille (, ) was a fortress in Paris, known as the Bastille Saint-Antoine. It played an important role in the internal conflicts of France and for most of its history was used as a state prison by the kings of France. It was stormed by a crowd on 14 July 1789, in the French Revolution, becoming an important symbol for the French Republican movement. It was later demolished and replaced by the Place de la Bastille.

The castle was built to defend the eastern approach to the city from potential English attacks during the Hundred Years&#x27; War. Construction was underway by 1357, but the main construction occurred from 1370 onwards, creating a strong fortress with eight towers that protected the strategic gateway of the Porte Saint-Antoine heading out to the east. The innovative design proved influential in both France and England and was widely copied. The Bastille figured prominently in France&#x27;s domestic conflicts, including the fighting between the rival factions of the Burgundians and the Armagnacs in the 15th century, and the Wars of Religion in the 16th. The fortress was declared a state prison in 1417; this role was expanded further, first under the English occupiers of the 1420s and 1430s, and then under Louis XI in the 1460s. The defences of the Bastille were fortified in response to the Imperial threat during the 1550s, with a bastion constructed to the east of the fortress. The Bastille played a key role in the rebellion of the Fronde and the Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine, which was fought beneath its walls in 1652.

Louis XIV used the Bastille as a prison for upper-class members of French society who had opposed or angered him including, after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, French Protestants. From 1659 onwards, the Bastille functioned primarily as a state penitentiary; by 1789, 5,279 prisoners had passed through its gates. Under Louis XV and XVI, the Bastille was used to detain prisoners from more varied backgrounds, and to support the operations of the Parisian police, especially in enforcing government censorship of the printed media. Although inmates were kept in relatively good conditions, criticism of the Bastille grew during the 18th century, fueled by autobiographies written by former prisoners. Reforms were implemented and prisoner numbers were considerably reduced. In 1789, the royal government&#x27;s financial crisis and the formation of the National Assembly gave rise to a swelling of republican sentiments among city-dwellers. On 14 July, the Bastille was stormed by a revolutionary crowd, primarily residents of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine who sought to commandeer the valuable gunpowder held within the fortress. Seven remaining prisoners were found and released and the Bastille&#x27;s governor, Bernard-René de Launay, was killed by the crowd. The Bastille was demolished by order of the Committee of the Hôtel de Ville. Souvenirs of the fortress were transported around France and displayed as icons of the overthrow of despotism. Over the next century, the site and historical legacy of the Bastille featured prominently in French revolutions, political protests and popular fiction, and it remained an important symbol for the French Republican movement.

Almost nothing is left of the Bastille, except some remains of its stone foundation that were relocated to the side of Boulevard Henri IV. Historians were critical of the Bastille in the early 19th century, and believe the fortress to have been a relatively well-administered example of French policing and political control during the 18th century.
==History==

===14th century===
The Bastille was built in response to a threat to Paris during the Hundred Years&#x27; War between England and France. Prior to the Bastille, the main royal castle in Paris was the Louvre, in the west of the capital, but the city had expanded by the middle of the 14th century and the eastern side was now exposed to an English attack. The situation worsened after the imprisonment of John II in England following the French defeat at the Battle of Poitiers, and in his absence the Provost of Paris, Étienne Marcel, took steps to improve the capital&#x27;s defences. In 1357, Marcel expanded the city walls and protected the Porte Saint-Antoine with two high stone towers and a ditch. A fortified gateway of this sort was called a &quot;bastille&quot;, and was one of two created in Paris, the other being built outside the Porte Saint-Denis. Marcel was subsequently removed from his post and executed in 1358.

In 1369, Charles V became concerned about the weakness of the eastern side of the city to English attacks and raids by mercenaries. Charles instructed Hugues Aubriot, the new provost, to build a much larger fortification on the same site as Marcel&#x27;s &quot;bastille&quot;. Work began in 1370 with another pair of towers being built behind the first &quot;bastille&quot;, followed by two towers to the north, and finally two towers to the south. The fortress was probably not finished by the time Charles died in 1380, and was completed by his son, Charles VI. The resulting structure became known simply as the Bastille, with the eight irregularly built towers and linking curtain walls forming a structure wide and deep, the walls and towers high and thick at their bases. Built to the same height, the roofs of the towers and the tops of the walls formed a broad, crenellated walkway all the way around the fortress. Each of the six newer towers had underground &quot;cachots&quot;, or dungeons, at its base, and curved &quot;calotte&quot;, literally &quot;shell&quot;, rooms in their roofs.

Garrisoned by a captain, a knight, eight squires and ten crossbowmen, the Bastille was encircled with ditches fed by the River Seine, and faced with stone. The fortress had four sets of drawbridges, which allowed the Rue Saint-Antoine to pass eastwards through the Bastille&#x27;s gates while giving easy access to the city walls on the north and south sides. The Bastille overlooked the Saint-Antoine gate, which by 1380 was a strong, square building with turrets and protected by two drawbridges of its own. Charles V chose to live close to the Bastille for his own safety and created a royal complex to the south of the fortress called the Hôtel Saint-Pol, stretching from the Porte Saint-Paul up to the Rue Saint-Antoine.

Historian Sidney Toy has described the Bastille as &quot;one of the most powerful fortifications&quot; of the period, and the most important fortification in late medieval Paris. The Bastille&#x27;s design was highly innovative: it rejected both the 13th-century tradition of more weakly fortified quadrangular castles, and the contemporary fashion set at Vincennes, where tall towers were positioned around a lower wall, overlooked by an even taller keep in the centre. In particular, building the towers and the walls of the Bastille at the same height allowed the rapid movement of forces around the castle, as well as giving more space to move and position cannons on the wider walkways. The Bastille design was copied at Pierrefonds and Tarascon in France, while its architectural influence extended as far as Nunney Castle in south-west England.

===15th century===
During the 15th century the French kings continued to face threats both from the English and from the rival factions of the Burgundians and the Armagnacs. The Bastille was strategically vital during the period, both because of its role as a royal fortress and safe-haven inside the capital, and because it controlled a critical route in and out of Paris. In 1418, for example, the future Charles VII took refuge in the Bastille during the Burgundian-led &quot;Massacre of the Armagnacs&quot; in Paris, before successfully fleeing the city through the Porte Saint-Antoine.
The Bastille was occasionally used to hold prisoners, including its creator, Hugues Aubriot, who was the first person to be imprisoned there. In 1417, in addition to being a royal fortress, it formally became a state prison.

Despite the improved Parisian defences, Henry V of England captured Paris in 1420 and the Bastille was seized and garrisoned by the English for the next sixteen years. Henry V appointed Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter, as the new captain of the Bastille. The English made more use of the Bastille as a prison; in 1430 there was a minor rebellion when some prisoners overpowered a sleeping guard and attempted to seize control of the fortress; this incident includes the first reference to a dedicated gaoler at the Bastille.

Paris was finally recaptured by Charles VII of France in 1436. When the French king re-entered the city, his enemies in Paris fortified themselves in the Bastille; after a siege, they eventually ran out of food, surrendered and were allowed to leave the city after the payment of a ransom. The castle remained a key Parisian fortress, but was successfully seized by the Burgundians in 1464, when they convinced royal troops to surrender: once taken, this allowed their faction to make a surprise attack into Paris, almost resulting in the capture of the king.

The Bastille was being used to hold prisoners once again by the reign of Louis XI, who began to use it extensively as a state penitentiary. An early escapee from the Bastille during this period was Antoine de Chabannes, Count of Dammartin and a member of the League of the Public Weal, who was imprisoned by Louis and escaped by boat in 1465. The captains of the Bastille during this period were primarily officers and royal functionaries; Philippe de Melun was the first captain to receive a salary in 1462, being awarded 1,200 livres a year. Despite being a state prison, the Bastille retained the other traditional functions of a royal castle, and was used to accommodate visiting dignitaries, hosting some lavish entertainments given by Louis XI and Francis I.

===16th century===
During the 16th century the area around the Bastille developed further. Early modern Paris continued to grow, and by the end of the century it had around 250,000 inhabitants and was one of the most populous cities in Europe, though still largely contained within its old city walls – open countryside remained beyond the Bastille. The Arsenal, a large military-industrial complex tasked with the production of cannons and other weapons for the royal armies, was established to the south of the Bastille by Francis I, and substantially expanded under Charles IX. An arms depot was later built above the Porte Saint-Antoine, all making the Bastille part of a major military centre.

During the 1550s, Henry II became concerned about the threat of an English or Holy Roman Empire attack on Paris, and strengthened the defences of the Bastille in response. The southern gateway into the Bastille became the principal entrance to the castle in 1553, the other three gateways being closed. A bastion, a large earthwork projecting eastwards from the Bastille, was built to provide additional protective fire for the Bastille and the Arsenal; the bastion was reached from the fortress across a stone abutment using a connecting drawbridge that was installed in the Bastille&#x27;s Comté tower. In 1573 the Porte Saint-Antoine was also altered – the drawbridges were replaced with a fixed bridge, and the medieval gatehouse was replaced with a triumphal arch.

The Bastille was involved in the numerous wars of religion fought between Protestant and Catholic factions with support from foreign allies during the second half of the 16th century. Religious and political tensions in Paris initially exploded in the Day of the Barricades on 12 May 1588, when hard-line Catholics rose up in revolt against the relatively moderate Henry III. After a day&#x27;s fighting had occurred across the capital, Henry III fled and the Bastille surrendered to Henry I, Duke of Guise, the leader of the Catholic League, who appointed Bussy-Leclerc as his new captain. Henry III responded by having the Duke and his brother murdered later that year, whereupon Bussy-Leclerc used the Bastille as a base to mount a raid on the Parlement of Paris, arresting the president and other magistrates, whom he suspected of having royalist sympathies, and detaining them in the Bastille. They were not released until the intervention of Charles, Duke of Mayenne, and the payment of substantial ransoms. Bussy-Leclerc remained in control of the Bastille until December 1592, when, following further political instability, he was forced to surrender the castle to Charles and flee the city.

It took Henry IV several years to retake Paris. By the time he succeeded in 1594, the area around the Bastille formed the main stronghold for the Catholic League and their foreign allies, including Spanish and Flemish troops. The Bastille itself was controlled by a League captain called du Bourg. Henry entered Paris early on the morning of 23 March, through the Porte-Neuve rather than the Saint-Antoine and seized the capital, including the Arsenal complex that neighboured the Bastille. The Bastille was now an isolated League stronghold, with the remaining members of the League and their allies clustering around it for safety. After several days of tension, an agreement was finally reached for this rump element to leave safely, and on 27 March du Bourg surrendered the Bastille and left the city himself.

===Early 17th century===
The Bastille continued to be used as a prison and a royal fortress under both Henry IV and his son, Louis XIII. When Henry clamped down on a Spanish-backed plot among the senior French nobility in 1602, for example, he detained the ringleader Charles de Gontaut, duc de Biron, in the Bastille, and had him executed in the courtyard. Louis XIII&#x27;s chief minister, Cardinal Richelieu, is credited with beginning the modern transformation of the Bastille into a more formal organ of the French state, further increasing its structured use as a state prison. Richelieu broke with Henry IV&#x27;s tradition of the Bastille&#x27;s captain being a member of the French aristocracy, typically a Marshal of France such as François de Bassompierre, Charles d&#x27;Albert or Nicolas de L&#x27;Hospital, and instead appointed Père Joseph&#x27;s brother to run the facility. The first surviving documentary records of prisoners at the Bastille also date from this period.

In 1648, the Fronde insurrection broke out in Paris, prompted by high taxes, increased food prices and disease. The &quot;Parlement of Paris&quot;, the Regency government of Anne of Austria and rebellious noble factions fought for several years to take control of the city and wider power. On 26 August, during the period known as the First Fronde, Anne ordered the arrest of some of the leaders of the Parlement of Paris; violence flared as a result, and the 27 August became known as another Day of the Barricades. The governor of the Bastille loaded and readied his guns to fire on the Hôtel de Ville, controlled by the parliament, although the decision was eventually taken not to shoot. Barricades were erected across the city and the royal government fled in September, leaving a garrison of 22 men behind in the Bastille. On 11 January 1649, the Fronde decided to take the Bastille, giving the task to Elbeuf, one of their leaders. Elbeuf&#x27;s attack required only a token effort: five or six shots were fired at the Bastille, before it promptly surrendered on 13 January. Pierre Broussel, one of the Fronde leaders, appointed his son as the governor and the Fronde retained it even after the ceasefire that March.

During the Second Fronde, between 1650 and 1653, Louis, the Prince of Condé, controlled much of Paris alongside the Parlement, while Broussel, through his son, continued to control the Bastille. In July 1652, the Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine took place just outside the Bastille. Condé had sallied out of Paris to prevent the advance of the royalist forces under the command of Turenne. Condé&#x27;s forces became trapped against the city walls and the Porte Saint-Antoine, which the Parlement refused to open; he was coming under increasingly heavy fire from the Royalist artillery and the situation looked bleak. In a famous incident, La Grande Mademoiselle, the daughter of Gaston, Duke of Orléans, convinced her father to issue an order for the Parisian forces to act, before she then entered the Bastille and personally ensured that the commander turned the fortress&#x27;s cannon on Turenne&#x27;s army, causing significant casualties and enabling Condé&#x27;s army&#x27;s safe withdrawal. Later in 1652, Condé was finally forced to surrender Paris to the royalist forces in October, effectively bringing the Fronde to an end: the Bastille returned to royal control.

===Reign of Louis XIV and the Regency (1661–1723)===
The area around the Bastille was transformed in the reign of Louis XIV. Paris&#x27; growing population reached 400,000 during the period, causing the city to spill out past the Bastille and the old city into the arable farmland beyond, forming more thinly populated &quot;faubourgs&quot;, or suburbs. Influenced by the events of the Fronde, Louis XIV rebuilt the area around the Bastille, erecting a new archway at the Porte Saint-Antoine in 1660, and then ten years later pulling down the city walls and their supporting fortifications to replace them with an avenue of trees, later called Louis XIV&#x27;s boulevard, which passed around the Bastille. The Bastille&#x27;s bastion survived the redevelopment, becoming a garden for the use of the prisoners.

Louis XIV made extensive use of the Bastille as a prison, with 2,320 individuals being detained there during his reign, approximately 43 a year. Louis used the Bastille to hold not just suspected rebels or plotters but also those who had simply irritated him in some way, such as differing with him on matters of religion. The typical offences that inmates were accused of were espionage, counterfeiting and embezzlement from the state; a number of financial officials were detained in this way under Louis, most famously including Nicolas Fouquet, his supporters Henry de Guénegaud, Jeannin and Lorenzo de Tonti. In 1685 Louis revoked the Edict of Nantes, which had previously granted various rights to French Protestants; the subsequent royal crackdown was driven by the king&#x27;s strongly anti-Protestant views. The Bastille was used to investigate and break up Protestant networks by imprisoning and questioning the more recalcitrant members of the community, in particular upper-class Calvinists; some 254 Protestants were imprisoned in the Bastille during Louis&#x27;s reign.

By Louis&#x27;s reign, Bastille prisoners were detained using a &quot;lettre de cachet&quot;, a letter under royal seal, issued by the king and countersigned by a minister, ordering a named person to be held. Louis, closely involved in this aspect of government, personally decided who should be imprisoned at the Bastille. The arrest itself involved an element of ceremony: the individual would be tapped on the shoulder with a white baton and formally detained in the name of the king. Detention in the Bastille was typically ordered for an indefinite period and there was considerable secrecy over who had been detained and why: the legend of the &quot;Man in the Iron Mask&quot;, a mysterious prisoner who finally died in 1703, symbolises this period of the Bastille. Although in practice many were held at the Bastille as a form of punishment, legally a prisoner in the Bastille was only being detained for preventative or investigative reasons: the prison was not officially supposed to be a punitive measure in its own right. The average length of imprisonment in the Bastille under Louis XIV was approximately three years.

Under Louis, only between 20 and 50 prisoners were usually held at the Bastille at any one time, although as many as 111 were held for a short period in 1703. These prisoners were mainly from the upper classes, and those who could afford to pay for additional luxuries lived in good conditions, wearing their own clothes, living in rooms decorated with tapestries and carpets or taking exercise around the castle garden and along the walls. By the late 17th century, there was a rather disorganised library for the use of inmates in the Bastille, although its origins remain unclear.

Louis reformed the administrative structure of the Bastille, creating the post of governor, although this post was still often referred to as the captain-governor. During Louis&#x27;s reign the policing of marginal groups in Paris was greatly increased: the wider criminal justice system was reformed, controls over printing and publishing extended, new criminal codes were issued and the post of the Parisian lieutenant general of police was created in 1667, all of which would enable the Bastille&#x27;s later role in support of the Parisian police during the 18th century. By 1711, a 60-strong French military garrison had been established at the Bastille. It continued to be an expensive institution to run, particularly when the prison was full, such as during 1691 when numbers were inflated by the campaign against French Protestants and the annual cost of running the Bastille rose to 232,818 livres.

Between 1715 – the year of Louis&#x27;s death – and 1723, power transferred to the &quot;Régence&quot;; the regent, Philippe d&#x27;Orléans, maintained the prison but the absolutist rigour of Louis XIV&#x27;s system began to weaken somewhat. Although Protestants ceased to be kept in the Bastille, the political uncertainties and plots of the period kept the prison busy and 1,459 were imprisoned there under the Regency, an average of around 182 a year. During the Cellamare conspiracy, the alleged enemies of the Regency were imprisoned in the Bastille, including Marguerite De Launay. While in the Bastille, de Launay fell in love with a fellow prisoner, the Chevalier de Ménil; she also infamously received an invitation of marriage from the Chevalier de Maisonrouge, the governor&#x27;s deputy, who had fallen in love with her himself.

===Reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI (1723–1789)===

====Architecture and organisation====
By the late 18th century, the Bastille had come to separate the more aristocratic quarter of The Marais in the old city from the working class district of the faubourg Saint-Antoine that lay beyond the Louis XIV boulevard. The Marais was a fashionable area, frequented by foreign visitors and tourists, but few went beyond the Bastille into the faubourg. The faubourg was characterised by its built-up, densely populated areas, particularly in the north, and its numerous workshops producing soft furnishings. Paris as a whole had continued to grow, reaching slightly less than 800,000 inhabitants by the reign of Louis XVI, and many of the residents around the faubourg had migrated to Paris from the countryside relatively recently. The Bastille had its own street address, being officially known as No. 232, rue Saint-Antoine.

Structurally, the late-18th century Bastille was not greatly changed from its 14th-century predecessor. The eight stone towers had gradually acquired individual names: running from the north-east side of the external gate, these were La Chapelle, Trésor, Comté, Bazinière, Bertaudière, Liberté, Puits and Coin. La Chapelle contained the Bastille&#x27;s chapel, decorated with a painting of Saint Peter in chains. Trésor took its name from the reign of Henry IV, when it had contained the royal treasury. The origins of the name of Comté tower are unclear; one theory is that the name refers to the County of Paris. Bazinière was named after Bertrand de La Bazinière, a royal treasurer who was imprisoned there in 1663. Bertaudière was named after a medieval mason who died building the structure in the 14th century. Liberté tower took its name either from a protest in 1380, when Parisians shouted the phrase outside the castle, or because it was used to house prisoners who had more freedom to walk around the castle than the typical prisoner. Puits tower contained the castle well, while Coin formed the corner of the Rue Saint-Antoine.

The main castle courtyard, accessed through the southern gateway, was 120 feet long by 72 feet wide (37 m by 22 m), and was divided from the smaller northern yard by a three-office wing, built around 1716 and renovated in 1761 in a modern, 18th-century style. The office wing held the council room that was used for interrogating prisoners, the Bastille&#x27;s library, and servants&#x27; quarters. The upper stories included rooms for the senior Bastille staff, and chambers for distinguished prisoners. An elevated building on one side of the courtyard held the Bastille&#x27;s archives. A clock was installed by Antoine de Sartine, the lieutenant general of police between 1759 and 1774, on the side of the office wing, depicting two chained prisoners.

New kitchens and baths were built just outside the main gate to the Bastille in 1786. The ditch around the Bastille, now largely dry, supported a high stone wall with a wooden walkway for the use of the guards, known as &quot;la ronde&quot;, or the round. An outer court had grown up around the south-west side of the Bastille, adjacent to the Arsenal. This was open to the public and lined with small shops rented out by the governor for almost 10,000 livres a year, complete with a lodge for the Bastille gatekeeper; it was illuminated at night to light the adjacent street.

The Bastille was run by the governor, sometimes called the captain-governor, who lived in a 17th-century house alongside the fortress. The governor was supported by various officers, in particular his deputy, the &quot;lieutenant de roi&quot;, or lieutenant of the king, who was responsible for general security and the protection of state secrets; the major, responsible for managing the Bastille&#x27;s financial affairs and the police archives; and the &quot;capitaine des portes&quot;, who ran the entrance to the Bastille. Four warders divided up the eight towers between them. From an administrative perspective, the prison was generally well run during the period. These staff were supported by an official surgeon, a chaplain and could, on occasion, call upon the services of a local midwife to assist pregnant prisoners. A small garrison of &quot;invalides&quot; was appointed in 1749 to guard the interior and exterior of the fortress; these were retired soldiers and were regarded locally, as Simon Schama describes, as &quot;amiable layabouts&quot; rather than professional soldiers.

====Use of the prison====
The role of the Bastille as a prison changed considerably during the reigns of Louis XV and XVI. One trend was a decline in the number of prisoners sent to the Bastille, with 1,194 imprisoned there during the reign of Louis XV and only 306 under Louis XVI up until the Revolution, annual averages of around 23 and 20 respectively. A second trend was a slow shift away from the Bastille&#x27;s 17th-century role of detaining primarily upper-class prisoners, towards a situation in which the Bastille was essentially a location for imprisoning socially undesirable individuals of all backgrounds – including aristocrats breaking social conventions, criminals, pornographers, thugs – and was used to support police operations, particularly those involving censorship, across Paris. Despite these changes, the Bastille remained a state prison, subject to special authorities, answering to the monarch of the day and surrounded by a considerable and threatening reputation.

Under Louis XV, around 250 Catholic convulsionnaires, often called Jansenists, were detained in the Bastille for their religious beliefs. Many of these prisoners were women and came from a wider range of social backgrounds than the upper-class Calvinists detained under Louis XIV; historian Monique Cottret argues that the decline of the Bastille&#x27;s social &quot;mystique&quot; originates from this phase of detentions. By Louis XVI, the background of those entering the Bastille and the type of offences they were detained over had changed markedly. Between 1774 and 1789, the detentions included 54 people accused of robbery; 31 of involvement in the 1775 Famine Revolt; 11 detained for assault; 62 illegal editors, printers and writers – but relatively few detained over the grander affairs of state.

Many prisoners still continued to come from the upper classes, particularly in those cases termed &quot;désordres des familles&quot;, or disorders of the family. These cases typically involving members of the aristocracy who had, as historian Richard Andrews notes, &quot;rejected parental authority, disgraced the family reputation, manifested mental derangement, squandered capital or violated professional codes.&quot; Their families – often their parents, but sometimes husbands and wives taking action against their spouses – could apply for individuals to be detained at one of the royal prisons, resulting in an average imprisonment of between six months and four years. Such a detention could be preferable to facing a scandal or a public trial over their misdemeanours, and the secrecy that surrounded detention at the Bastille allowed personal and family reputations to be quietly protected. The Bastille was considered one of the best prisons for an upper-class prisoner to be detained at, because of the standard of the facilities for the wealthy. In the aftermath of the notorious &quot;Affair of the Diamond Necklace&quot; of 1786, involving Queen Marie Antoinette and accusations of fraud, all the eleven suspects were held in the Bastille, significantly increasing the notoriety surrounding the institution.

Increasingly, however, the Bastille became part of the system of wider policing in Paris. Although appointed by the king, the governor reported to the lieutenant general of police: the first of these, Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie, made only occasional visits to the Bastille, but his successor, Marquis d&#x27;Argenson, and subsequent officers used the facility extensively and took a close interest in inspections of the prison. The lieutenant general reported in turn to the secretary of the &quot;Maison du Roi&quot;, largely responsible for order in the capital; in practice together they controlled the issuing of the &quot;lettres&quot; in the king&#x27;s name. The Bastille was unusual among Parisian prisons in that it acted on behalf of the king – prisoners could therefore be imprisoned secretly, for longer, and without normal judicial processes being applied, making it a useful facility for the police authorities. The Bastille was a preferred location for holding prisoners who needed extensive questioning or where a case required the analysis of extensive documents. The Bastille was also used to store the Parisian police archives; public order equipment such as chains and flags; and illegal goods, seized by order of the crown using a version of the &quot;lettre de cachet&quot;, such as banned books and illicit printing presses.

Throughout this period, but particularly in the middle of the 18th century, the Bastille was used by the police to suppress the trade in illegal and seditious books in France. In the 1750s, 40% of those sent to the Bastille were arrested for their role in manufacturing or dealing in banned material; in the 1760s, the equivalent figure was 35%. Seditious writers were also often held in the Bastille, although many of the more famous writers held in the Bastille during the period were formally imprisoned for more anti-social, rather than strictly political, offences. In particular, many of those writers detained under Louis XVI were imprisoned for their role in producing illegal pornography, rather than political critiques of the regime. The writer Laurent Angliviel de la Beaumelle, the philosopher André Morellet and the historian Jean-François Marmontel, for example, were formally detained not for their more obviously political writings, but for libellous remarks or for personal insults against leading members of Parisian society.

====Prison regime====
Contrary to its later image, conditions for prisoners in the Bastille by the mid-18th century were in fact relatively benign, particularly by the standards of other prisons of the time. The typical prisoner was held in one of the octagonal rooms in the mid-levels of the towers. The &quot;calottes&quot;, the rooms just under the roof that formed the upper storey of the Bastille, were considered the least pleasant quarters, being more exposed to the elements and usually either too hot or too cold. The &quot;cachots&quot;, the underground dungeons, had not been used for many years except for holding recaptured escapees. Prisoners&#x27; rooms each had a stove or a fireplace, basic furniture, curtains and in most cases a window. A typical criticism of the rooms was that they were shabby and basic rather than uncomfortable. Like the &quot;calottes&quot;, the main courtyard, used for exercise, was often criticised by prisoners as being unpleasant at the height of summer or winter, although the garden in the bastion and the castle walls were also used for recreation.

The governor received money from the Crown to support the prisoners, with the amount varying on rank: the governor received 19 livres a day for each political prisoner – with conseiller-grade nobles receiving 15 livres – and, at the other end of the scale, three livres a day for each commoner. Even for the commoners, this sum was around twice the daily wage of a labourer and provided for an adequate diet, while the upper classes ate very well: even critics of the Bastille recounted many excellent meals, often taken with the governor himself. Prisoners who were being punished for misbehaviour, however, could have their diet restricted as a punishment. The medical treatment provided by the Bastille for prisoners was excellent by the standards of the 18th century; the prison also contained a number of inmates suffering from mental illnesses and took, by the standards of the day, a very progressive attitude to their care.

Although potentially dangerous objects and money were confiscated and stored when a prisoner first entered the Bastille, most wealthy prisoners continued to bring in additional luxuries, including pet dogs or cats to control the local vermin. The Marquis de Sade, for example, arrived with an elaborate wardrobe, paintings, tapestries, a selection of perfume, and a collection of 133 books. Card games and billiards were played among the prisoners, and alcohol and tobacco were permitted. Servants could sometimes accompany their masters into the Bastille, as in the cases of the 1746 detention of the family of Lord Morton and their entire household as British spies: the family&#x27;s domestic life continued on inside the prison relatively normally. The prisoners&#x27; library had grown during the 18th century, mainly through ad hoc purchases and various confiscations by the Crown, until by 1787 it included 389 volumes.

The length of time that a typical prisoner was kept at the Bastille continued to decline, and by Louis XVI&#x27;s reign the average length of detention was only two months. Prisoners would still be expected to sign a document on their release, promising not to talk about the Bastille or their time within it, but by the 1780s this agreement was frequently broken. Prisoners leaving the Bastille could be granted pensions on their release by the Crown, either as a form of compensation or as a way of ensuring future good behaviour – Voltaire was granted 1,200 livres a year, for example, while Latude received an annual pension of 400 livres.

====Criticism and reform====
During the 18th century, the Bastille was extensively criticised by French writers as a symbol of ministerial despotism, which ultimately resulted in reforms and plans for its abolition. The first major criticism was by Constantin de Renneville, who had been imprisoned in the Bastille for 11 years and published his accounts of the experience in 1715 in his book &quot;L&#x27;Inquisition françois&quot;. Renneville presented a dramatic account of his detention, explaining that, despite being innocent, he had been abused and left to rot in one of the Bastille&#x27;s &quot;cachot&quot; dungeons, enchained next to a corpse. More criticism followed in 1719 when the Abbé Jean de Bucquoy , who had escaped from the Bastille ten years previously, published an account of his adventures from the safety of Hanover. He gave a similar account to Renneville&#x27;s and termed the Bastille the &quot;hell of the living&quot;. Voltaire added to the notorious reputation of the Bastille when he wrote about the case of the &quot;Man in the Iron Mask&quot; in 1751, and later criticised the way he himself was treated while detained in the Bastille, labelling the fortress a &quot;palace of revenge&quot;.

In the 1780s, prison reform became a popular topic for French writers and the Bastille was increasingly condemned as a symbol of arbitrary despotism. Two authors were particularly influential during that period. The first was Simon-Nicholas Linguet, who was arrested and detained at the Bastille in 1780, after publishing a critique of Maréchal Duras. After his release, he published his &quot;Mémoires sur la Bastille&quot; in 1783, a damning critique of the institution. Linguet criticised, sometimes inaccurately, the physical conditions in which he was kept, but went further by capturing in detail the more psychological effects of the prison regime upon an inmate. Linguet also encouraged Louis XVI to destroy the Bastille, publishing an engraving depicting the king announcing to the prisoners &quot;may you be free and live!&quot;, a phrase borrowed from Voltaire.

Linguet&#x27;s work was followed by another prominent autobiography, Henri Latude&#x27;s &quot;Le despotisme dévoilé&quot;. Latude was a soldier who was imprisoned in the Bastille following a sequence of complex misadventures, including the sending of a letter bomb to Madame de Pompadour, the King&#x27;s mistress. Latude became famous for managing to escape from the Bastille by means of climbing up the chimney of his cell and then descending the walls with a home-made rope ladder, before being recaptured in Amsterdam by French agents. Latude was released in 1777, but was rearrested following his publication of a book entitled &quot;Memoirs of Vengeance&quot;. Pamphlets and magazines publicised Latude&#x27;s case until he was finally released in 1784. Latude became a popular figure with the Académie française, or French Academy, and his autobiography, although inaccurate in places, did much to reinforce the public perception of the Bastille as a despotic institution.

Modern historians of the period, such as Hans-Jürgen Lüsebrink, Simon Schama and Monique Cottret , concur that the actual treatment of prisoners in Bastille was much better than the public impression left through those writings. Nonetheless, fuelled by the secrecy that still surrounded the Bastille, official as well as public concern about the prison, and the system that supported it, also began to mount, prompting reforms. As early as 1775, Louis XVI&#x27;s minister Malesherbes had authorised all prisoners to be given newspapers to read, and to be allowed to correspond with their family and friends. In the 1780s, Breteuil, the Secretary of State of the Maison du Roi, began a substantial reform of the system of &quot;lettres de cachet&quot; that sent prisoners to the Bastille: such letters were now required to list the length of time a prisoner would be detained for, and the offence for which they were being held.

Meanwhile, in 1784, the architect Alexandre Brogniard proposed that the Bastille be demolished and converted into a circular public space with colonnades. Director-General of Finance Jacques Necker, having examined the cost of running the Bastille, amounting to well over 127,000 livres in 1774, proposed closing the institution on the grounds of economy alone. Similarly, Pierre-François de Rivière du Puget, the Bastille&#x27;s &quot;lieutenant de roi&quot;, submitted reports in 1788 suggesting that the authorities close the prison, demolish the fortress and sell the real estate off. In June 1789, the Académie royale d&#x27;architecture proposed a similar scheme to Brogniard&#x27;s, in which the Bastille would be transformed into an open public area, with a tall column at the centre surrounded by fountains, dedicated to Louis XVI as the &quot;restorer of public freedom&quot;.

The number of prisoners held in the Bastille at any one time declined sharply towards the end of Louis&#x27;s reign. It contained ten prisoners in September 1782 and, despite a small increase at the beginning of 1788, by July 1789 only seven prisoners remained in custody. Before any official scheme to close the prison could be enacted, however, disturbances across Paris brought a more violent end to the Bastille.

===The French Revolution===

====Storming of the Bastille====

By July 1789, revolutionary sentiment was rising in Paris. The Estates-General was convened in May and members of the Third Estate proclaimed the Tennis Court Oath in June, calling for the king to grant a written constitution. Violence between loyal royal forces, mutinous members of the royal Gardes Françaises and local crowds broke out at Vendôme on 12 July, leading to widespread fighting and the withdrawal of royal forces from the centre of Paris. Revolutionary crowds began to arm themselves during 13 July, looting royal stores, gunsmiths and armourers&#x27; shops for weapons and gunpowder.

The commander of the Bastille at the time was Bernard-René de Launay, a conscientious but minor military officer. Tensions surrounding the Bastille had been rising for several weeks. Only seven prisoners remained in the fortress, – the Marquis de Sade had been transferred to the asylum of Charenton, after addressing the public from his walks on top of the towers and, once this was forbidden, shouting from the window of his cell. Sade had claimed that the authorities planned to massacre the prisoners in the castle, which resulted in the governor removing him to an alternative site in early July.

At de Launay&#x27;s request, an additional force of 32 soldiers from the Swiss Salis-Samade regiment had been assigned to the Bastille on 7 July, adding to the existing 82 invalides pensioners who formed the regular garrison. De Launay had taken various precautions, raising the drawbridge in the Comté tower and destroying the stone abutment that linked the Bastille to its bastion to prevent anyone from gaining access from that side of the fortress. The shops in the entranceway to the Bastille had been closed and the gates locked. The Bastille was defended by 30 small artillery pieces, but nonetheless, by 14 July de Launay was very concerned about the Bastille&#x27;s situation. The Bastille, already hugely unpopular with the revolutionary crowds, was now the only remaining royalist stronghold in central Paris, in addition to which he was protecting a recently arrived stock of 250 barrels of valuable gunpowder. To make matters worse, the Bastille had only two days&#x27; supply of food and no source of water, making it impossible to withstand a long siege.

On the morning of 14 July around 900 people formed outside the Bastille, primarily working-class members of the nearby faubourg Saint-Antoine, but also including some mutinous soldiers and local traders. The crowd had gathered in an attempt to commandeer the gunpowder stocks known to be held in the Bastille, and at 10:00 am de Launay let in two of their leaders to negotiate with him. Just after midday, another negotiator was let in to discuss the situation, but no compromise could be reached: the revolutionary representatives now wanted both the guns and the gunpowder in the Bastille to be handed over, but de Launay refused to do so unless he received authorisation from his leadership in Versailles. By this point it was clear that the governor lacked the experience or the skills to defuse the situation.

Just as negotiations were about to recommence at around 1:30 pm, chaos broke out as the impatient and angry crowd stormed the outer courtyard of the Bastille, pushing toward the main gate. Confused firing broke out in the confined space and chaotic fighting began in earnest between de Launay&#x27;s forces and the revolutionary crowd as the two sides exchanged fire. At around 3:30 pm, more mutinous royal forces arrived to reinforce the crowd, bringing with them trained infantry officers and several cannons. After discovering that their weapons were too light to damage the main walls of the fortress, the revolutionary crowd began to fire their cannons at the wooden gate of the Bastille. By now around 83 of the crowd had been killed and another 15 mortally wounded; only one of the Invalides had been killed in return.

De Launay had limited options: if he allowed the Revolutionaries to destroy his main gate, he would have to turn the cannon directly inside the Bastille&#x27;s courtyard on the crowds, causing great loss of life and preventing any peaceful resolution of the episode. De Launay could not withstand a long siege, and he was dissuaded by his officers from committing mass suicide by detonating his supplies of powder. Instead, de Launay attempted to negotiate a surrender, threatening to blow up the Bastille if his demands were not met. In the midst of this attempt, the Bastille&#x27;s drawbridge suddenly came down and the revolutionary crowd stormed in. Popular myth believes Stanislas-Marie Maillard was the first revolutionary to enter the fortress. De Launay was dragged outside into the streets and killed by the crowd, and three officers and three soldiers were killed during the course of the afternoon by the crowd. The soldiers of the Swiss Salis-Samade Regiment, however, were not wearing their uniform coats and were mistaken for Bastille prisoners; they were left unharmed by the crowds until they were escorted away by French Guards and other regular soldiers among the attackers. The valuable powder and guns were seized and a search begun for the other prisoners in the Bastille.

====Destruction====
Within hours of its capture the Bastille began to be used as a powerful symbol to give legitimacy to the revolutionary movement in France. The faubourg Saint-Antoine&#x27;s revolutionary reputation was firmly established by their storming of the Bastille and a formal list began to be drawn up of the &quot;vainqueurs&quot;, or &quot;the victorious&quot;, who had taken part so as to honour both the fallen and the survivors. Although the crowd had initially gone to the Bastille searching for gunpowder, historian Simon Schama observes how the captured prison &quot;gave a shape and an image to all the vices against which the Revolution defined itself&quot;. Indeed, the more despotic and evil the Bastille was portrayed by the pro-revolutionary press, the more necessary and justified the actions of the Revolution became. Consequently, the late governor, de Launay, was rapidly vilified as a brutal despot. The fortress itself was described by the revolutionary press as a &quot;place of slavery and horror&quot;, containing &quot;machines of death&quot;, &quot;grim underground dungeons&quot; and &quot;disgusting caves&quot; where prisoners were left to rot for up to 50 years.

As a result, in the days after 14 July, the fortress was searched for evidence of torture: old pieces of armour and bits of a printing press were taken out and presented as evidence of elaborate torture equipment. Latude returned to the Bastille, where he was given the rope ladder and equipment with which he had escaped from the prison many years before. The former prison warders escorted visitors around the Bastille in the weeks after its capture, giving colourful accounts of the events in the castle. Stories and pictures about the rescue of the fictional Count de Lorges – supposedly a mistreated prisoner of the Bastille incarcerated by Louis XV – and the similarly imaginary discovery of the skeleton of the &quot;Man in the Iron Mask&quot; in the dungeons, were widely circulated as fact across Paris. In the coming months, over 150 broadside publications used the storming of the Bastille as a theme, while the events formed the basis for a number of theatrical plays.

Despite a thorough search, the revolutionaries discovered only seven prisoners in the Bastille, rather fewer than had been anticipated. Of these, only one – de Whyte de Malleville, an elderly and white-bearded man – closely resembled the public image of a Bastille prisoner; despite being mentally ill, he was paraded through the streets, where he waved happily to the crowds. Of the remaining six liberated prisoners, four were convicted forgers who quickly vanished into the Paris streets; one was the Count Hubert de Solages, who had been imprisoned on the request of his family for sexual misdemeanours; the sixth was Auguste-Claude Tavernier, who also proved to be mentally ill and, along with Whyte, was in due course reincarcerated in the Charenton asylum.

At first the revolutionary movement was uncertain whether to destroy the prison, to reoccupy it as a fortress with members of the volunteer guard militia, or to preserve it intact as a permanent revolutionary monument. The revolutionary leader Mirabeau eventually settled the matter by symbolically starting the destruction of the battlements himself, after which a panel of five experts was appointed by the Permanent Committee of the Hôtel de Ville to manage the demolition of the castle. One of these experts was Pierre-François Palloy, a bourgeois entrepreneur who claimed vainqueur status for his role during the taking of the Bastille, and he rapidly assumed control over the entire process. Palloy&#x27;s team worked quickly and by November most of the fortress had been destroyed.

The ruins of the Bastille rapidly became iconic across France. Palloy had an altar set up on the site in February 1790, formed out of iron chains and restraints from the prison. Old bones, probably of 15th century soldiers, were discovered during the clearance work in April and, presented as the skeletons of former prisoners, were exhumed and ceremonially reburied in Saint-Paul&#x27;s cemetery. In the summer, a huge ball was held by Palloy on the site for the National Guardsmen visiting Paris for the 14 July celebrations. A memorabilia industry surrounding the fall of the Bastille was already flourishing and as the work on the demolition project finally dried up, Palloy started producing and selling memorabilia of the Bastille. Palloy&#x27;s products, which he called &quot;relics of freedom&quot;, celebrated the national unity that the events of July 1789 had generated across all classes of French citizenry, and included a very wide range of items. Palloy also sent models of the Bastille, carved from the fortress&#x27;s stones, as gifts to the French provinces at his own expense to spread the revolutionary message. In 1793 a large revolutionary fountain featuring a statue of Isis was built on the former site of the fortress, which became known as the Place de la Bastille.

===19th–20th century political and cultural legacy===
The Bastille remained a powerful and evocative symbol for French republicans throughout the 19th century. Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the French First Republic that emerged from the Revolution in 1799, and subsequently attempted to marginalise the Bastille as a symbol. Napoleon was unhappy with the revolutionary connotations of the Place de la Bastille, and initially considered building his Arc de Triomphe on the site instead. This proved an unpopular option, and so instead he planned the construction of a huge bronze statue of an imperial elephant. The project was delayed, eventually indefinitely, and all that was constructed was a large plaster version of the bronze statue, which stood on the former site of the Bastille between 1814 and 1846, when the decaying structure was finally removed. After the restoration of the French Bourbon monarchy in 1815, the Bastille became an underground symbol for Republicans. The July Revolution in 1830 used images such as the Bastille to legitimise their new regime and in 1833, the former site of the Bastille was used to build the July Column to commemorate the revolution. The short-lived Second Republic was symbolically declared in 1848 on the former revolutionary site.

The storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789 had been celebrated annually since 1790, initially through quasi-religious rituals, and then later during the Revolution with grand, secular events including the burning of replica Bastilles. Under Napoleon the events became less revolutionary, focusing instead on military parades and national unity in the face of foreign threats. During the 1870s, the 14 July celebrations became a rallying point for Republicans opposed to the early monarchist leadership of the Third Republic; when the moderate Republican Jules Grévy became president in 1879, his new government turned the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille into a national holiday. The anniversary remained contentious, with hard-line Republicans continuing to use the occasion to protest against the new political order and right-wing conservatives protesting about the imposition of the holiday. The July Column itself remained contentious, and Republican radicals unsuccessfully tried to blow it up in 1871.

Meanwhile, the legacy of the Bastille proved popular among French novelists. Alexandre Dumas, for example, used the Bastille and the legend of the &quot;Man in the Iron Mask&quot; extensively in his d&#x27;Artagnan Romances; in these novels the Bastille is presented as both picturesque and tragic, a suitable setting for heroic action. By contrast, in many of Dumas&#x27;s other works, such as &quot;Ange Pitou&quot;, the Bastille takes on a much darker appearance, being described as a place in which a prisoner is &quot;forgotten, bankrupted, buried, destroyed&quot;. In England, Charles Dickens took a similar perspective when he drew on popular histories of the Bastille in writing &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot;, in which Doctor Manette is &quot;buried alive&quot; in the prison for 18 years; many historical figures associated with the Bastille are reinvented as fictional individuals in the novel, such as Claude Cholat, reproduced by Dickens as &quot;Ernest Defarge&quot;. Victor Hugo&#x27;s 1862 novel &quot;Les Misérables&quot;, set just after the Revolution, gave Napoleon&#x27;s plaster Bastille elephant a permanent place in literary history. In 1889 the continued popularity of the Bastille with the public was illustrated by the decision to build a replica in stone and wood for the Exposition Universelle world fair in Paris, manned by actors in period costumes.

Due in part to the diffusion of national and Republican ideas across France during the second half of the Third Republic, the Bastille lost an element of its prominence as a symbol by the 20th century. Nonetheless, the Place de la Bastille continued to be the traditional location for left wing rallies, particularly in the 1930s, the symbol of the Bastille was widely evoked by the French Resistance during the Second World War and until the 1950s Bastille Day remained the single most significant French national holiday.

==Remains==

Due to its destruction after 1789, very little remains of the Bastille in the 21st century. During the excavations for the Métro underground train system in 1899, the foundations of the Liberté Tower were uncovered and moved to the corner of the Boulevard Henri IV and the Quai de Celestins, where they can still be seen today. The Pont de la Concorde contains stones reused from the Bastille.

Some relics of the Bastille survive: the Carnavalet Museum holds objects including one of the stone models of the Bastille made by Palloy and the rope ladder used by Latude to escape from the prison roof in the 18th century, while the mechanism and bells of the prison clock are exhibited in Musée Européen d&#x27;Art Campanaire at L&#x27;Isle-Jourdain. The key to the Bastille was given to George Washington in 1790 by Lafayette and is displayed in the historic house of Mount Vernon. The Bastille&#x27;s archives are now held by the Bibliothèque nationale de France.

The Place de la Bastille still occupies most of the location of the Bastille, and the Opéra Bastille was built on the square in 1989 to commemorate the bicentennial anniversary of the storming of the prison. The surrounding area has largely been redeveloped from its 19th-century industrial past. The ditch that originally linked the defences of the fortress to the River Seine had been dug out at the start of the 19th century to form the industrial harbour of the Bassin de l&#x27;Arsenal, linked to the Canal Saint Martin, but is now a marina for pleasure boats, while the Promenade plantée links the square with redeveloped parklands to the east.

==Historiography==
A number of histories of the Bastille were published immediately after July 1789, usually with dramatic titles promising the uncovering of secrets from the prison. By the 1830s and 1840s, popular histories written by Pierre Joigneaux and by the trio of Auguste Maquet, Auguste Arnould and Jules-Édouard Alboize de Pujol presented the years of the Bastille between 1358 and 1789 as a single long period of royal tyranny and oppression, epitomised by the fortress; their works featured imaginative 19th-century reconstructions of the medieval torture of prisoners. As living memories of the Revolution faded, the destruction of the Bastille meant that later historians had to rely primarily on memoires and documentary materials in analysing the fortress and the 5,279 prisoners who had come through the Bastille between 1659 and 1789. The Bastille&#x27;s archives, recording the operation of the prison, had been scattered in the confusion after the seizure; with some effort, the Paris Assembly gathered around 600,000 of them in the following weeks, which form the basis of the modern archive. After being safely stored and ignored for many years, these archives were rediscovered in 1840 (under the kitchen floor at the Arsenal library) by the French historian François Ravaisson, who catalogued and used them for research between 1866 and 1904.

At the end of the 19th century the historian Frantz Funck-Brentano used the archives to undertake detailed research into the operation of the Bastille, focusing on the upper-class prisoners in the Bastille, disproving many of the 18th-century myths about the institution and portraying the prison in a favourable light. Modern historians today consider Funck-Brentano&#x27;s work slightly biased by his anti-Republican views, but his histories of the Bastille were highly influential and were largely responsible for establishing that the Bastille was a well-run, relatively benign institution. Historian Fernand Bournon used the same archive material to produce the &quot;Histoire de la Bastille&quot; in 1893, considered by modern historians to be one of the best and most balanced 19th-century histories of the Bastille. These works inspired the writing of a sequence of more popular histories of the Bastille in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including Auguste Coeuret&#x27;s anniversary history of the Bastille, which typically focused on a handful of themes and stories involving the more glamorous prisoners from the upper classes of French society.

One of the major debates on the actual taking of the Bastille in 1789 has been the nature of the crowds that stormed the building. Hippolyte Taine argued in the late 19th century that the crowd consisted of unemployed vagrants, who acted without real thought; by contrast, the post-war left-wing intellectual George Rudé argued that the crowd was dominated by relatively prosperous artisan workers. The matter was reexamined by Jacques Godechot in the post-war years; Godechot showing convincingly that, in addition to some local artisans and traders, at least half the crowd that gathered that day were, like the inhabitants of the surrounding faubourg, recent immigrants to Paris from the provinces. Godechot used this to characterise the taking of the Bastille as a genuinely national event of wider importance to French society.

In the 1970s French sociologists, particularly those interested in critical theory, re-examined this historical legacy. The Annales School conducted extensive research into how order was maintained in pre-revolutionary France, focusing on the operation of the police, concepts of deviancy and religion. Histories of the Bastille since then have focused on the prison&#x27;s role in policing, censorship and popular culture, in particular how these impacted on the working classes. Research in West Germany during the 1980s examined the cultural interpretation of the Bastille against the wider context of the French Revolution; Hanse Lüsebrink and Rolf Reichardt&#x27;s work, explaining how the Bastille came to be regarded as a symbol of despotism, was among the most prominent. This body of work influenced English historian Simon Schama&#x27;s 1989 book on the Revolution, which incorporated cultural interpretation of the Bastille with a controversial critique of the violence surrounding the storming of the Bastille. The Bibliothèque nationale de France held a major exhibition on the legacy of the Bastille between 2010 and 2011, resulting in a substantial edited volume summarising the current academic perspectives on the fortress.

==See also==
*List of castles in France
==Notes==

=== Footnotes ===
=== Citations ===
== References ==

* Alpaugh, Micah. &quot;A Self-Defining Bourgeoisie in the Early French Revolution: The Milice bourgeoise, the Bastille Days of 1789, and Their Aftermath,&quot; &quot;Journal of Social History&quot; 47, no. 3 (Spring 2014), 696–720.
* Amalvi, Christian. &quot;La Bastille dans l&#x27;historiographie républicaine du XIXe siècle&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Anderson, William (1980). &quot;Castles of Europe: From Charlemagne to the Renaissance&quot;. London: Ferndale. .
* Andress, David (2004). &quot;The French Revolution and the People&quot;. New York: Hambledon Continuum. .
* Andrews, Richard Mowery (1994). &quot;Law, Magistracy, and Crime in Old Regime Paris, 1735–1789: Volume 1, The system of Criminal Justice&quot;. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press. .
* Ayers, Andrew (2004). &quot;The Architecture of Paris: an Architectural Guide &quot;. Stuttgart, Germany: Axel Menges. .
* Bély, Lucien (2005). &quot;Louis XIV: le plus grand roi du monde&quot;. Paris: Gisserot. . 
* Berchtold, Jacques (2010). &quot;L&#x27;embastillement dans les mémoires des XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Berens, Carol (2011). &quot;Redeveloping Industrial Sites: A Guide For Architects, Planners, and Developers&quot;. Hoboken, US: John Wiley. .
* Birn, Raymond (1989). &quot;Malesherbes and the Call For a Free Press&quot;, in Darnton and Roche (eds) (1989).
* Bournon, Fernand (1898). &quot;La Bastille: histoire et description des bâtiments, administration, régime de la prison, événements historiques.&quot; Paris: Imprimerie Nationale. . 
* Bucquoy, Jean Albert de (1719). &quot;Die sogenannte Hölle der Lebendigen: d.i. die weltberufene Bastille zu Paris.&quot; nl: Friends of the Author. . 
* Charpentier, François (1789). &quot;La Bastille dévoilée, ou, Recueil de pièces authentiques pour servir a son histoire.&quot; Paris: Chez Desenne. . 
* Chevallier, Jim (2005). &quot;Appendices B and C&quot;, in Linguet (2005).
* Coeuret, August (1890). &quot;La Bastille 1370–1789: historie, description, attaque et prise.&quot; Paris: Rothschild. . 
* Colley, Linda (1989). &quot;Last Farewells&quot;. &quot;London Review of Books&quot; 11: no. 12, pp. 12–13.
* Collins, James B. (1995). &quot;The State in Early Modern France&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* Cottret, Monique (2010). &quot;Les affaires de religion à la Bastille&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Crook, Malcolm (1999). &quot;Review: The Bastille: a History of a Symbol of Despotism and Freedom&quot;. &quot;French History&quot; 13: no. 2, pp. 245–6.
* Crowdy, Terry (2004). &quot;French Revolutionary Infantry 1789–1802&quot;. Botley, UK: Osprey Publishing. .
* Curry, Anne (2002). &quot;The Hundred Years&#x27; War: 1337–1453&quot;. Botley, UK: Osprey. .
* Daileader, Philip and Philip Whalen (eds) (2010). &quot;French Historians 1900–2000: New Historical Writing in Twentieth-Century France&quot;. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. .
* Darnton, Robert and Daniel Roche (eds) (1989). &quot;Revolution in Print: the Press in France, 1775–1800&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. .
* Denis, Vincent (2010). &quot;La police de Paris et la Bastille au XVIIIe siècle&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Dutray-Lecoin, Élise (2010a). &quot;La vie quotidienne à la Bastille&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Dutray-Lecoin, Élise (2010b). &quot;Le système pénitentiaire parisien sous l&#x27;Ancien Régime&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Dutray-Lecoin, Élise (2010c). &quot;175: La Bastille vue par un artiste&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Dutray-Lecoin, Élise and Danielle Muzerelle (eds) (2010). &quot;La Bastille ou &#x27;l&#x27;enfer des vivants&#x27; à travers les archives de la Bastille.&quot; Paris: Bibliothèque nationale de France. .
* Farge, Arlette (1993). &quot;Fragile Lives: Violence, Power and Solidarity in Eighteenth-Century Paris&quot;. London: Polity Press. .
* Farge, Arlette (2010). &quot;Le désordre social et politique, la main due roi s&#x27;y oppose&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Freer, Martha Walker (1860). &quot;History of the Reign of Henry IV.&quot; London: Hurst and Blackett. .
* Funck-Brentano, Frantz (1899). &quot;Legends of the Bastille.&quot; London: Downey. .
* Funck-Brentano, Frantz (1932). &quot;Les secrets de la Bastille (Tirés de ses archives)&quot;. (in French). Paris: Flammarion.
* Garrioch, David (2004). &quot;The Making of Revolutionary Paris&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. .
* Gillispie, Charles Coulston (1980). &quot;Science and Polity in France: the End of the Old Regime&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press. .
* Giret, Noëlle (2010). &quot;La Bastille ou le &#x27;palais de la vengeance&#x27;&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Glancy, Ruth F (2006). &quot;Charles Dickens&#x27;s A Tale of Two Cities: a Sourcebook&quot;. London: Routledge. .
* Godechot, Jacques Léon (1965). &quot;La prise de la Bastille: 14 juillet 1789&quot;. Paris: Gallimard. .
* Hazan, Eric (2011). &quot;The Invention of Paris: A History in Footsteps&quot;. London: Verso. .
* Joigneaux, Pierre (1838). &quot;Histoire générale de la Bastille.&quot; Paris: Pierre Joigneaux. .
* Kennedy, Emmet (2010). &quot;Jacques Godechot (1907–1989)&quot;, in Daileader and Whalen (eds) (2010).
* Knecht, Robert Jean (2001). &quot;The Rise and Fall of Renaissance France, 1483–1610&quot;. Oxford: Blackwell Press. .
* Lacam, Emmanuel (2010). &quot;Les convulsionnaires&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Lansdale, Maria Hornor (1898). &quot;Paris: Its Sites, Monuments and History.&quot; Philadelphia, US: H.T. Coates. .
* Latude, Henri (1790). &quot;Le despotisme dévoilé; ou, Mémoires de Henry Masers de Latude, détenu pendant trente-cinq ans dans divers prisons d&#x27;état.&quot; Paris: Frais de M. de Latude. . 
* Le Bas, M (1840). &quot;France. Annales historiques.&quot; Paris: F. Didot frères. . 
* Lefèvre, Martine (2010). &quot;La bibliothèque de la Bastille&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Linguet, Simon-Nicolas-Henry (2005). &quot;Memoirs of the Bastille&quot;. North Hollywood, US: CJ Books. .
* Lüsebrink, Hans-Jürgen (2010). &quot;Les grandes affairs politiques&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Lüsebrink, Hans-Jürgen and Rolf Reichardt (1997). &quot;The Bastille: a History of a Symbol of Despotism and Freedom&quot;. Durham, US: Duke University Press. .
* Maquet, Auguste, A. Arnould and Jules-Édouard Alboize Du Pujol (1844). &quot;Histoire de la Bastille depuis sa fondation (1374) jusqu&#x27;à sa destruction (1789).&quot; Paris: Administration de Librairie. . 
* Marmontel, Jean-François (1891). &quot;Memoires de Marmontel.&quot; Paris: Librairie des bibliophiles. . 
* McLeod, Jane (2011). &quot;Licensing Loyalty: Printers, Patrons, and the State in Early Modern France&quot;. University Park, US: Pennsylvania State University. .
* McPhee, Peter (1992). &quot;A Social History of France 1780–1880&quot;. London: Routledge. .
* Morellet, André (1822). &quot;Mémoires inédits de l&#x27;abbé Morellet, de l&#x27;Académie française: sur le dix-huitième siècle et sur la révolution.&quot; Paris: Ladvocat. . 
* Munck, Thomas (1990). &quot;Seventeenth Century Europe: 1598–1700.&quot; London: Macmillan. .
* Muzerelle, Danielle (2010a). &quot;La Bastille et le quartier de l&#x27;Arsenal&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Muzerelle, Danielle (2010b). &quot;La Bastille après le 14 Juillet&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Nora, Pierre (1998). &quot;Realms of Memory: Rethinking the French Past&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press. .
* Petitfils, Jean-Christian (2003). &quot;Le Masque de fer: entre histoire et légende&quot;. Paris, Perrin. . 
* Prade, Catherine (2010). &quot;Les prisons de Paris&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Reichardt, Rolf (1980). &quot;Prints: Images of the Bastille&quot;, in Darnton and Roche (eds) (1989).
* Renneville, de Constantin (1719). &quot;L&#x27;Inquisition françoise ou l&#x27;histoire de la Bastille.&quot; Amsterdam: np. . 
* Roche, Daniel (1987). &quot;The People of Paris: an Essay in Popular Culture in the 18th Century&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. .
* Rudé, George (1958). &quot;The Crowd in the French Revolution.&quot; Oxford: Clarendon Press. .
* Sacquin, Michèle (2010). &quot;La Bastille romanesque: entre idéologie et pittoresque&quot;, in Dutray-Lecoin and Muzerelle (eds) (2010). 
* Sainte-Aulaire, Louis Clair de Beaupoil Le Comte de (1827). &quot;Histoire de la Fronde, Tome 3.&quot; Paris: Baudouin frères. . 
* Schama, Simon (2004). &quot;&quot;. London: Penguin. .
* Sérieux, Paul and Lucien Libert (1914). &quot;Le Régime des aliénés en France au XVIIIe siècle.&quot; Paris: Masson. . 
* Sturdy, David J (1998). &quot;Louis XIV&quot;. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan. .
* Taine, Hippolyte (1878). &quot;The French Revolution.&quot; New York: H. Holt. .
* Toy, Sidney (1985). &quot;Castles: Their Construction and History&quot;. New York: Dover Publications. (reissue of &quot;Castles: a short history of fortification from 1600 B.C. to A.D. 1600&quot;; London: Heinemann, 1939).
* Treasure, Geoffrey (1997). &quot;Mazarin: the Crisis of Absolutism in France&quot;. London: Routledge. .
* Trout, Andrew P. (1996). &quot;City on the Seine: Paris in the Time of Richelieu and Louis XIV&quot;. New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press. .
* Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène-Emmanuel (1875). &quot;Dictionnaire raisonné de l&#x27;architecture française du XIe au XVIe siècle.&quot; Paris: Morel. . 
==External links==

*Video accompanying 2011 exhibition at the Bibliothèque nationale de France </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="4" end="12" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="36" end="41" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="56" end="78" title="Bastille" label="Bastille Saint-Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="206" end="221" title="List of French monarchs" label="kings of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="230" end="237" title="storming of the Bastille" label="stormed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="273" end="290" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="336" end="355" title="History of the Left in France#19th century" label="Republican movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q778784" start="401" end="421" title="Place de la Bastille" label="Place de la Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="530" end="553" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398946" start="733" end="752" title="Porte Saint-Antoine" label="Porte Saint-Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="996" end="1007" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q301905" start="1016" end="1025" title="Armagnac (party)" label="Armagnacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="1055" end="1071" title="French Wars of Religion" label="Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="1183" end="1200" title="Henry V of England" label="English occupiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="1240" end="1248" title="Louis XI" label="Louis XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1326" end="1334" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="1367" end="1374" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q656186" start="1471" end="1477" title="Fronde" label="Fronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890900" start="1486" end="1519" title="Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine" label="Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1566" end="1575" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="1700" end="1733" title="revocation of the Edict of Nantes" label="revocation of the Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1742" end="1752" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="1894" end="1902" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="1907" end="1910" title="Louis XVI" label="XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q784689" start="2427" end="2444" title="National Assembly (French Revolution)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="2544" end="2551" title="Storming of the Bastille" label="stormed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067308" start="2605" end="2627" title="Faubourg Saint-Antoine" label="Faubourg Saint-Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q822225" start="2786" end="2808" title="Bernard-René de Launay" label="Bernard-René de Launay"/>
<link wikidata="Q640968" start="2879" end="2910" title="Hôtel de Ville, Paris" label="Committee of the Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="3012" end="3021" title="despotism" label="despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="3124" end="3135" title="July Revolution" label="revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3228" end="3247" title="History of the Left in France#19th century" label="Republican movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="3699" end="3722" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="3813" end="3819" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293495" start="4001" end="4024" title="Ransom of John II of France" label="imprisonment of John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q201692" start="4071" end="4089" title="Battle of Poitiers" label="Battle of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12371988" start="4114" end="4130" title="Provost of Paris" label="Provost of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q143046" start="4132" end="4146" title="Étienne Marcel" label="Étienne Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398946" start="4257" end="4276" title="Porte Saint-Antoine" label="Porte Saint-Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q684594" start="4456" end="4473" title="Porte Saint-Denis" label="Porte Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369960" start="4695" end="4709" title="Hugues Aubriot" label="Hugues Aubriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="5096" end="5106" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23423" start="5414" end="5425" title="crenellated" label="crenellated"/>
<link wikidata="Q89753" start="5536" end="5543" title="dungeon" label="dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="5770" end="5775" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476690" start="6286" end="6301" title="Hôtel Saint-Pol" label="Hôtel Saint-Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q29605773" start="6380" end="6390" title="Sidney Toy" label="Sidney Toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q92107" start="6668" end="6687" title="quadrangular castle" label="quadrangular castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q663673" start="6726" end="6735" title="Château de Vincennes" label="Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q376699" start="7096" end="7107" title="Château de Pierrefonds" label="Pierrefonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q740250" start="7112" end="7120" title="Tarascon castle" label="Tarascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q427746" start="7185" end="7198" title="Nunney Castle" label="Nunney Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="7366" end="7377" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q301905" start="7386" end="7395" title="Armagnac (party)" label="Armagnacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="7630" end="7641" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369960" start="7891" end="7905" title="Hugues Aubriot" label="Hugues Aubriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="8080" end="8098" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q660630" start="8226" end="8257" title="Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter" label="Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="9200" end="9208" title="Louis XI" label="Louis XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965624" start="9325" end="9345" title="Antoine de Chabannes" label="Antoine de Chabannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762735" start="9386" end="9411" title="League of the Public Weal" label="League of the Public Weal"/>
<link wikidata="Q607248" start="9656" end="9662" title="French livre" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="9881" end="9890" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10247" end="10254" title="Arsenal of Paris" label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="10462" end="10472" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="10611" end="10619" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="10671" end="10688" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="10898" end="10905" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164253" start="10997" end="11012" title="Suppressive fire" label="protective fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452175" start="11104" end="11112" title="abutment" label="abutment"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="11347" end="11361" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="11406" end="11422" title="French Wars of Religion" label="wars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187015" start="11616" end="11637" title="Day of the Barricades" label="Day of the Barricades"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="11729" end="11738" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q313700" start="11848" end="11870" title="Henry I, Duke of Guise" label="Henry I, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="11890" end="11905" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="12111" end="12129" title="Parlement of Paris" label="Parlement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q524562" start="12312" end="12336" title="Charles, Duke of Mayenne" label="Charles, Duke of Mayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="12573" end="12581" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="13505" end="13515" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066570" start="13648" end="13680" title="Charles de Gontaut, duc de Biron" label="Charles de Gontaut, duc de Biron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="13772" end="13790" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q960741" start="14122" end="14146" title="François de Bassompierre" label="François de Bassompierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q577795" start="14148" end="14169" title="Charles d&amp;#x27;Albert, duc de Luynes" label="Charles d&amp;#x27;Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340936" start="14173" end="14199" title="Nicolas de L&amp;#x27;Hospital" label="Nicolas de L&amp;#x27;Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q548497" start="14223" end="14234" title="François Leclerc du Tremblay" label="Père Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q656186" start="14382" end="14388" title="Fronde" label="Fronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q151209" start="14543" end="14558" title="Anne of Austria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187015" start="14863" end="14884" title="Day of the Barricades" label="Day of the Barricades"/>
<link wikidata="Q640968" start="14958" end="14972" title="Hôtel de Ville, Paris" label="Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q125811" start="15451" end="15466" title="Pierre Broussel" label="Pierre Broussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310837" start="15643" end="15648" title="Louis, Grand Condé" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890900" start="15807" end="15840" title="Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine" label="Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q303216" start="15977" end="15984" title="Henri de la Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne" label="Turenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q231832" start="16236" end="16258" title="Anne Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier" label="La Grande Mademoiselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q644635" start="16276" end="16299" title="Gaston, Duke of Orléans" label="Gaston, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q442799" start="17098" end="17106" title="faubourg" label="faubourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q312794" start="18116" end="18131" title="Nicolas Fouquet" label="Nicolas Fouquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132411" start="18148" end="18166" title="Henry de Guénegaud" label="Henry de Guénegaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q725441" start="18180" end="18196" title="Lorenzo de Tonti" label="Lorenzo de Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="18212" end="18239" title="Edict of Fontainebleau" label="revoked the Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="18576" end="18585" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q772128" start="18739" end="18755" title="lettre de cachet" label="lettre de cachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q72296" start="19325" end="19345" title="Man in the Iron Mask" label="Man in the Iron Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408901" start="20796" end="20824" title="Prefecture of Police" label="lieutenant general of police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362712" start="21385" end="21392" title="Régence" label="Régence"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="21412" end="21435" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297581" start="21762" end="21782" title="Cellamare conspiracy" label="Cellamare conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290788" start="21862" end="21882" title="Marguerite de Launay, baronne de Staal" label="Marguerite De Launay"/>
<link wikidata="Q749573" start="22321" end="22331" title="The Marais" label="The Marais"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="23449" end="23460" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355979" start="24815" end="24833" title="Antoine de Sartine" label="Antoine de Sartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188977" start="26391" end="26400" title="invalides" label="invalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q472272" start="26539" end="26551" title="Simon Schama" label="Simon Schama"/>
<link wikidata="Q387521" start="27664" end="27680" title="Convulsionnaires of Saint-Médard" label="convulsionnaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="27695" end="27705" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenists"/>
<link wikidata="Q465744" start="29537" end="29567" title="Affair of the Diamond Necklace" label="Affair of the Diamond Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="29599" end="29615" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634140" start="29963" end="29991" title="Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie" label="Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338709" start="30057" end="30080" title="Marc-René de Voyer de Paulmy d&amp;#x27;Argenson (1652–1721)" label="Marquis d&amp;#x27;Argenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086469" start="30262" end="30275" title="Maison du Roi" label="Maison du Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393973" start="31869" end="31902" title="Laurent Angliviel de la Beaumelle" label="Laurent Angliviel de la Beaumelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178653" start="31920" end="31934" title="André Morellet" label="André Morellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q379923" start="31953" end="31976" title="Jean-François Marmontel" label="Jean-François Marmontel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994367" start="33433" end="33443" title="Councillor of State (France)" label="conseiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="34091" end="34105" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="34438" end="34453" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q377335" start="34803" end="34814" title="James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton" label="Lord Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="35653" end="35661" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q354244" start="35714" end="35720" title="Jean Henri Latude" label="Latude"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="35903" end="35912" title="despotism" label="despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144524" start="36013" end="36037" title="René Auguste Constantin de Renneville" label="Constantin de Renneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="36597" end="36604" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q72296" start="36814" end="36834" title="Man in the Iron Mask" label="Man in the Iron Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505526" start="37217" end="37239" title="Simon-Nicholas Henri Linguet" label="Simon-Nicholas Linguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052519" start="37327" end="37341" title="Emmanuel-Félicité de Durfort de Duras" label="Maréchal Duras"/>
<link wikidata="Q188965" start="38134" end="38153" title="Madame de Pompadour" label="Madame de Pompadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="38666" end="38684" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q551456" start="39319" end="39330" title="Guillaume-Chrétien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes" label="Malesherbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777234" start="39469" end="39477" title="Louis Auguste Le Tonnelier de Breteuil" label="Breteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q283135" start="39483" end="39522" title="Secretary of State of the Maison du Roi" label="Secretary of State of the Maison du Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342645" start="39810" end="39829" title="Alexandre-Théodore Brongniart" label="Alexandre Brogniard"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="39919" end="39928" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q123062" start="39959" end="39973" title="Jacques Necker" label="Jacques Necker"/>
<link wikidata="Q337586" start="40383" end="40418" title="Académie royale d&amp;#x27;architecture" label="Académie royale d&amp;#x27;architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="41159" end="41172" title="French Revolution" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463941" start="41208" end="41223" title="Estates-General of 1789" label="Estates-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q60022" start="41291" end="41308" title="Tennis Court Oath" label="Tennis Court Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079501" start="41439" end="41456" title="Gardes Françaises" label="Gardes Françaises"/>
<link wikidata="Q214575" start="41487" end="41494" title="Vendôme" label="Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q822225" start="41792" end="41814" title="Bernard-René de Launay" label="Bernard-René de Launay"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="41982" end="41997" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q183356" start="42026" end="42045" title="Charenton (asylum)" label="asylum of Charenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452175" start="42683" end="42691" title="abutment" label="abutment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="44117" end="44127" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531663" start="45740" end="45764" title="Stanislas-Marie Maillard" label="Stanislas-Marie Maillard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48127" end="48142" title="Count de Lorges" label="Count de Lorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433985" start="48408" end="48417" title="Broadside (printing)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q183356" start="49292" end="49308" title="Charenton (asylum)" label="Charenton asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q218747" start="49555" end="49563" title="Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau" label="Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383057" start="49827" end="49849" title="Pierre-François Palloy" label="Pierre-François Palloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059047" start="50565" end="50583" title="National Guard (France)" label="National Guardsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="51295" end="51299" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q778784" start="51372" end="51392" title="Place de la Bastille" label="Place de la Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="51555" end="51573" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="51588" end="51609" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="51844" end="51859" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326237" start="52091" end="52112" title="Elephant of the Bastille" label="large plaster version"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="52264" end="52306" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="restoration of the French Bourbon monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="52379" end="52394" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q269641" start="52534" end="52545" title="July Column" label="July Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="52593" end="52608" title="French Second Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="53189" end="53203" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q296083" start="53234" end="53245" title="Jules Grévy" label="Jules Grévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="53774" end="53789" title="Alexandre Dumas" label="Alexandre Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111179" start="53896" end="53920" title="d&amp;#x27;Artagnan Romances" label="d&amp;#x27;Artagnan Romances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="54280" end="54295" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="54390" end="54410" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="54681" end="54692" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180736" start="54717" end="54731" title="Les Misérables" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q957317" start="54998" end="55020" title="Exposition Universelle (1889)" label="Exposition Universelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="55021" end="55031" title="World&amp;#x27;s fair" label="world fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="55463" end="55480" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="55492" end="55508" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="55529" end="55541" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q508256" start="55741" end="55746" title="Bastille (Paris Métro)" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q644398" start="55950" end="55969" title="Pont de la Concorde (Paris)" label="Pont de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q640447" start="56054" end="56071" title="Carnavalet Museum" label="Carnavalet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383057" start="56144" end="56150" title="Pierre-François Palloy" label="Palloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q354244" start="56179" end="56185" title="Jean Henri Latude" label="Latude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56305" end="56341" title="Musée Européen d&amp;#x27;Art Campanaire" label="Musée Européen d&amp;#x27;Art Campanaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q735931" start="56345" end="56365" title="L&amp;#x27;Isle-Jourdain, Gers" label="L&amp;#x27;Isle-Jourdain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="56404" end="56421" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="56433" end="56442" title="Marquis de Lafayette" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q731635" start="56485" end="56497" title="Mount Vernon" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="56548" end="56580" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque nationale de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q778784" start="56587" end="56607" title="Place de la Bastille" label="Place de la Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q638423" start="56669" end="56683" title="Opéra Bastille" label="Opéra Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="56949" end="56960" title="River Seine" label="River Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102184" start="57049" end="57073" title="Bassin de l&amp;#x27;Arsenal" label="Bassin de l&amp;#x27;Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q860172" start="57089" end="57107" title="Canal Saint Martin" label="Canal Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060889" start="57159" end="57176" title="Promenade plantée" label="Promenade plantée"/>
<link wikidata="Q766768" start="57507" end="57521" title="Auguste Maquet" label="Auguste Maquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545711" start="57523" end="57538" title="Auguste Arnould" label="Auguste Arnould"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188381" start="57543" end="57573" title="Jules-Édouard Alboize de Pujol" label="Jules-Édouard Alboize de Pujol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445752" start="58648" end="58669" title="Frantz Funck-Brentano" label="Frantz Funck-Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q297726" start="59901" end="59916" title="Hippolyte Taine" label="Hippolyte Taine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814503" start="60079" end="60090" title="George Rudé" label="George Rudé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450921" start="60198" end="60214" title="Jacques Godechot" label="Jacques Godechot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="60624" end="60635" title="sociology" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="60671" end="60686" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q336241" start="60728" end="60742" title="Annales School" label="Annales School"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="60884" end="60892" title="deviancy" label="deviancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q472272" start="61431" end="61443" title="Simon Schama" label="Simon Schama"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="61631" end="61663" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque nationale de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863239" start="61860" end="61885" title="List of castles in France" label="List of castles in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065837" start="66142" end="66162" title="Martha Walker Freer" label="Freer, Martha Walker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66189" wikidata="Q516811" url="?curid=66189" title="Mesomeric effect">
<text>In chemistry, the mesomeric effect (or resonance effect) is a property of substituents or functional groups in a chemical compound. It is defined as the polarity produced in the molecule by the interaction of two pi bonds or between a pi bond and lone pair of electrons present on an adjacent atom. This change in electron arrangement results in the formation of resonance structures that hybridize into the molecule&#x27;s true structure. The pi electrons then move away from or toward a particular substituent group. The mesomeric effect is stronger in compounds with a lower ionization potential. This is because the electron transfer states will have lower energies.

== Representations of the mesomeric effect ==
The effect is used in a qualitative way and describes the electron withdrawing or releasing properties of substituents based on relevant resonance structures and is symbolized by the letter M. The mesomeric effect is negative (–M) when the substituent is an electron-withdrawing group, and the effect is positive (+M) when the substituent is an electron donating group. Below are two examples of the +M and –M effect. Additionally, the functional groups that contribute to each type of resonance are given below.

=== +M effect ===
The +M effect, also known as the positive mesomeric effect, occurs when the substituent is an electron donating group. The group must have one of two things: a lone pair of electrons, or a negative charge. In the +M effect, the pi electrons are transferred from the group towards the conjugate system, increasing the density of the system. Due to the increase in electron density, the conjugate system will develop a more negative charge. As a result, the system under the +M effect will be more reactive towards electrophiles, which can take away the negative charge, than a nucleophile.

+M effect order:

=== -M effect ===
The -M effect, also known as the negative mesomeric effect, occurs when the substituent is an electron-withdrawing group. In order for a negative mesomeric (-M) effect to occur the group must have a positive charge or an empty orbital in order to draw the electrons towards it. In the -M effect, the pi electrons move away from the conjugate system and towards the electron drawing group. In the conjugate system, the density of electrons decreases and the overall charge becomes more positive. With the -M effect the groups and compounds become less reactive towards electrophiles, and more reactive toward nucleophiles, which can give up electrons and balance out the positive charge.
-M effect order:

== Mesomeric effect vs. inductive effect ==
The net electron flow from or to the substituent is determined also by the inductive effect. The mesomeric effect as a result of &quot;p&quot;-orbital overlap (resonance) has absolutely no effect on this inductive effect, as the inductive effect has purely to do with the electronegativity of the atoms and their topology in the molecule (which atoms are connected to which). Specifically the inductive effect is the tendency for the substituents to repel or attract electrons purely based on electronegativity and not dealing with restructuring. The mesomeric effect however, deals with restructuring and occurs when the electron pair of the substituents shift around. The inductive effect only acts on alpha carbons, while the mesomeric utilizes pi bonds between atoms. While these two paths often lead to the similar molecules and resonance structures, the mechanism is different. As such, the mesomeric effect is stronger than the inductive effect.

The concepts of mesomeric effect, mesomerism and mesomer were introduced by Ingold in 1938 as an alternative to Pauling&#x27;s synonymous concept of resonance. &quot;Mesomerism&quot; in this context is often encountered in German and French literature, but in English literature the term &quot;resonance&quot; dominates.

== Mesomerism in conjugated systems ==
Mesomeric effect can be transmitted along any number of carbon atoms in a conjugated system. This accounts for the resonance stabilization of the molecule due to delocalization of charge. It is important to note that the energy of the actual structure of the molecule, i.e. the resonance hybrid, may be lower than that of any of the contributing canonical structures. The difference in energy between the actual inductive structure and the (most stable contributing structures) worst kinetic structure is called the resonance energy or resonance stabilization energy. For the quantitative estimation of the mesomeric/resonance effect strength various substituent constants are used, i.e. Swain-Lupton resonance constant, Taft resonance constant or Oziminski and Dobrowolski pEDA parameter.

Additionally, the resulting resonance structures can give the molecule properties that are not inherently evident from looking at one structure. Some of these properties include different reactivities, local diamagnetic shielding in aromatics, deshielding, and acid and base strengths.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q516811" start="18" end="34" title="Mesomeric effect" label="mesomeric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q516811" start="39" end="55" title="Mesomeric effect" label="resonance effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q898422" start="74" end="85" title="substituent" label="substituent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="90" end="106" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="113" end="130" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="153" end="161" title="Chemical polarity" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q723069" start="213" end="220" title="pi bond" label="pi bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q804644" start="247" end="256" title="lone pair" label="lone pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="260" end="268" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="363" end="382" title="resonance structure" label="resonance structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="389" end="398" title="Orbital hybridisation" label="hybridize"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="578" end="598" title="ionization potential" label="ionization potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q902898" start="620" end="637" title="electron transfer" label="electron transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="855" end="875" title="Resonance (chemistry)" label="resonance structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967652" start="976" end="1002" title="electron-withdrawing group" label="electron-withdrawing group"/>
<link wikidata="Q113012397" start="1063" end="1086" title="electron donating group" label="electron donating group"/>
<link wikidata="Q908086" start="1763" end="1776" title="electrophiles" label="electrophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="1826" end="1837" title="nucleophile" label="nucleophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q898645" start="2700" end="2716" title="inductive effect" label="inductive effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="2768" end="2775" title="Atomic orbital" label="orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="2897" end="2914" title="electronegativity" label="electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127779" start="3655" end="3661" title="Christopher Kelk Ingold" label="Ingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="3691" end="3705" title="Linus Pauling" label="Pauling&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q898370" start="4014" end="4031" title="conjugated system" label="conjugated system"/>
<link wikidata="Q45135006" start="4714" end="4718" title="Pi electron donor-acceptor" label="pEDA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66191" wikidata="Q973748" url="?curid=66191" title="Fourth Geneva Convention">
<text>The Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (), more commonly referred to as the Fourth Geneva Convention and abbreviated as GCIV, is one of the four treaties of the Geneva Conventions. It was adopted in August 1949, and came into force in October 1950. While the first three conventions dealt with combatants, the Fourth Geneva Convention was the first to deal with humanitarian protections for civilians in a war zone. There are currently 196 countries party to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, including this and the other three treaties.

Among its numerous provisions, the Fourth Geneva Convention explicitly prohibits the transfer of the population of an occupying power into the territory it occupies.
The Fourth Geneva Convention only concerns protected civilians in occupied territory rather than the effects of hostilities, such as the strategic bombing during World War II.

The 1977 Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions (AP-1) prohibits all intentional attacks on &quot;the civilian population and civilian objects.&quot; It also prohibits and defines &quot;indiscriminate attacks&quot; as &quot;incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.&quot; This rule is referred to by scholars as the principle of proportionality. Until well after World War II ended in 1945, the norm of reciprocity provided a justification for conduct in armed conflict.

In 1993, the United Nations Security Council adopted a report from the Secretary-General and a Commission of Experts which concluded that the Geneva Conventions had passed into the body of customary international humanitarian law, thus making them binding on non-signatories to the Conventions whenever they engage in armed conflicts. This broader application underscores the importance of the Fourth Geneva Convention in ongoing conflicts where allegations of violations frequently surface, emphasising its role in international efforts to ensure the protection of civilians, as illustrated by the ongoing debates and legal interpretations in modern conflicts.

== Part I. General provisions ==

This sets out the overall parameters for GCIV:

=== Article 2: Application of the Convention ===
Article 2 states that signatories are bound by the convention both in war, armed conflicts where war has not been declared, and in an occupation of another country&#x27;s territory.

The scope of Article 2 is broad:

In the commentary to the article Jean Pictet writes:

=== Article 3: Conflicts not of an international character ===
Article 3 states that even where there is not a conflict of international character, the parties must as a minimum adhere to minimal protections described as: non-combatants, members of armed forces who have laid down their arms, and combatants who are &quot;hors de combat&quot; (out of the fight) due to wounds, detention, or any other cause &quot;shall in all circumstances be treated humanely&quot;, with the following prohibitions:

*(a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
*(b) taking of hostages;
*(c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment;
*(d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.

=== Article 4: Definition of protected persons ===
Article 4 defines who is &quot;protected person&quot;:

It explicitly excludes &quot;Nationals of a State which is not bound by the Convention&quot; and the citizens of a neutral state in the territory of a belligerent power or nationals of a co-belligerent state (i.e., allied nation) if that state has normal diplomatic relations &quot;within the State in whose hands they are.&quot; Dr. Ola Engdahl wrote &quot;[t]he purpose of excluding [these] nationals from the category of protected persons was that they could rely on diplomatic protection of the state of nationality. Persons are either protected persons under the convention or can benefit from the diplomatic protection of their state of nationality.&quot; 

A number of articles specify how &quot;protecting powers&quot;, &quot;ICRC&quot; and &quot;other humanitarian organizations&quot; may aid &quot;protected persons&quot;.

The definition of &quot;protected person&quot; in this article is arguably the most important article in this section because many of the articles in the rest of GCIV only apply to &quot;protected persons&quot;.

=== Article 5: Derogations ===
Article 5 provides for the suspension of persons&#x27; rights under the convention for the duration of time that this is &quot;prejudicial to the security of such State&quot;, although &quot;such persons shall nevertheless be treated with humanity and, in case of trial, shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed by the present Convention.&quot;

The common interpretation of article 5 is that its scope is very limited. Derogation is limited to individuals &quot;definitely suspected of&quot; or &quot;engaged in activities hostile to the security of the State.&quot; In paragraph two of the article, &quot;spy or saboteur&quot; is mentioned.

== Part II. General Protection of Populations Against Certain Consequences of War ==
===Article 13: Field of application of part II===
The list of basis on which distinction might be drawn is not exhaustive.

===Article 16: Wounded and Sick: General Protection===
== Part III. Status and Treatment of Protected Persons ==
=== Section I. Provisions common to the territories of the parties to the conflict and to occupied territories ===

==== Article 32: Prohibition of corporal punishment, torture, etc. ====
A protected person may not have anything done &quot;of such a character as to cause physical suffering or extermination ... the physical suffering or extermination of protected persons in their hands. This prohibition applies to murder, torture, corporal punishments, mutilation and medical or scientific experiments not necessitated by the medical treatment. While popular debate remains on what constitutes a legal definition of torture, the ban on corporal punishment simplifies the matter; even the most mundane physical abuse is thereby forbidden by Article 32, as a precaution against alternate definitions of torture.

The prohibition on scientific experiments was added, in part, in response to experiments by German and Japanese doctors during World War II of whom Josef Mengele was the most infamous.

==== Article 33: Individual responsibility, collective penalties, pillage and reprisals ====
Under the 1949 Geneva Conventions, collective punishment is a war crime. By collective punishment, the drafters of the Geneva Conventions had in mind the reprisal killings of World War I and World War II. In the First World War, the Germans executed Belgian villagers in mass retribution for resistance activity during the Rape of Belgium. In World War II, both German and Japanese forces carried out a form of collective punishment to suppress resistance. Entire villages or towns or districts were held responsible for any resistance activity that occurred at those places. The conventions, to counter this, reiterated the principle of individual responsibility. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Commentary to the conventions states that parties to a conflict often would resort to &quot;intimidatory measures to terrorize the population&quot; in hopes of preventing hostile acts, but such practices &quot;strike at guilty and innocent alike. They are opposed to all principles based on humanity and justice&quot;.

Additional Protocol II of 1977 is about the protection of victims of non-international armed conflicts explicitly forbidding collective punishment. But as fewer states have ratified this protocol than GCIV, GCIV Article 33 is the one more commonly quoted.

=== Section III. Occupied territories ===
Articles 47–78 impose substantial obligations on occupying powers. As well as numerous provisions for the general welfare of the inhabitants of an occupied territory, an occupier may not forcibly deport protected persons, or deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into occupied territory (Art.49).

==== Article 49: Deportations, transfers, evacuations ====
The reference in the last paragraph to &quot;deportation&quot;, is commonly understood as the &quot;expulsion&quot; of foreign nationals, whereas the expulsion of nationals would be called &quot;extradition, banishment&quot; or &quot;exile&quot;. If ethnic groups are affected by &quot;deportation&quot;, it may also be referred to as population transfer. &quot;Transfer&quot; in this case literally means to move or pass from one place to another. The ICRC has expressed the opinion, &quot;that international humanitarian law prohibits the establishment of settlements, as these are a form of population transfer into occupied territory&quot;.

==== Article 50: Children ====
==== Article 51: Recruitment of Protected persons ====
The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to serve in its armed or auxiliary forces. No pressure or propaganda which aims at securing voluntary enlistment is permitted.

The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to work unless they are over eighteen years of age, and then only on work which is necessary either for the needs of the army of occupation, or for the public utility services, or for the feeding, sheltering, clothing, transportation or health of the population of the occupied country. Protected persons may not be compelled to undertake any work which would involve them in the obligation of taking part in military operations. The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to employ forcible means to ensure the security of the installations where they are performing compulsory labour.

The work shall be carried out only in the occupied territory where the persons whose services have been requisitioned are. Every such person shall, so far as possible, be kept in his usual place of employment. Workers shall be paid a fair wage and the work shall be proportionate to their physical and intellectual capacities. The legislation in force in the occupied country concerning working conditions, and safeguards as regards, in particular, such matters as wages, hours of work, equipment, preliminary training and compensation for occupational accidents and diseases, shall be applicable to the protected persons assigned to the work referred to in this Article.

In no case shall requisition of labour lead to a mobilization of workers in an organization of a military or semi-military character.

==== Article 53: Prohibited destruction ====
In The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. Commentary, Jean Pictet writes:

==== Article 56: Hygiene and public health ====
Article 56 describes the medical obligations the occupying power has in the occupied territory:
==== Article 78: Security measures. Internment and assigned residence. Right of appeal ====
Article 78 deals with internment. It allows the occupying power for &quot;imperative reasons of security&quot; to &quot;subject them [protected persons] to assigned residence or to internment&quot;. The article does not allow the occupying power to take collective measures: each case must be decided separately.

==Part IV. Execution of the Convention==
This part contains &quot;the formal or diplomatic provisions which it is customary to place at the end of an international Convention to settle the procedure for bringing it into effect are grouped together under this heading&quot; (1). They are similar in all four Geneva Conventions.

==Annexes==
The ICRC commentary on the Fourth Geneva convention states that when the establishment of hospital and safety zones in occupied territories were discussed reference was made to a draft agreement and it was agreed to append it as an annex I to the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The ICRC states that &quot;the Draft Agreement has only been put forward to States as a model, but the fact that it as carefully drafted at the Diplomatic Conference, which finally adopted it, gives it a very real value. It could usefully be taken as a working basis, therefore, whenever a hospital zone is to be established.&quot;

The ICRC states that Annex II is a &quot;draft which, according to Article 109 (paragraph 1) of the Convention, will be applied in the absence of special agreements between the Parties, deals with the conditions for the receipt and distribution of collective relief shipments. It is based on the traditions of the International Committee of the Red Cross which submitted it, and on the experience the Committee gained during the Second World War.&quot;

Annex III contains an example internment card, letter and correspondence card:
# An example internment card with dimensions of 10 × 15 cm.
# An example letter with dimensions of 29 × 15 cm.
# An example correspondence card with dimensions of 10 × 15 cm.

==See also==
*List of parties to the Geneva Conventions
*Universal Declaration of Human Rights
*Globalization
*Human rights
*International humanitarian law

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==

* Rev. Mons. Sebastiao Francisco Xavier dos Remedios Monteiro v. The State of Goa, Supreme Court of India
*Committee of the Red Cross: Full text of GCIV with commentaries
* Text of the Fourth Geneva Convention (PDF)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q973748" start="4" end="76" title="Fourth Geneva Convention" label="Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q973748" start="114" end="138" title="Fourth Geneva Convention" label="Fourth Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q973748" start="158" end="162" title="Fourth Geneva Convention" label="GCIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="183" end="191" title="treaties" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="199" end="217" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558905" start="474" end="487" title="List of parties to the Geneva Conventions" label="196 countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="506" end="524" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109641" start="781" end="790" title="protected persons" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="804" end="822" title="military occupation" label="occupied territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="875" end="912" title="strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229133" start="924" end="945" title="Protocol I" label="Additional Protocol 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q113460033" start="1110" end="1131" title="indiscriminate attack" label="indiscriminate attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="1403" end="1431" title="principle of proportionality" label="principle of proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1450" end="1462" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107249" start="1482" end="1501" title="norm of reciprocity" label="norm of reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="1572" end="1603" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="1630" end="1647" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196414" start="1748" end="1788" title="customary international humanitarian law" label="customary international humanitarian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="2428" end="2442" title="armed conflict" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="2450" end="2475" title="Declaration of war" label="war has not been declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="2487" end="2497" title="Military occupation" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116523" start="2603" end="2614" title="Jean Pictet" label="Jean Pictet"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="2846" end="2859" title="non-combatant" label="non-combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="2921" end="2931" title="combatants" label="combatants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628941" start="2946" end="2960" title="hors de combat" label="hors de combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184753" start="2993" end="2998" title="wound" label="wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071447" start="3001" end="3010" title="detention (imprisonment)" label="detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="3194" end="3204" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="3226" end="3233" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="3250" end="3257" title="hostage" label="hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="3368" end="3377" title="sentence (law)" label="sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="3502" end="3510" title="judicial" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824221" start="3511" end="3520" title="guarantee" label="guarantee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109641" start="3665" end="3681" title="Protected persons" label="protected person"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="3805" end="3818" title="neutral country" label="neutral state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137428" start="3877" end="3891" title="Co-belligerence" label="co-belligerent"/>
<link wikidata="Q878249" start="3905" end="3911" title="alliance" label="allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="3945" end="3965" title="diplomatic relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="4424" end="4428" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="ICRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q336473" start="4451" end="4476" title="humanitarian organization" label="humanitarian organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="6191" end="6198" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="6200" end="6219" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6707" end="6719" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57109" start="6728" end="6741" title="Josef Mengele" label="Josef Mengele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690716" start="6894" end="6915" title="collective punishment" label="collective punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="6921" end="6930" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7034" end="7045" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7050" end="7062" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="7151" end="7161" title="Resistance movement" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054700" start="7182" end="7197" title="Rape of Belgium" label="Rape of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="7528" end="7568" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="International Committee of the Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401715" start="7896" end="7918" title="Additional Protocol II" label="Additional Protocol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="8615" end="8626" title="deportation" label="deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15589476" start="8905" end="8924" title="population transfer" label="population transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="9023" end="9027" title="ICRC" label="ICRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="10990" end="11042" title="The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. Commentary" label="The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q116523" start="11044" end="11055" title="Jean Pictet" label="Jean Pictet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="11323" end="11333" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558905" start="13285" end="13326" title="List of parties to the Geneva Conventions" label="List of parties to the Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="13328" end="13365" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="13367" end="13380" title="Globalization" label="Globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="13382" end="13394" title="Human rights" label="Human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q381148" start="13396" end="13426" title="International humanitarian law" label="International humanitarian law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66192" wikidata="Q1990719" url="?curid=66192" title="Copyhold">
<text>Copyhold was a form of customary land ownership common from the Late Middle Ages into modern times in England. The name for this type of land tenure is derived from the act of giving a copy of the relevant title deed that is recorded in the manorial court roll to the tenant, rather than the actual land deed itself. The legal owner of the manor land remained the mesne lord, who was legally the &quot;copyholder&quot;, according to the titles and customs written down in the manorial roll. In return for being given land, a copyhold tenant was required to carry out specific manorial duties or services. The specific rights and duties of copyhold tenants varied greatly from one manor to another and many were established by custom. By the 19th century, many customary duties had been replaced with the payment of rent.

Copyhold was directly descended from the feudal system of villeinage which involved giving service and produce to the local lord in return for land. Although feudalism in England had ended by the early 1500s, forms of copyhold tenure continued in England until being completely abolished by the Law of Property Act 1925.

==Principles==
The privileges granted to each tenant, and the exact services he was to render to the lord of the manor and/or lord paramount in return for them, were described in the roll or book kept by the steward, who gave a copy of the relevant entry to the tenant. Consequently, these tenants were afterwards called copyholders, in contrast to freeholders. The actual term &quot;copyhold&quot; is first recorded in 1483, and &quot;copyholder&quot; in 1511–1512. The specific rights and duties of copyholders varied greatly from one manor to another and many were established by custom. Initially, some works and services to the lord were required of copyholders (four days&#x27; work per year for example), but these were commuted later to a rent equivalent. Each manor custom laid out rights to use various resources of the land such as wood and pasture, and numbers of animals allowed on the common. Copyholds very commonly required the payment of a type of death duty called an heriot to the lord of the manor upon the decease of the copyholder.

==Inheritance==
Two main kinds of copyhold tenure developed:
* Copyhold of inheritance: with one main tenant landholder who paid rent and undertook duties to the lord. When he died, the holding normally passed to his next heir(s) – who might be the eldest son or, if no son existed, the eldest daughter (primogeniture); the youngest son or, if no son existed, the youngest daughter (&quot;Borough English&quot; or ultimogeniture); or all sons or all children in equal or otherwise prescribed shares (partible inheritance or &quot;gavelkind&quot;), depending upon the custom of that particular manor. In practice, local rules of inheritance were often applied with considerable flexibility. During their life the tenant could usually &#x27;sell&#x27; the holding to another person by formally surrendering it to the lord of the manor on the condition that the lord regrant it to the &#x27;buyer&#x27;. This three-party transaction was recorded in the manorial roll and formed the new &#x27;copyhold&#x27; for the purchaser.
* Copyhold for lives: where several (usually three) named persons held the premises for the duration of their lives. The first-named life tenant acted as tenant and paid rent and heriots; while the other two were said to be &quot;in reversion and remainder&quot; and effectively formed a queue. When the first life died, the second-named inherited the property and nominated a new third life for the end of the new queue. These were recorded in the court rolls as the &quot;copyhold&quot; for this type of tenant. It was possible to exchange the reversion and remainder lives with different ones during a lifetime upon payment of a fine to the lord. However, it was not usually possible for these holdings to be sold, as there were three lives with an entitlement. Copyhold for lives is therefore regarded as a less secure tenancy than copyhold of inheritance.

Copyhold land often did not appear in a will. This is because its inheritance was already pre-determined by custom, as just described. It could not therefore be given or devised in a will to any other person. In some instances, the executor of the estate held the copyhold for the term of one year after the decease of the testator, which was called the &quot;executor&#x27;s year&quot;, in parallel with the same concept in common law. Language regarding the disposal of the profits of the executor&#x27;s year or of a heriot often indicates a copyhold.

==Abolition==


Copyholds were gradually enfranchised (turned into ordinary holdings of land – either freehold or 999-year leasehold) as a result of the Copyhold Acts during the 19th century. By this time, servitude to the lord of the manor was merely token, discharged on purchasing the copyhold by payment of a &quot;fine in respite of fealty&quot;. The &#x27; (4 &amp; 5 Vict. c. 35), &#x27; (6 &amp; 7 Vict. c. 23), &#x27; (7 &amp; 8 Vict. c. 55), &#x27; (15 &amp; 16 Vict. c. 51), &#x27; (21 &amp; 22 Vict. c. 94) and &#x27; (50 &amp; 51 Vict. c. 73) were consolidated in the (57 &amp; 58 Vict. c. 46).

Part V of the Law of Property Act 1925 finally abolished all remaining statutes.

==See also==
*Feudal land tenure
*History of English land law, including:
**Grand and petty serjeanty, rent in various services
**Knight-service, rent in military service
**Frankalmoin or free alms, rent in religious service
**Socage, rent in goods or cash, including such forms as:
***Gavelkind, partible inheritance
***Borough English, inheritance by the youngest son
***Burgage, urban property, often including voting rights, with various rent conditions
**Villein (a type of tenure which preceded copyhold)

==References==
==Further reading==
* Andrew Barsby (1996). &quot;Manorial Law&quot;.
* Gray, C. M. (1963). &quot;Copyhold, Equity and the Common Law&quot;.
* Scriven, John, (Serjeant at law), &quot;A treatise on copyhold, customary freehold, and ancient demesne tenure: with the jurisdiction of Courts baron and Courts leet; also an appendix, containing rules for holding Customary courts, Courts baron and Courts leet, forms of court rolls, deputations, and copyhold assurances, and extracts from the relative acts of Parliament&quot;, 2 vols., 2nd. ed., London, 1823.
* Tawney, R. H. (1912). &quot;The Agrarian Problem of the Sixteenth Century&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1990719" start="0" end="8" title="Copyhold" label="Copyhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="23" end="32" title="Custom (law)" label="customary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="33" end="47" title="real property" label="land ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="64" end="80" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="102" end="109" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="137" end="148" title="land tenure" label="land tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q705914" start="206" end="216" title="Deed" label="title deed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751436" start="241" end="260" title="Manorial roll" label="manorial court roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="340" end="350" title="Manorialism" label="manor land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821392" start="364" end="374" title="mesne lord" label="mesne lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="863" end="876" title="Feudalism" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477473" start="880" end="890" title="villein" label="villeinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503425" start="1117" end="1141" title="Law of Property Act 1925" label="Law of Property Act 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="1245" end="1262" title="lord of the manor" label="lord of the manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679845" start="1270" end="1284" title="lord paramount" label="lord paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263369" start="1352" end="1359" title="Steward (office)" label="steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492696" start="1493" end="1504" title="Freehold (law)" label="freeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304653" start="2130" end="2136" title="heriot" label="heriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="2328" end="2332" title="Renting" label="rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="2503" end="2516" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568955" start="2613" end="2627" title="ultimogeniture" label="ultimogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493627" start="2729" end="2738" title="gavelkind" label="gavelkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751436" start="3149" end="3162" title="manorial roll" label="manorial roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260774" start="3954" end="3985" title="Pur autre vie" label="three lives with an entitlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="4124" end="4128" title="will and testament" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="4509" end="4519" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492696" start="4742" end="4750" title="freehold (real property)" label="freehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646275" start="4754" end="4762" title="999-year lease" label="999-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="4763" end="4772" title="leasehold" label="leasehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813294" start="4978" end="4984" title="fealty" label="fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q123858130" start="5004" end="5019" title="4 &amp;amp; 5 Vict." label="4 &amp;amp; 5 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123858129" start="5036" end="5051" title="6 &amp;amp; 7 Vict." label="6 &amp;amp; 7 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123858133" start="5068" end="5083" title="7 &amp;amp; 8 Vict." label="7 &amp;amp; 8 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123965346" start="5100" end="5117" title="15 &amp;amp; 16 Vict." label="15 &amp;amp; 16 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123965367" start="5134" end="5151" title="21 &amp;amp; 22 Vict." label="21 &amp;amp; 22 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123982988" start="5171" end="5188" title="50 &amp;amp; 51 Vict." label="50 &amp;amp; 51 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q123965314" start="5222" end="5239" title="57 &amp;amp; 58 Vict." label="57 &amp;amp; 58 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q6503425" start="5263" end="5287" title="Law of Property Act 1925" label="Law of Property Act 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836659" start="5345" end="5363" title="Feudal land tenure" label="Feudal land tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776035" start="5365" end="5392" title="History of English land law" label="History of English land law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417607" start="5423" end="5432" title="serjeanty" label="serjeanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422187" start="5461" end="5475" title="Knight-service" label="Knight-service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490609" start="5504" end="5515" title="Frankalmoin" label="Frankalmoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q74616232" start="5558" end="5564" title="Socage" label="Socage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493627" start="5617" end="5626" title="Gavelkind" label="Gavelkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568955" start="5652" end="5667" title="Borough English" label="Borough English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998508" start="5704" end="5711" title="Burgage" label="Burgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477473" start="5791" end="5798" title="Villein" label="Villein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66193" wikidata="Q1278039" url="?curid=66193" title="Prefix code">
<text>A prefix code is a type of code system distinguished by its possession of the &quot;prefix property&quot;, which requires that there is no whole code word in the system that is a prefix (initial segment) of any other code word in the system. It is trivially true for fixed-length codes, so only a point of consideration for variable-length codes.

For example, a code with code {9, 55} has the prefix property; a code consisting of {9, 5, 59, 55} does not, because &quot;5&quot; is a prefix of &quot;59&quot; and also of &quot;55&quot;. A prefix code is a uniquely decodable code: given a complete and accurate sequence, a receiver can identify each word without requiring a special marker between words. However, there are uniquely decodable codes that are not prefix codes; for instance, the reverse of a prefix code is still uniquely decodable (it is a suffix code), but it is not necessarily a prefix code.

Prefix codes are also known as prefix-free codes, prefix condition codes and instantaneous codes. Although Huffman coding is just one of many algorithms for deriving prefix codes, prefix codes are also widely referred to as &quot;Huffman codes&quot;, even when the code was not produced by a Huffman algorithm. The term comma-free code is sometimes also applied as a synonym for prefix-free codes but in most mathematical books and articles (e.g.) a comma-free code is used to mean a self-synchronizing code, a subclass of prefix codes.

Using prefix codes, a message can be transmitted as a sequence of concatenated code words, without any out-of-band markers or (alternatively) special markers between words to frame the words in the message. The recipient can decode the message unambiguously, by repeatedly finding and removing sequences that form valid code words. This is not generally possible with codes that lack the prefix property, for example {0, 1, 10, 11}: a receiver reading a &quot;1&quot; at the start of a code word would not know whether that was the complete code word &quot;1&quot;, or merely the prefix of the code word &quot;10&quot; or &quot;11&quot;; so the string &quot;10&quot; could be interpreted either as a single codeword or as the concatenation of the words &quot;1&quot; then &quot;0&quot;.

The variable-length Huffman codes, country calling codes, the country and publisher parts of ISBNs, the Secondary Synchronization Codes used in the UMTS W-CDMA 3G Wireless Standard, and the instruction sets (machine language) of most computer microarchitectures are prefix codes.

Prefix codes are not error-correcting codes. In practice, a message might first be compressed with a prefix code, and then encoded again with channel coding (including error correction) before transmission.

For any uniquely decodable code there is a prefix code that has the same code word lengths. Kraft&#x27;s inequality characterizes the sets of code word lengths that are possible in a uniquely decodable code.

==Techniques==
If every word in the code has the same length, the code is called a fixed-length code, or a block code (though the term block code is also used for fixed-size error-correcting codes in channel coding). For example, ISO 8859-15 letters are always 8 bits long. UTF-32/UCS-4 letters are always 32 bits long. ATM cells are always 424 bits (53 bytes) long. A fixed-length code of fixed length &quot;k&quot; bits can encode up to formula_1 source symbols.

A fixed-length code is necessarily a prefix code. It is possible to turn any code into a fixed-length code by padding fixed symbols to the shorter prefixes in order to meet the length of the longest prefixes. Alternately, such padding codes may be employed to introduce redundancy that allows autocorrection and/or synchronisation. However, fixed length encodings are inefficient in situations where some words are much more likely to be transmitted than others.

Truncated binary encoding is a straightforward generalization of fixed-length codes to deal with cases where the number of symbols &quot;n&quot; is not a power of two. Source symbols are assigned codewords of length &quot;k&quot; and &quot;k&quot;+1, where &quot;k&quot; is chosen so that &quot;2k &lt; n ≤ 2k+1&quot;.

Huffman coding is a more sophisticated technique for constructing variable-length prefix codes. The Huffman coding algorithm takes as input the frequencies that the code words should have, and constructs a prefix code that minimizes the weighted average of the code word lengths. (This is closely related to minimizing the entropy.) This is a form of lossless data compression based on entropy encoding.

Some codes mark the end of a code word with a special &quot;comma&quot; symbol (also called a Sentinel value), different from normal data. This is somewhat analogous to the spaces between words in a sentence; they mark where one word ends and another begins. If every code word ends in a comma, and the comma does not appear elsewhere in a code word, the code is automatically prefix-free. However, reserving an entire symbol only for use as a comma can be inefficient, especially for languages with a small number of symbols. Morse code is an everyday example of a variable-length code with a comma. The long pauses between letters, and the even longer pauses between words, help people recognize where one letter (or word) ends, and the next begins. Similarly, Fibonacci coding uses a &quot;11&quot; to mark the end of every code word.

Self-synchronizing codes are prefix codes that allow frame synchronization.

==Related concepts==
A suffix code is a set of words none of which is a suffix of any other; equivalently, a set of words which are the reverse of a prefix code. As with a prefix code, the representation of a string as a concatenation of such words is unique. A bifix code is a set of words which is both a prefix and a suffix code.
An optimal prefix code is a prefix code with minimal average length. That is, assume an alphabet of symbols with probabilities formula_2 for a prefix code . If is another prefix code and formula_3 are the lengths of the codewords of , then formula_4.

==Prefix codes in use today==
Examples of prefix codes include:
* variable-length Huffman codes
* country calling codes
* Chen–Ho encoding
* the country and publisher parts of ISBNs
* the Secondary Synchronization Codes used in the UMTS W-CDMA 3G Wireless Standard
* VCR Plus+ codes
* Unicode Transformation Format, in particular the UTF-8 system for encoding Unicode characters, which is both a prefix-free code and a self-synchronizing code
* variable-length quantity

===Techniques===
Commonly used techniques for constructing prefix codes include Huffman codes and the earlier Shannon–Fano codes, and universal codes such as:
* Elias delta coding
* Elias gamma coding
* Elias omega coding
* Fibonacci coding
* Levenshtein coding
* Unary coding
* Golomb Rice code
* Straddling checkerboard (simple cryptography technique which produces prefix codes)
* binary coding

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* D.A. Huffman, &quot;A method for the construction of minimum-redundancy codes&quot;, Proceedings of the I.R.E., Sept. 1952, pp. 1098–1102 (Huffman&#x27;s original article)
* Profile: David A. Huffman, Scientific American, Sept. 1991, pp. 54–58 (Background story)
* Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. &quot;Introduction to Algorithms&quot;, Second Edition. MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, 2001. . Section 16.3, pp. 385–392.

==External links==
* Codes, trees and the prefix property by Kona Macphee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1278039" start="2" end="13" title="Prefix code" label="prefix code"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="27" end="31" title="code" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q863873" start="145" end="154" title="Code word (communication)" label="code word"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626534" start="179" end="185" title="prefix (computer science)" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981616" start="324" end="345" title="variable-length code" label="variable-length codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981616" start="556" end="579" title="uniquely decodable code" label="uniquely decodable code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278039" start="943" end="960" title="Prefix code" label="prefix-free codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278039" start="962" end="984" title="Prefix code" label="prefix condition codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278039" start="989" end="1008" title="Prefix code" label="instantaneous codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="1019" end="1033" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278039" start="1232" end="1247" title="Prefix code" label="comma-free code"/>
<link wikidata="Q56313399" start="1396" end="1419" title="self-synchronizing code" label="self-synchronizing code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146123" start="1553" end="1564" title="Out-of-band data" label="out-of-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477933" start="1625" end="1630" title="framing (telecommunication)" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="2258" end="2271" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="2273" end="2294" title="country calling codes" label="country calling codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33057" start="2331" end="2335" title="ISBN" label="ISBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="2386" end="2390" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="2391" end="2397" title="W-CDMA" label="W-CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="2428" end="2443" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="2540" end="2562" title="error-correcting codes" label="error-correcting codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="2661" end="2675" title="channel coding" label="channel coding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2735" end="2753" title="Variable-length_code#Uniquely_decodable_codes" label="uniquely decodable"/>
<link wikidata="Q371685" start="2819" end="2842" title="Kraft&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Kraft&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2910" end="2928" title="Variable-length_code#Uniquely_decodable_codes" label="uniquely decodable"/>
<link wikidata="Q884707" start="3071" end="3081" title="block code" label="block code"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="3110" end="3131" title="error-correcting code" label="error-correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="3136" end="3150" title="channel coding" label="channel coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="3166" end="3177" title="ISO 8859-15" label="ISO 8859-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q736068" start="3210" end="3222" title="UTF-32/UCS-4" label="UTF-32/UCS-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q206047" start="3256" end="3265" title="Asynchronous Transfer Mode" label="ATM cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608" start="3866" end="3891" title="Truncated binary encoding" label="Truncated binary encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="4186" end="4200" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="4537" end="4562" title="lossless data compression" label="lossless data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345239" start="4572" end="4588" title="entropy encoding" label="entropy encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q71826074" start="4685" end="4699" title="Sentinel value" label="Sentinel value"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="5118" end="5128" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633" start="5354" end="5370" title="Fibonacci coding" label="Fibonacci coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q56313399" start="5430" end="5453" title="Self-synchronizing code" label="Self-synchronizing code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477933" start="5483" end="5504" title="frame synchronization" label="frame synchronization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="6174" end="6187" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="6190" end="6211" title="country calling codes" label="country calling codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091568" start="6214" end="6230" title="Chen–Ho encoding" label="Chen–Ho encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q33057" start="6268" end="6272" title="ISBN" label="ISBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="6324" end="6328" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="6329" end="6335" title="W-CDMA" label="W-CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q704457" start="6359" end="6374" title="VCR Plus" label="VCR Plus+ codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="6377" end="6406" title="Unicode Transformation Format" label="Unicode Transformation Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="6426" end="6431" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="6452" end="6459" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q56313399" start="6511" end="6534" title="self-synchronizing code" label="self-synchronizing code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915686" start="6537" end="6561" title="variable-length quantity" label="variable-length quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="6643" end="6656" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645" start="6673" end="6691" title="Shannon–Fano coding" label="Shannon–Fano codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176366" start="6697" end="6711" title="universal code (data compression)" label="universal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626" start="6724" end="6742" title="Elias delta coding" label="Elias delta coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611" start="6745" end="6763" title="Elias gamma coding" label="Elias gamma coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629" start="6766" end="6784" title="Elias omega coding" label="Elias omega coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633" start="6787" end="6803" title="Fibonacci coding" label="Fibonacci coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635" start="6806" end="6824" title="Levenshtein coding" label="Levenshtein coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606" start="6827" end="6839" title="Unary coding" label="Unary coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638" start="6842" end="6858" title="Golomb Rice code" label="Golomb Rice code"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803619" start="6861" end="6884" title="Straddling checkerboard" label="Straddling checkerboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="7193" end="7212" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524992" start="7257" end="7273" title="Thomas H. Cormen" label="Thomas H. Cormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93028" start="7275" end="7295" title="Charles E. Leiserson" label="Charles E. Leiserson"/>
<link wikidata="Q578036" start="7297" end="7313" title="Ronald L. Rivest" label="Ronald L. Rivest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024396" start="7319" end="7333" title="Clifford Stein" label="Clifford Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141518" start="7341" end="7367" title="Introduction to Algorithms" label="Introduction to Algorithms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66196" wikidata="Q870109" url="?curid=66196" title="Rapture">
<text>The Rapture is an eschatological position held by some Christians, particularly those of American evangelicalism, consisting of an end-time event when all dead Christian believers will be resurrected and, joined with Christians who are still alive, together will rise &quot;in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.&quot; This view of eschatology is typically part of dispensational premillennialism, a form of futurism that considers various prophecies in the Bible as remaining unfulfilled and occurring in the future. 

The idea of a rapture as it is defined in dispensational premillennialism is not found in historic Christianity and is a relatively recent doctrine originating from the 1830s. The term is used frequently among fundamentalist theologians in the United States. The origin of the term extends from the First Epistle to the Thessalonians in the Bible, which uses the Greek word (), meaning &quot;to snatch away&quot; or &quot;to seize&quot;.

Differing viewpoints exist about the exact time of the rapture and whether Christ&#x27;s return would occur in one event or two. Pretribulationism distinguishes the rapture from the second coming of Jesus Christ mentioned in the Gospel of Matthew, 2 Thessalonians, and Revelation. This view holds that the rapture would precede the seven-year Tribulation, which would culminate in Christ&#x27;s second coming and be followed by a thousand-year Messianic Kingdom. This theory grew out of the translations of the Bible that John Nelson Darby analyzed in 1833. Pretribulationism is the most widely held view among Christians believing in the rapture today, although this view is disputed within evangelicalism. Other views include midtribulation, prewrath, and posttribulation rapture.

Most Christian denominations do not subscribe to rapture theology and have a different interpretation of the aerial gathering described in 1 Thessalonians 4. They do not use &quot;rapture&quot; as a specific theological term, nor do they generally subscribe to the dispensational theology associated with its use. Instead they typically interpret &quot;rapture&quot; in the sense of the elect gathering with Christ in Heaven right after his second coming and reject the idea that a large segment of humanity will be left behind on earth for an extended tribulation period after the events of 1 Thessalonians 4:17.

== Etymology ==

&quot;Rapture&quot; is derived from Middle French , via the Medieval Latin (&quot;seizure, kidnapping&quot;), which derives from the Latin (&quot;a carrying off&quot;).

=== Greek ===

The Koine Greek of 1 Thessalonians 4:17 uses the verb form (), which means &quot;we shall be caught up&quot; or &quot;we shall be taken away&quot;. The dictionary form of this Greek verb is (). This use is also seen in such texts as Acts 8:39, 2 Corinthians 12:2–4, and Revelation 12:5. Linguist, Dr. Douglas Hamp, notes that Greek scholar Spiros Zodhiates lists as the first-person plural future passive indicative of the Greek stem, &quot;harpagē&quot; (har-pag-ay), “the act of plundering, plunder, spoil.” The future passive indicative of &quot;harpázō&quot; (although not used by Paul in 1 Thess. 4:17) can be viewed at verbix.com: αρπασθησόμεθα (&quot;harpasthesometha&quot;). GS724 &quot;harpagē&quot; means&quot;:&quot; 1. the act of plundering, robbery; 2. plunder, spoil. When the rapture and the &quot;restoration of all things&quot; (Acts 3:20-21) are viewed as simultaneous events (according to Romans 8:19-21) then it makes sense why Paul would use &quot;shall be plundered&quot; to match the verbiage of the distortion of the Earth described in Isaiah 24:3, &quot;The land shall be entirely emptied and utterly plundered...&quot;.

=== Latin ===

The Latin Vulgate translates the Greek as meaning &quot;we will be caught up&quot; or &quot;we will be taken away&quot; from the Latin verb meaning &quot;to catch up&quot; or &quot;take away&quot;.

=== English ===

English translations of the Bible have translated 1 Thessalonians 4:17 in various ways:

* The Wycliffe Bible (1395), translated from the Latin Vulgate, uses &quot;rushed&quot;.
* The Tyndale New Testament (1525), the Bishop&#x27;s Bible (1568), the Geneva Bible (1587) and the King James Version (1611) use &quot;caught up&quot;. This is carried over to the American Standard Version (1901), the Revised Standard Version (1946, 1952) and the English Standard Version (2001, 2007, 2011, 2016), as well as the New International Version (1973, 1978, 1984, 2011).

== Doctrinal position ==

A pretribulational rapture view is most commonly found among American Fundamentalist Baptists, Bible churches, Brethren churches, certain Methodist denominations, Pentecostals, non-denominational evangelicals, and various other evangelical groups. The Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, the Lutheran Churches, the Anglican Communion, and Reformed denominations have no tradition of a preliminary return of Christ. The Eastern Orthodox Church, for example, favors the amillennial interpretation of prophetic Scriptures and thus rejects a preliminary, premillennial return. Most Methodists do not adhere to the dispensationalist view of the rapture.

== Views ==

=== One or two events ===

Most premillennialists distinguish the Rapture and the Second Coming as separate events. Some dispensational premillennialists (including many evangelicals) hold the return of Christ to be two distinct events (i.e., Christ&#x27;s second coming in two stages). According to this view, 1 Thessalonians 4:15–17 is a description of a preliminary event to the return described in Matthew 24:29–31. Although both describe a coming of Jesus, these are seen to be different events. The first event is a coming where the saved are to be &#x27;caught up,&#x27; whence the term &quot;rapture&quot; is taken. The second event is described as the second coming. The majority of dispensationalists hold that the first event precedes the period of tribulation, even if not immediately (see chart for additional dispensationalist timing views). Dispensationalists distinguish these events as a result of their own literal understanding of Paul&#x27;s words.

Amillennialists deny the interpretation of a literal thousand-year earthly rule of Christ. There is considerable overlap in the beliefs of amillennialists (including most Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, Anglicans, and Lutherans), postmillennialists (including Presbyterians), and historic premillennialists (including some Calvinistic Baptists) with those who hold that the return of Christ will be a single, public event.

Some proponents believe the doctrine of amillennialism originated with Alexandrian scholars such as Clement and Origen and later became Catholic dogma through Augustine.

=== Destination ===

Dispensationalists see the immediate destination of the raptured Christians as being Heaven. Catholic commentators, such as Walter Drum (1912), identify the destination of the 1 Thessalonians 4:17 gathering as Heaven.

While Anglicans have many views, some Anglican commentators, such as N. T. Wright, identify the destination as a specific place on Earth. This interpretation may sometimes be connected to Christian environmentalist concerns.

== Views of eschatological timing ==

There are numerous views regarding the timing of the Rapture. Some maintain that Matthew 24:37–40 refers to the Rapture, pointing out similarities between the two texts, indicating that the Rapture would occur at the &quot;parousia&quot; of the Lord. Others point out that neither &quot;church&quot; nor &quot;rapture&quot; occur in Matthew 24 and there are significant differences between Matthew 24:37–40 and 1 Thessalonians 4:13–18. As a result, these two texts receive the overwhelming focus within discussions about the Rapture&#x27;s timing. The two texts are as follows:



In the amillennial and postmillennial views there are no distinctions in the timing of the Rapture. These views regard that the Rapture, as it is described in 1 Thessalonians 4:15–17, would be identical to the Second Coming of Jesus as described in Matthew 24:29–31 after the spiritual/symbolic millennium.

In the premillennial view, the Rapture would be before a literal, earthly millennium. Within premillennialism, the pretribulation position distinguishes between the Rapture and the Second Coming as two different events. There are also other positions within premillennialism that differ with regard to the timing of the Rapture.

=== Premillennialist views ===

In the earliest days of the church, chiliastic teaching (i.e., early premillennialism) was the dominant view. Eusebius wrote, &quot;To these [written accounts] belong his [Papias of Hierapolis] statement that there will be a period of some thousand years after the resurrection of the dead, and that the kingdom of Christ will be set up in the material form on this very earth. [...] But it was due to him that so many of the Church Fathers after him adopted a like opinion, urging in their own support the antiquity of the man; as for instance Irenaeus and anyone else that may have proclaimed similar views.&quot;

The 19th-century scholar Schaff notes that, &quot;The most striking point in the eschatology of the ante-Nicene age is the prominent chiliasm, or millennarianism, that is the belief of a visible reign of Christ in glory on earth with the risen saints for a thousand years, before the general resurrection and judgment.&quot;

Over time, however, a clash surfaced between two schools of interpretation, the Antiochene and Alexandrian schools. The Alexandrian school&#x27;s roots can be traced back to the influence of Philo, a Hellenized Jew who sought to reconcile God&#x27;s veracity with what he thought were errors in the Tanakh. Alexandrian theologians viewed the Millennium as a symbolic reign of Christ from Heaven. Through the influence of Origen and Augustine—students of the Alexandrian school—allegorical interpretation rose to prominence, and its eschatology became the majority view for more than a thousand years. As a reaction to the rise of allegorical interpretation the Antiochene school insisted on a literal hermeneutic. but did little to counter the Alexandrian&#x27;s symbolic Millennium.

In the twelfth century futurism became prominent again when Joachim of Fiore (1130–1202) wrote a commentary on Revelation and insisted that the end was near and taught that God would restore the earth, the Jews would be converted, and the Millennium would take place on earth. His teaching influenced much of Europe.

Though the Catholic Church does not generally regard Biblical prophecy in texts such as Daniel and Revelation as strictly future-based (when viewed from the standpoint of our present time), in 1590 Francisco Ribera, a Catholic Jesuit, taught futurism. He also taught that a gathering-of-the-elect event (similar to what is now called the rapture) would happen 45 days before the end of a 3.5-year tribulation.

The concept of the rapture, in connection with premillennialism, was expressed by the 17th-century American Puritans Increase Mather and Cotton Mather. They held to the idea that believers would be caught up in the air, followed by judgments on earth, and then the millennium.
Other 17th-century expressions of the rapture are found in the works of Robert Maton, Nathaniel Holmes, John Browne, Thomas Vincent, Henry Danvers, and William Sherwin.

The term &quot;rapture&quot; was used by Philip Doddridge and John Gill in their New Testament commentaries, with the idea that believers would be caught up prior to judgment on earth and Jesus&#x27; second coming.

An 1828 edition of Matthew Henry&#x27;s &quot;An Exposition of the Old and New Testament&quot; uses the word &quot;rapture&quot; in explicating 1 Thessalonians 4:17.

Although not using the term &quot;rapture&quot;, the idea was more fully developed by Edward Irving (1792–1834). In 1825, Irving directed his attention to the study of prophecy and eventually accepted the one-man Antichrist idea of James Henthorn Todd, Samuel Roffey Maitland, Robert Bellarmine, and Francisco Ribera, yet he went a step further. Irving began to teach the idea of a two-phase return of Christ, the first phase being a secret rapture prior to the rise of the Antichrist. Edward Miller described Irving&#x27;s teaching like this: &quot;There are three gatherings: – First, of the first-fruits of the harvest, the wise virgins who follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth; next, the abundant harvest gathered afterwards by God; and lastly, the assembling of the wicked for punishment.&quot;

==== Pretribulational premillennialism ====
The pretribulation position advocates that the rapture will occur before the beginning of a seven-year tribulation period, while the second coming will occur at the end of it. Pretribulationists often describe the rapture as Jesus coming &quot;for&quot; the church and the second coming as Jesus coming &quot;with&quot; the church. Pretribulation educators and preachers include Jimmy Swaggart, Robert Jeffress, J. Dwight Pentecost, Tim LaHaye, J. Vernon McGee, Perry Stone, Chuck Smith, Hal Lindsey, Jack Van Impe, Skip Heitzig, Chuck Missler, Grant Jeffrey, Thomas Ice, David Jeremiah, John F. MacArthur, and John Hagee.

John Nelson Darby first solidified and popularized the pretribulation rapture in 1827. Despite vague notions of this view existing in a few Puritan theologians prior to Darby, he was the first person to place it into a larger theological framework . This view was accepted among many other Plymouth Brethren movements in England. Darby and other prominent Brethren were part of the Brethren movement which impacted American Christianity, especially with movements and teachings associated with Christian eschatology and fundamentalism, primarily through their writings. Influences included the Bible Conference Movement, starting in 1878 with the Niagara Bible Conference. These conferences, which were initially inclusive of historicist and futurist premillennialism, led to an increasing acceptance of futurist premillennial views and the pretribulation rapture especially among Presbyterian, Baptist, and Congregational members. Popular books also contributed to acceptance of the pretribulation rapture, including William E. Blackstone&#x27;s book &quot;Jesus is Coming&quot;, published in 1878, which sold more than 1.3 million copies, and the Scofield Reference Bible, published in 1909 and 1919 and revised in 1967.

Some pretribulation proponents, such as Grant Jeffrey, maintain that the earliest known extra-Biblical reference to the pretribulation rapture is from a 7th-century tract known as the Apocalypse of Pseudo-Ephraem the Syrian. Different authors have proposed several different versions of the text as authentic and there are differing opinions as to whether it supports belief in a pretribulation rapture. One version of the text reads, &quot;For all the saints and Elect of God are gathered, prior to the tribulation that is to come, and are taken to the Lord lest they see the confusion that is to overwhelm the world because of our sins.&quot; In addition, &quot;The Apocalypse of Elijah&quot; and &quot;The History of Brother Dolcino&quot; both state that believers will be removed prior to the Tribulation.

There exists at least one 18th-century and two 19th-century pretribulation references: in an essay published in 1788 in Philadelphia by the Baptist Morgan Edwards which articulated the concept of a pretribulation rapture, in the writings of Catholic priest Manuel Lacunza in 1812, and by John Nelson Darby in 1827. Manuel Lacunza (1731–1801), a Jesuit priest (under the pseudonym Juan Josafat Ben Ezra), wrote an apocalyptic work entitled &quot;La venida del Mesías en gloria y majestad&quot; (&quot;The Coming of the Messiah in Glory and Majesty&quot;). The book appeared first in 1811, 10 years after his death. In 1827, it was translated into English by the Scottish minister Edward Irving.

During the 1970s, belief in the rapture became popular in wider circles, in part because of the books of Hal Lindsey, including &quot;The Late Great Planet Earth&quot;, which has reportedly sold between 15 million and 35 million copies, and the movie &quot;A Thief in the Night&quot;, which based its title on the scriptural reference . Lindsey proclaimed that the rapture was imminent, based on world conditions at the time.

In 1995, the doctrine of the pretribulation rapture was further popularized by Tim LaHaye&#x27;s &quot;Left Behind&quot; series of books, which sold close to 80 million copies and was made into several movies and four real-time strategy video games.

According to Thomas Ice a belief in the imminence of Christ&#x27;s return, key to modern pretribulation theology, can be found in various Church Fathers and early Christian writings.

==== Midtribulational premillennialism ====

The mid-tribulation position espouses that the rapture will occur at some point in the middle of what is popularly called the tribulation period, or during Daniel&#x27;s 70th Week. The tribulation is typically divided into two periods of 3.5 years each. Midtribulationists hold that the saints will go through the first period (Beginning of Travail) but will be raptured into Heaven before the severe outpouring of God&#x27;s wrath in the second half of what is popularly called the Great Tribulation. Midtribulationists appeal to which says the saints will be given over to tribulation for &quot;time, times, and half a time,&quot; – interpreted to mean 3.5 years. At the halfway point of the tribulation, the Antichrist will commit the &quot;abomination of desolation&quot; by desecrating the Jerusalem temple. Midtribulationist teachers include Harold Ockenga, James O. Buswell (a reformed, Calvinistic Presbyterian), and Norman Harrison. This position is a minority view among premillennialists.

==== Prewrath premillennialism ====

The prewrath rapture view also places the rapture at some point during the tribulation period before the second coming. This view holds that the tribulation of the church begins toward the latter part of a seven-year period, being Daniel&#x27;s 70th week, when the Antichrist is revealed in the temple. This latter half of a seven-year period [i.e. years] is defined as the great tribulation, although the exact duration is not known. References from Matthew 24, Mark 13, and Luke 21 are used as evidence that this tribulation will be cut short by the coming of Christ to deliver the righteous by means of the rapture, which will occur after specific events in Revelation, in particular after the sixth seal is opened and the sun is darkened and the moon is turned to blood. However, by this point many Christians will have been slaughtered as martyrs by the Antichrist. After the rapture will come God&#x27;s seventh-seal wrath of trumpets and bowls (a.k.a. &quot;the Day of the Lord&quot;). The Day of the Lord&#x27;s wrath against the ungodly will follow for the remainder of seven years.

==== Partial rapture premillennialism ====

The partial, conditional or selective rapture theory holds that all obedient Christians will be raptured before the great tribulation depending on one&#x27;s personal fellowship (or closeness) between she or he and God, which is not to be confused with the relationship between the same and God (which is believer, regardless of fellowship). Therefore, it is believed by some that the rapture of a believer is determined by the timing of his conversion before the great tribulation. Other proponents of this theory hold that only those who are faithful in their relationship with God (having true fellowship with him) will be raptured, and the rest resurrected during the great tribulation, between the 5th and 6th seals of Revelation, having lost their lives during. Still others hold the rest will either be raptured during the tribulation or at its end. As stated by Ira David (a proponent of this view): &quot;The saints will be raptured in groups during the tribulation as they are prepared to go.&quot; Some notable proponents of this theory are G. H. Lang, Robert Chapman, G. H. Pember, Robert Govett, D. M. Panton, Watchman Nee, Ira E. David, J. A. Seiss, Hudson Taylor, Anthony Norris Groves, John Wilkinson, G. Campbell Morgan, Otto Stockmayer and Rev. J. W. (Chip) White Jr.

==== Posttribulational premillennialism ====
In the posttribulation premillennial position, the rapture would be identical to the second coming of Jesus or as a meeting in the air with Jesus that immediately precedes his return to the Earth before a literal millennium. The posttribulation position places the rapture at the end of the tribulation period. Posttribulation writers define the tribulation period in a generic sense as the entire present age, or in a specific sense of a period of time preceding the second coming of Christ. The emphasis in this view is that the church will undergo the tribulation. – &quot;Immediately after the Tribulation of those days...they shall gather together his elect...&quot; – is cited as a foundational scripture for this view. Posttribulationists perceive the rapture as occurring simultaneously with the second coming of Christ. Upon Jesus&#x27;s return, believers will meet him in the air and will then accompany him in his return to the Earth. 

In the Epistles of Paul, most notably in (&quot;the dead in Christ shall rise first&quot;) and , a trumpet is described as blowing at the end of the tribulation to herald the return of Christ; further supports this view. Moreover, after chapters 6–19, and after 20:1–3 when Satan is bound, says, &quot;and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This &quot;is&quot; the first resurrection. Blessed and holy &quot;is&quot; he that hath part in the first resurrection.&quot;

Authors and teachers who support the posttribulational view include Pat Robertson, Walter R. Martin, John Piper, George E. Ladd, Robert H. Gundry, and Douglas Moo.

=== Postmillennialism ===

In the postmillennialist view the millennium is seen as an indefinitely long time thus precluding literal interpretation of a thousand-year period. According to Loraine Boettner &quot;the world will be Christianized, and the return of Christ will occur at the close of a long period of righteousness and peace, commonly called the millennium.&quot; Postmillennialists commonly view the rapture of the Church as one and the same event as the second coming of Christ. According to them the great tribulation was already fulfilled in the Jewish-Roman War of 66–73 AD that involved the destruction of Jerusalem. Authors who have expressed support for this view include the Puritan author of &quot;Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;, John Bunyan, Jonathan Edwards and Charles Finney.

=== Amillennialism ===
Amillennialists view the millennial rule of Christ as the current, but indefinite period that began with the foundation of the church and that will end with the Second Coming—a period where Christ already reigns with his saints through the Eucharist and his church. They view the life of the church as Christ&#x27;s kingdom already established (inaugurated on the day of the Pentecost described in the first chapter of Acts), but not to be made complete until his second coming. This framework precludes a literal interpretation of the thousand-year period mentioned in chapter twenty of Revelation, viewing the number &quot;thousand&quot; as numerologically symbolic and pertaining to the current age of the church. 

Amillennialists generally do not use &quot;rapture&quot; as a theological term, but they do view a similar event coinciding with the second coming—primarily as a mystical gathering with Christ. To amillennialists the final days already began on the day of the Pentecost, but that the great tribulation will occur during the final phase or conclusion of the millennium, with Christ then returning as the alpha and omega at the end of time. Unlike premillennialists who predict the millennium as a literal thousand-year reign by Christ after his return, amillennialists emphasize the continuity and permanency of his reign throughout all periods of the New Covenant, past, present and future. They do not regard mentions of Jerusalem in the chapter twenty-one of Revelation as pertaining to the present geographical city, but to a future new Jerusalem or &quot;new heaven and new earth&quot;, for which the church through the twelve apostles (representing of the twelve tribes of Israel) currently lays the foundation in the messianic kingdom already present. Unlike certain premillennial dispensationalists, they do not view the rebuilding of the temple of Jerusalem as either necessary or legitimate, because the practice of animal sacrifices has now been fulfilled in the life of the church through Christ&#x27;s ultimate sacrifice on the cross. Authors who have expressed support for the amillenialist view include St. Augustine. The amillennialist viewpoint is the position held by the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglican churches, as well as mainline Protestant bodies, such as Lutherans, Methodists, Presbyterians and many Reformed congregations.

== Date ==
Since the origin of the concept, some believers have made predictions regarding the date of the event. All have failed in their attempt to set a date.

=== Failed predictions ===

Some predictions of the date of the Second Coming of Jesus (which may or may not refer to the rapture) include the following:

* 1843-44: William Miller predicted that Christ would return between 21 March 1843 and 21 March 1844, then revised his prediction, claiming to have miscalculated the Bible, to 22 October 1844. The realization that the predictions were incorrect resulted in the Great Disappointment. Miller&#x27;s theology gave rise to the Advent movement, which later on gave birth to the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Followers of the Baháʼí Faith believe that Christ did return as Miller predicted in 1844, with the advent of the Báb, and numerous Miller-like prophetic predictions from many religions are given in William Sears&#x27; book, &quot;Thief in The Night&quot;.
* 1914, 1918, and 1925: Various dates were predicted for the Second Coming of Jesus by Charles Taze Russell the founder of the Watch Tower Society and many of his successors heading his Bible Students Association which was later renamed the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.

Some predictions of the date of the rapture include the following:

* 1981: Chuck Smith predicted that Jesus would probably return by 1981.

* 1988: Edgar C. Whisenant published a book called &quot;88 Reasons Why the Rapture Will Be in 1988&quot;.
* 1994 September 6: Radio evangelist Harold Camping predicted 6 September 1994.
* 2011 May 21: Harold Camping&#x27;s revised prediction put 21 May 2011 as the date of the rapture. After this date passed without apparent incident, Camping made a radio broadcast stating that a non-visible &quot;spiritual judgement&quot; had indeed taken place, and that the physical rapture would occur on 21 October 2011. On that date, according to Camping, the &quot;whole world will be destroyed.&quot;
* 2017 September 23: Christian numerologist David Meade based this prediction on astrological theories.

==Criticism==
The theology has been criticized by child psychologists for scaring children by making them believe that the Rapture has occurred and they have been left behind when their parents have been out of sight.

== See also ==
* Bible prophecy
* Covenantalism
* Eschatology of Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses
* Kamikakushi
* &quot;The Leftovers&quot; (TV series) – American series in which a rapture-like event occurs
* Number of the beast
* Preterism
* Rapture anxiety 
* Unfulfilled Christian religious predictions

== Notes ==
== References ==

{{Reflist
| refs =





}}

== External links ==

* {{Commons category-inline|Prophecy of the Rapture}}

{{Doomsday}}

{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q870109" start="4" end="11" title="Rapture" label="Rapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="18" end="32" title="Christian eschatology" label="eschatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="55" end="65" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q25108476" start="89" end="112" title="American evangelicalism" label="American evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="131" end="139" title="Eschatology" label="end-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="370" end="401" title="dispensational premillennialism" label="dispensational premillennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475650" start="413" end="421" title="Futurism (Christianity)" label="futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="769" end="782" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="824" end="858" title="First Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="First Epistle to the Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="866" end="871" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1093" end="1110" title="Great Tribulation#Events" label="Pretribulationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="1146" end="1159" title="Second Coming" label="second coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="1193" end="1210" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q131107" start="1212" end="1227" title="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="2 Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="1233" end="1243" title="Book of Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151340" start="1307" end="1318" title="Great Tribulation" label="Tribulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="1408" end="1425" title="Millennialism" label="Messianic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="1486" end="1503" title="John Nelson Darby" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="1753" end="1775" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="1887" end="1904" title="1 Thessalonians 4" label="1 Thessalonians 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694585" start="2166" end="2172" title="Heaven in Christianity" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="2416" end="2429" title="Middle French" label="Middle French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="2440" end="2454" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2513" end="2518" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="2569" end="2580" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578200" start="2905" end="2921" title="Spiros Zodhiates" label="Spiros Zodhiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="3731" end="3744" title="Vulgate" label="Latin Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626958" start="4038" end="4052" title="Wycliffe Bible" label="Wycliffe Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462802" start="4127" end="4148" title="Tyndale New Testament" label="Tyndale New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q866134" start="4161" end="4180" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Bible" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502139" start="4193" end="4205" title="Geneva Bible" label="Geneva Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="4221" end="4239" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264194" start="4302" end="4327" title="American Standard Version" label="American Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270198" start="4340" end="4364" title="Revised Standard Version" label="Revised Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572685" start="4386" end="4410" title="English Standard Version" label="English Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200072" start="4452" end="4477" title="New International Version" label="New International Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="4601" end="4624" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="Fundamentalist Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841470" start="4626" end="4638" title="Bible church" label="Bible church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985212" start="4642" end="4659" title="Brethren Church" label="Brethren churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4669" end="4678" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="4694" end="4706" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="4708" end="4739" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="non-denominational evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4783" end="4798" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="4800" end="4823" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="4829" end="4844" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="4852" end="4870" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="4876" end="4884" title="Calvinism" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q471317" start="5005" end="5016" title="amillennialism" label="amillennial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5321" end="5353" title="Premillennialism#Dispensational school" label="dispensational premillennialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="5370" end="5382" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="5892" end="5910" title="Dispensationalism" label="dispensationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151340" start="5960" end="5971" title="tribulation" label="tribulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="6427" end="6440" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773791" start="6447" end="6473" title="Historic premillennialism" label="historic premillennialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="6490" end="6499" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="6502" end="6509" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="6662" end="6672" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="6691" end="6698" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="6703" end="6709" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="6750" end="6759" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694585" start="6868" end="6874" title="Heaven (Christianity)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="7071" end="7083" title="N. T. Wright" label="N. T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110485" start="7190" end="7216" title="Christian environmentalist" label="Christian environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493080" start="8553" end="8563" title="Premillennialism" label="chiliastic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8688" end="8709" title="[Papias of Hierapolis" label="[Papias of Hierapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="9062" end="9070" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="9759" end="9765" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q772373" start="10121" end="10138" title="School of Antioch" label="Antiochene school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333667" start="10153" end="10172" title="Historical-grammatical method" label="literal hermeneutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199991" start="10305" end="10321" title="Joachim of Fiore" label="Joachim of Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q953184" start="10761" end="10777" title="Francisco Ribera" label="Francisco Ribera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475650" start="10805" end="10813" title="Futurism (Christianity)" label="futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493080" start="11021" end="11037" title="premillennialism" label="premillennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870262" start="11073" end="11090" title="American Puritanism" label="American Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632251" start="11091" end="11106" title="Increase Mather" label="Increase Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q380719" start="11111" end="11124" title="Cotton Mather" label="Cotton Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="11239" end="11249" title="millennium" label="millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969677" start="11337" end="11353" title="Nathaniel Holmes (theologian)" label="Nathaniel Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850723" start="11368" end="11382" title="Thomas Vincent (minister)" label="Thomas Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207047" start="11384" end="11397" title="Henry Danvers (Baptist)" label="Henry Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018389" start="11403" end="11418" title="William Sherwin (minister)" label="William Sherwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718478" start="11462" end="11478" title="Philip Doddridge" label="Philip Doddridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428196" start="11483" end="11492" title="John Gill (theologian)" label="John Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="11502" end="11515" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="11621" end="11634" title="second coming" label="second coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q663216" start="11656" end="11669" title="Matthew Henry" label="Matthew Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292605" start="11890" end="11903" title="Edward Irving" label="Edward Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="11972" end="11980" title="prophecy" label="prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="12017" end="12027" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135937" start="12036" end="12055" title="James Henthorn Todd" label="James Henthorn Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412495" start="12057" end="12079" title="Samuel Roffey Maitland" label="Samuel Roffey Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="12081" end="12098" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378213" start="13030" end="13044" title="Jimmy Swaggart" label="Jimmy Swaggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346080" start="13046" end="13061" title="Robert Jeffress" label="Robert Jeffress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105442" start="13063" end="13082" title="J. Dwight Pentecost" label="J. Dwight Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q558416" start="13084" end="13094" title="Tim LaHaye" label="Tim LaHaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q835734" start="13096" end="13111" title="J. Vernon McGee" label="J. Vernon McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q115208431" start="13113" end="13124" title="Perry Stone (minister)" label="Perry Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q712231" start="13126" end="13137" title="Chuck Smith (pastor)" label="Chuck Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407611" start="13139" end="13150" title="Hal Lindsey" label="Hal Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115566" start="13152" end="13165" title="Jack Van Impe" label="Jack Van Impe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535671" start="13167" end="13179" title="Skip Heitzig" label="Skip Heitzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115627" start="13181" end="13194" title="Chuck Missler" label="Chuck Missler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596283" start="13196" end="13209" title="Grant Jeffrey" label="Grant Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790976" start="13211" end="13221" title="Thomas Ice" label="Thomas Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235633" start="13223" end="13237" title="David Jeremiah" label="David Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240738" start="13239" end="13256" title="John F. MacArthur" label="John F. MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q861718" start="13262" end="13272" title="John Hagee" label="John Hagee"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="13275" end="13292" title="John Darby (evangelist)" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="13415" end="13422" title="Puritans" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q685812" start="13565" end="13582" title="Plymouth Brethren" label="Plymouth Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="13795" end="13809" title="fundamentalism" label="fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023597" start="13922" end="13946" title="Niagara Bible Conference" label="Niagara Bible Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q460501" start="14001" end="14012" title="Historicism" label="historicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="14017" end="14025" title="Futurism" label="futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13575324" start="14293" end="14314" title="William E. Blackstone" label="William E. Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260449" start="14424" end="14448" title="Scofield Reference Bible" label="Scofield Reference Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780097" start="14683" end="14723" title="Apocalypse of Pseudo-Ephraem" label="Apocalypse of Pseudo-Ephraem the Syrian."/>
<link wikidata="Q4780100" start="15163" end="15187" title="Apocalypse of Elijah" label="The Apocalypse of Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q448586" start="15204" end="15234" title="Fra Dolcino" label="The History of Brother Dolcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911650" start="15458" end="15472" title="Morgan Edwards" label="Morgan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295548" start="15567" end="15581" title="Manuel Lacunza" label="Manuel Lacunza"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="15598" end="15615" title="John Nelson Darby" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="15655" end="15661" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765746" start="16139" end="16166" title="The Late Great Planet Earth" label="The Late Great Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660059" start="16262" end="16282" title="A Thief in the Night (film)" label="A Thief in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027525" start="16535" end="16546" title="Left Behind" label="Left Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151340" start="17395" end="17412" title="Great Tribulation" label="Great Tribulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="17707" end="17723" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q927611" start="17760" end="17774" title="Harold Ockenga" label="Harold Ockenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q870109" start="17954" end="17970" title="prewrath" label="prewrath rapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="18809" end="18819" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q997811" start="18860" end="18872" title="Seven seals" label="seventh-seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540046" start="20139" end="20149" title="George H. Lang" label="G. H. Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342863" start="20151" end="20165" title="Robert Chapman (Plymouth Brethren)" label="Robert Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q839109" start="20167" end="20179" title="G. H. Pember" label="G. H. Pember"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790309" start="20181" end="20194" title="Robert Govett" label="Robert Govett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237741" start="20196" end="20208" title="David Morrieson Panton" label="D. M. Panton"/>
<link wikidata="Q379806" start="20210" end="20222" title="Watchman Nee" label="Watchman Nee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178150" start="20238" end="20249" title="Joseph Seiss" label="J. A. Seiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q470718" start="20251" end="20264" title="Hudson Taylor" label="Hudson Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q447554" start="20266" end="20287" title="Anthony Norris Groves" label="Anthony Norris Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512182" start="20305" end="20323" title="G. Campbell Morgan" label="G. Campbell Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="21374" end="21390" title="Epistles of Paul" label="Epistles of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q48298" start="21466" end="21473" title="Shofar" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="22004" end="22017" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565861" start="22019" end="22035" title="Walter Ralston Martin" label="Walter R. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151352" start="22037" end="22047" title="John Piper (theologian)" label="John Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538945" start="22049" end="22063" title="George Eldon Ladd" label="George E. Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345058" start="22065" end="22081" title="Robert H. Gundry" label="Robert H. Gundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301648" start="22087" end="22098" title="Douglas Moo" label="Douglas Moo"/>
<link wikidata="Q764836" start="22289" end="22305" title="Loraine Boettner" label="Loraine Boettner"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="22865" end="22881" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q532375" start="22886" end="22900" title="Charles Finney" label="Charles Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="23166" end="23175" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="23301" end="23310" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="23569" end="23584" title="Numerology" label="numerologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q567888" start="24481" end="24494" title="new Jerusalem" label="new Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="25232" end="25241" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25243" end="25253" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="25255" end="25268" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="25278" end="25286" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q353723" start="25632" end="25646" title="William Miller (preacher)" label="William Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214667" start="25882" end="25902" title="Great Disappointment" label="Great Disappointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="25944" end="25959" title="Adventism" label="Advent movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="25994" end="26022" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="26041" end="26053" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="26133" end="26140" title="the Báb" label="the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580527" start="26222" end="26235" title="William Sears (Baháʼí)" label="William Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q313456" start="26367" end="26387" title="Charles Taze Russell" label="Charles Taze Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q898067" start="26407" end="26426" title="Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania" label="Watch Tower Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348298" start="26466" end="26492" title="International Bible Students Association" label="Bible Students Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="26521" end="26545" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q712231" start="26624" end="26635" title="Chuck Smith (pastor)" label="Chuck Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337157" start="26697" end="26715" title="Edgar C. Whisenant" label="Edgar C. Whisenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q380678" start="26833" end="26847" title="Harold Camping" label="Harold Camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q380678" start="26891" end="26905" title="Harold Camping" label="Harold Camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740637" start="26913" end="26931" title="2011 end times prediction" label="revised prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="27316" end="27328" title="numerologist" label="numerologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700746" start="27329" end="27340" title="David Meade (author)" label="David Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915341" start="27626" end="27640" title="Bible prophecy" label="Bible prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373014" start="27643" end="27656" title="Covenantalism" label="Covenantalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373646" start="27659" end="27698" title="Eschatology of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Eschatology of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443949" start="27701" end="27712" title="Kamikakushi" label="Kamikakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468818" start="27715" end="27752" title="The Leftovers (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Leftovers&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="27810" end="27829" title="Number of the beast" label="Number of the beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q691393" start="27832" end="27841" title="Preterism" label="Preterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124096687" start="27844" end="27859" title="Rapture anxiety" label="Rapture anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884421" start="27863" end="27906" title="Unfulfilled Christian religious predictions" label="Unfulfilled Christian religious predictions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66199" wikidata="Q189950" url="?curid=66199" title="Osip Mandelstam">
<text>Osip Emilyevich Mandelstam (, ; – 27 December 1938) was a Russian and Soviet poet. He was one of the foremost members of the Acmeist school.

Osip Mandelstam was arrested during the repressions of the 1930s and sent into internal exile with his wife, Nadezhda Mandelstam. Given a reprieve of sorts, they moved to Voronezh in southwestern Russia. In 1938, Mandelstam was arrested again and sentenced to five years in a corrective-labour camp in the Soviet Far East. He died that year at a transit camp near Vladivostok.

==Life and work==
Mandelstam was born on 14 January 1891 in Warsaw, Congress Poland, Russian Empire, to a wealthy Polish-Jewish family. His father, a leather merchant by trade, was able to receive a dispensation freeing the family from the Pale of Settlement. Soon after Osip&#x27;s birth, they moved to Saint Petersburg. In 1900, Mandelstam entered the prestigious Tenishev School. His first poems were printed in 1907 in the school&#x27;s almanac. As a schoolboy, he was introduced by a friend to members of the illegal Socialist Revolutionary Party, including Mark Natanson, and the revolutionary Grigory Gershuni.

In April 1908, Mandelstam decided to enter the Sorbonne in Paris to study literature and philosophy, but he left the following year to attend the University of Heidelberg in Germany. In 1911, he decided to continue his education at the University of Saint Petersburg, from which Jews were excluded. He converted to Methodism and entered the university the same year. He did not complete a formal degree.

Mandelstam&#x27;s poetry, acutely populist in spirit after the first Russian revolution in 1905, became closely associated with symbolist imagery. In 1911, he and several other young Russian poets formed the &quot;Poets&#x27; Guild&quot;, under the formal leadership of Nikolai Gumilyov and Sergei Gorodetsky. The nucleus of this group became known as Acmeists. Mandelstam wrote the manifesto for the new movement: &quot;The Morning Of Acmeism&quot; (1913, published in 1919). In 1913 he published his first collection of poems, &quot;The Stone&quot;; it was reissued in 1916 under the same title, but with additional poems included.

==Political persecution and death==
In 1922, Mandelstam and Nadezhda moved to Moscow. At this time, his second book of poems, &quot;Tristia&quot;, was published in Berlin. For several years after that, he almost completely abandoned poetry, concentrating on essays, literary criticism, memoirs &quot;The Noise Of Time&quot;, &quot;Feodosiya&quot; – both 1925; (&quot;Noise of Time&quot; 1993 in English) and small-format prose &quot;The Egyptian Stamp&quot; (1928). As a day job, he translated literature into Russian (19 books in 6 years), then worked as a correspondent for a newspaper.

=== First arrest ===

In the autumn of 1933, Mandelstam composed the poem &quot;Stalin Epigram&quot;, which he recited at a few small private gatherings in Moscow. The poem deliberately insulted the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin:
&lt;poem&gt;
His thick fingers are bulky and fat like live-baits,
And his accurate words are as heavy as weights.
Cucaracha’s moustaches are screaming,
And his boot-tops are shining and gleaming.
&lt;/poem&gt;

In the original version, the one that was handed in to the police, he called Stalin the &quot;peasant slayer&quot;, as well as pointing out that he had fat fingers. Six months later, on the night of 16–17 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested by three NKVD officers who arrived at his flat with a search warrant signed by Yakov Agranov. His wife hoped at first that this was over a fracas that had taken place in Leningrad a few days earlier, when Mandlestam slapped the writer Alexei Tolstoy because of a perceived insult to Nadezhda, but under interrogation he was confronted with a copy of the Stalin Epigram, and immediately admitted to being its author, believing that it was wrong in principle for a poet to renounce his own work. Neither he nor Nadezhda had ever risked writing it down, suggesting that one of the trusted friends to whom he recited it had memorised it, and handed a written copy to the police. It has never been established who it was.

Mandelstam anticipated that insulting Stalin would carry the death penalty, but Nadezhda and Anna Akhmatova started a campaign to save him, and succeeded in creating &quot;a kind of special atmosphere, with people fussing and whispering to each other.&quot; The Lithuanian ambassador in Moscow, Jurgis Baltrušaitis warned delegates at a conference of journalists that the regime appeared to be on the verge of killing a renowned poet. Boris Pasternak – who disapproved of the tone of the Epigram – nonetheless appealed to the eminent Bolshevik, Nikolai Bukharin, to intervene. Bukharin, who had known the Mandelstams since the early 1920s and had frequently helped them, approached the head of the NKVD, and wrote a note to Stalin.

=== Exile ===
On 26 May, Mandelstam was sentenced neither to death, nor even the Gulag, but to three years&#x27; exile in Cherdyn in the Northern Ural, where he was accompanied by his wife. This escape was looked upon as a &quot;miracle&quot; – but the strain of his interrogation had driven Mandelstam to the verge of insanity. He later wrote that &quot;at my side, my wife did not sleep for five nights&quot; – but when they arrived at Cherdyn, she fell asleep, in the upper floor of a hospital, and he attempted suicide by throwing himself out of the window. His brother, Alexander, appealed to the police for his brother to be given proper psychiatric care, and on 10 June, there was a second &quot;miracle&quot;, which banished Mandelstam from the twelve largest Soviet cities, but otherwise allowed him to choose his place of exile.

Mandelstam and his wife chose Voronezh, possibly, partly, because the name appealed to him. In April 1935, he wrote a four line poem that included the pun – &quot;Voronezh – blazh&#x27;, Voronezh – voron, nozh&quot; meaning &#x27;Voronezh is a whim, Voronezh – a raven, a knife.&#x27;. Just after their arrival, Boris Pasternak received a phone call from Stalin – his only conversation with the dictator, in which Stalin wanted to know whether Mandelstam really was a talented poet. &quot;He&#x27;s a genius, isn&#x27;t he?&quot; he is reputed to have asked Pasternak.

During these three years, Mandelstam wrote a collection of poems known as the &quot;Voronezh Notebooks&quot;, which included the cycle &quot;Verses on the Unknown Soldier&quot;. 

Actually, the fact that Stalin had given an order to &quot;isolate and preserve&quot; Mandelstam meant that he was safe from further persecution, temporarily. In Voronezh, he was even granted a face-to-face meeting with the local head of the NKVD, Semyon Dukelsky, who told him &quot;write what you like&quot;, and turned down an offer by Mandelstam to send in every poem he wrote to police headquarters. After that meeting, NKVD agents ceased shadowing the couple. There is a story, possibly apocryphal, that Mandelstam even rang Dukelsky to recite poetry over the phone.

===Second arrest and death===

Mandelstam&#x27;s three-year period of exile ended in May 1937, when the Great Purge was under way. The previous winter, he had forced himself to write his &quot;Ode to Stalin,&quot; hoping it would protect him against further persecution. The couple no longer had the right to live in Moscow, so lived in nearby Kalinin (Tver), and visited the capital, where they relied on friends to put them up. In the spring of 1938, Mandelstam was granted an interview with the head of the Writers&#x27; Union Vladimir Stavsky, who granted him a two-week holiday for two in a rest home outside Moscow. This was a trap. The previous month, on 16 March – the day after the Mandelstams&#x27; former protector, Nikolai Bukharin had been sentenced to death – Stavsky had written to the head of the NKVD, Nikolay Yezhov, denouncing Mandelstam. Getting him out of Moscow made it possible to arrest him without setting off a reaction. He was arrested while on holiday, on 5 May (ref. camp document of 12 October 1938, signed by Mandelstam), and charged with &quot;counter-revolutionary activities.&quot;

Four months later, on 2 August 1938, Mandelstam was sentenced to five years in correction camps. He arrived at the Vtoraya Rechka (Second River) transit camp near Vladivostok in Russia&#x27;s Far East. From the Vladperpunkt transit camp he sent his last letter to his brother and his wife, writing: &quot;I&#x27;m in Vladivostok, SVITL, barracks 11. I got 5 years for K.R.D. [counterrevolutionary activity] by the decision of the OSO. From Moscow, left from Butyrka on September 9, arrived on October 12. Health is very poor. Exhausted to the extreme. Have lost weight, almost unrecognizable. But I don&#x27;t know if there is any sense in sending clothes, food and money. Try it, all the same. I&#x27;m freezing without proper things.&quot;

On 27 December 1938, three weeks before his 48th birthday, Osip Mandelstam died in a transit camp of typhoid fever. His death was described later in a short story &quot;Cherry Brandy&quot; by Varlam Shalamov, who notes that his fellow inmates concealed his death for two days so they could continue to collect his rations. His body lay unburied until spring, along with the other deceased. Then the entire &quot;winter stack&quot; was buried in a mass grave.

Mandelstam&#x27;s own prophecy was fulfilled: &quot;Only in Russia is poetry respected, it gets people killed. Is there anywhere else where poetry is so common a motive for murder?&quot; Nadezhda wrote memoirs about her life and times with her husband in &quot;Hope against Hope&quot; (1970) and &quot;Hope Abandoned&quot;. She also managed to preserve a significant part of Mandelstam&#x27;s unpublished work.

==Marriage and family==
In 1916, Mandelstam was passionately involved with the poet Marina Tsvetayeva. According to her biographer, &quot;Of the many love affairs with men that Marina embarked upon with such intensity during this period, it was probably the only one that was physically consummated.&quot; Mandelstam was said to have had an affair with the poet Anna Akhmatova. She insisted throughout her life that their relationship had always been a very deep friendship, rather than a sexual affair. In the 1910s, he was in love, secretly and unrequitedly, with a Georgian princess and St. Petersburg socialite Salomea Andronikova, to whom Mandelstam dedicated his poem &quot;Solominka&quot; (1916).

In 1922, Mandelstam married Nadezhda Mandelstam in Kiev, Ukraine, where she lived with her family, but the couple settled in Moscow. He continued to be attracted to other women, sometimes seriously. Their marriage was threatened by his falling in love with other women, notably Olga Vaksel in 1924–25 and Mariya Petrovykh in 1933–34. Nadezha Mandelstam formed a lifelong friendship with Anna Akhmatova, who was a guest in the Mandelstam&#x27;s apartment when he was arrested for the first time, but complained that she could never be friendly with Tsvetayeva, partly because &quot;I had decided on Akhmatova as &#x27;top&#x27; woman poet&quot;. She also complained that Tsvetayeva could not take her eyes off her husband, and that &quot;she accused me of being jealous of her.&quot;

During Mandelstam&#x27;s years of imprisonment in 1934–38, Nadezhda accompanied him into exile. Given the real danger that all copies of Osip&#x27;s poetry would be destroyed, she worked to memorize his entire corpus, as well as to hide and preserve select paper manuscripts, all the while dodging her own arrest. In the 1960s and 1970s, as the political climate thawed, she was largely responsible for arranging clandestine republication of Mandelstam&#x27;s poetry.

==Posthumous reputation and influence==
*Dutch composer Marjo Tal (1915–2006) set several of Mandelstam&#x27;s poems to music.
*In 1956, during the Khrushchev thaw, Mandelstam was rehabilitated and exonerated from the charges brought against him in 1938.
*The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation aired &quot;Hope Against Hope&quot;, a radio dramatization about Mandelstam&#x27;s poetry based on the book of the same title by Nadezhda Mandelstam, on 1 February 1972. The script was written by George Whalley, a Canadian scholar and critic, and the broadcast was produced by John Reeves.
*In 1977, a minor planet, 3461 Mandelshtam, discovered by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh, was named after him.
*That same year, American author Saul Bellow mentioned Mandelstam in the annual Jefferson Lecture for the National Endowment for the Arts. Bellow claimed that Mandelstam &quot;carried a pocket edition of Dante&#x27;s &quot;Widow&quot; just in case he was arrested, not at home but in the street.&quot;
*On 28 October 1987, during the administration of Mikhail Gorbachev, Mandelstam was also exonerated from the 1934 charges and thus fully rehabilitated.
*In 1998, a monument was put up in Vladivostok in his memory.
* In 2020, Noemi Jaffe, a Brazilian writer, wrote a book about his persecution and how his wife managed to preserve his work, called &quot;What she whispers&quot; (O que ela sussurra).
*In 2021, the album &quot;Sokhrani moyu rech&#x27; navsegda&quot; () was released in honor of the 130th anniversary of Mandelstam&#x27;s birth. The album is a compilation of songs based on Mandelstam&#x27;s poems by artists such as Oxxxymiron, Leonid Agutin, Ilya Lagutenko, Shortparis, and Noize MC.

== Bibliography ==
=== Prose ===
*&quot;The Noise Of Time&quot; (1925, collection of autobiographical sketches)
*&quot;The Egyptian Stamp&quot; (1928, short novel) 
*&quot;The Fourth Prose&quot; (1930) 
*&quot;Journey to Armenia&quot; (1933, collection of travel sketches)

=== Poetry collections ===
*&quot;Stone&quot; (1913/1916/1923)
*&quot;Tristia&quot; (1922)
*&quot;Second Book&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Poems 1921–1925&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Poems&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Moscow Notebooks&quot; (1930–34) 
*&quot;Voronezh Notebooks&quot; (1934–37)

=== Essays ===
*&quot;On Poetry&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Conversation about Dante&quot; (1933; published in 1967)

===Selected translations===
* Ahkmatova, Mandelstam, and Gumilev (2013) &quot;Poems from the Stray Dog Cafe&quot;, translated by Meryl Natchez, with Polina Barskova and Boris Wofson, hit &amp; run press, (Berkeley, CA) 
* Mandelstam, Osip and Struve, Gleb (1955) &quot;Sobranie sočinenij&quot; (&quot;Collected works&quot;). New York 
* Mandelstam, Osip (1973) &quot;Selected Poems&quot;, translated by David McDuff, Rivers Press (Cambridge) and, with minor revisions, Farrar, Straus and Giroux (New York)
* Mandelstam, Osip (1973) &quot;The Complete Poetry of Osip Emilevich Mandelstam&quot;, translated by Burton Raffel and Alla Burago. State University of New York Press (USA)
* Mandelstam, Osip (1973) &quot;The Goldfinch&quot;. Introduction and translations by Donald Rayfield. The Menard Press
* Mandelstam, Osip (1974). &quot;Selected Poems,&quot; translated by and W. S. Merwin. NY: Atheneum, 1974.
* Mandelstam, Osip (1976) &quot;Octets 66–76&quot;, translated by Donald Davie, &quot;Agenda&quot; vol. 14, no. 2, 1976.
* Mandelstam, Osip (1977) &quot;50 Poems&quot;, translated by Bernard Meares with an Introductory Essay by Joseph Brodsky. Persea Books (New York)
* Mandelstam, Osip (1980) &quot;Poems&quot;. Edited and translated by James Greene. (1977) Elek Books, revised and enlarged edition, Granada/Elek, 1980.
* Mandelstam, Osip (1981) &quot;Stone&quot;, translated by Robert Tracy. Princeton University Press (USA)
* Mandelstam, Osip (1991) &quot;The Moscow Notebooks&quot;, translated by Richard &amp; Elizabeth McKane. Bloodaxe Books (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) 
* Mandelstam, Osip (1993, 2002) &quot;The Noise of Time: Selected Prose&quot;, translated by Clarence Brown, Northwestern University Press; Reprint edition 
* Mandelstam, Osip (1996) &quot;The Voronezh Notebooks&quot;, translated by Richard &amp; Elizabeth McKane. Bloodaxe Books (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) 
* Mandelstam, Osip (1991) &quot;The Moscow &amp; Voronezh Notebooks&quot;, translated by Richard &amp; Elizabeth McKane. Bloodaxe Books (Tarset, Northumberland, UK) 
* Mandlestam, Osip (2012) &quot;Stolen Air&quot;, translated by Christian Wiman. HarperCollins (USA)
* Mandelstam, Osip (2018) &quot;Concert at a Railway Station. Selected Poems&quot;, translated by Alistair Noon. Shearsman Books (Bristol)
* Mandelstam, Osip (2022) &quot;The Voronezh Workbooks&quot;, translated by Alistair Noon, Shearsman Books (Swindon)
* Mandelstam, Osip (2022) &quot;Occasional and Joke Poems&quot;, translated by Alistair Noon, Shearsman Books (Swindon)

==Reviews==
* McCarey, Peter (1982), review of &quot;Osip Mandelstam&#x27;s &quot;Stone&quot;&quot; translated by Robert Tracy and &quot;Poems&quot; chosen and translated by James Greene, in Murray, Glen (ed.), &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 8, Spring 1982, p. 49, 

==References==
==Further reading==
* Coetzee, J.M. &quot;Osip Mandelstam and the Stalin Ode&quot;, &quot;Representations&quot;, No.35, &quot;Special Issue: Monumental Histories&quot;. (Summer 1991), pp. 72–83.
* Davie, Donald (1977) &quot;In the Stopping Train&quot; Carcanet (Manchester)
* Freidin, Gregory (1987) &quot;A Coat of Many Colors: Osip Mandelstam and His Mythologies of Self-Presentation&quot;. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London
* Анатолий Ливри, &quot;Мандельштам в пещере Заратустры&quot;, – в &quot;Вестнике Университета Российской Академии Образования&quot;, ВАК, 1 – 2014, Москва, с. 9 – 21. Copie of Nietzsche.ru : . Version française : Anatoly Livry, Nietzscheforschung, Berlin, Humboldt-Universität, 2013, Band 20, S. 313–324 : Mandelstam, un dionysiaque nietzschéen
* Dr. Anatoly Livry, « Mandelstam le nietzschéen: une origine créative inattendue » dans Журнал Вісник Дніпропетровського університету імені Альфреда Нобеля. Серія «Філологічні науки» зареєстровано в міжнародних наукометричних базах Index Copernicus, РИНЦ, 1 (13) 2017, Університет імені Альфреда Нобеля, м. Дніпро, The Magazine is inscribed by the Higher Certifying Commission on the index of leading reviewing scientific periodicals for publications of main dissertation of academic degree of Doctor and Candidate of Science, p. 58–67. http://anatoly-livry.e-monsite.com/medias/files/1-13-2017.pdf
* MacKay, John (2006) &quot;Inscription and Modernity: From Wordsworth to Mandelstam.&quot; Bloomington: Indiana University Press 
* Nilsson N. A. (1974) &quot;Osip Mandel&#x27;štam: Five Poems&quot;. (Stockholm)
* Platt, Kevin, editor (2008) &quot;Modernist Archaist: Selected Poems by Osip Mandelstam&quot; 
* Riley, John (1980) &quot;The Collected Works&quot;. Grossteste (Derbyshire)
* Ronen, O. (1983) &quot;An Аpproach to Mandelstam&quot;. (Jerusalem)
* Mikhail Berman-Tsikinovsky (2008), play &quot;Continuation of Mandelstam&quot; (published by Vagrius, Moscow. )

==External links==

* Poetry Foundation. Poems and biography. Accessed 11 September 2010.
* Finding aid to the Osip Mandel&#x27;shtam Papers at the Princeton University Library. Accessed 19 August 2021.
* Osip Mandelstam poetry at Stihipoeta
* Academy of American Poets, Biography of Mandelstam. Accessed 11 September 2010.
* Osip Mandelstam: New Translations (e-chapbook from Ugly Duckling Presse) 
* , Poems &quot;&quot;How on Kama the river&quot; and &quot;Life fell&quot;&quot; dedicated to the wife of the poet, Nadezhda Mandelstam; music and performance by Larisa Novoseltseva.
* The Poems of Osip Mandelstam (ebook of poems in translation, mostly from the 1930s)
* English translation of Osip Mandelstam&#x27;s longest and only free verse poem, &quot;He Who Had Found a Horseshoe,&quot; in the New England Review
* English translation of Osip Mandelstam&#x27;s poems &quot;Menagerie&quot; (1915) and &quot;The Sky is Pregnant with the Future&quot; (1923, 1929) in the Colorado Review
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189950" start="0" end="26" title="Osip Mandelstam" label="Osip Emilyevich Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q420245" start="125" end="132" title="Acmeist poetry" label="Acmeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="182" end="206" title="Great Purge" label="repressions of the 1930s"/>
<link wikidata="Q234765" start="251" end="270" title="Nadezhda Mandelstam" label="Nadezhda Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426" start="313" end="321" title="Voronezh" label="Voronezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4228434" start="418" end="440" title="corrective-labour camp" label="corrective-labour camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="448" end="463" title="Russian Far East" label="Soviet Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="506" end="517" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="580" end="586" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="588" end="603" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="605" end="619" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="634" end="647" title="Polish-Jewish" label="Polish-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="760" end="778" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="824" end="840" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="1042" end="1071" title="Socialist Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q978605" start="1083" end="1096" title="Mark Natanson" label="Mark Natanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937448" start="1120" end="1136" title="Grigory Gershuni" label="Grigory Gershuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1186" end="1194" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1198" end="1203" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="1285" end="1309" title="University of Heidelberg" label="University of Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27621" start="1375" end="1405" title="University of Saint Petersburg" label="University of Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="1454" end="1463" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="1578" end="1586" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="1607" end="1631" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="first Russian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="1672" end="1681" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311033" start="1814" end="1830" title="Nikolai Gumilyov" label="Nikolai Gumilyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072175" start="1835" end="1852" title="Sergei Gorodetsky" label="Sergei Gorodetsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q420245" start="1896" end="1904" title="Acmeist poetry" label="Acmeists"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2257" end="2263" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2343" end="2349" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31506" start="2849" end="2863" title="Stalin Epigram" label="Stalin Epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2982" end="2995" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="3456" end="3460" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627631" start="3526" end="3539" title="Yakov Agranov" label="Yakov Agranov"/>
<link wikidata="Q192279" start="3682" end="3696" title="Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy" label="Alexei Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80440" start="4258" end="4272" title="Anna Akhmatova" label="Anna Akhmatova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378046" start="4460" end="4479" title="Jurgis Baltrušaitis" label="Jurgis Baltrušaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41223" start="4600" end="4615" title="Boris Pasternak" label="Boris Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="4710" end="4726" title="Nikolai Bukharin" label="Nikolai Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="4979" end="4984" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q197934" start="5020" end="5027" title="Cherdyn, Perm Krai" label="Cherdyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322976" start="5044" end="5048" title="Ural (region)" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426" start="5768" end="5776" title="Voronezh" label="Voronezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15066115" start="6736" end="6751" title="Semyon Dukelsky" label="Semyon Dukelsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="7166" end="7177" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288" start="7415" end="7419" title="Tver" label="Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439051" start="7592" end="7608" title="Vladimir Stavsky" label="Vladimir Stavsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q141860" start="7881" end="7895" title="Nikolay Yezhov" label="Nikolay Yezhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="8138" end="8159" title="counter-revolutionary" label="counter-revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="8342" end="8353" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575240" start="8509" end="8514" title="Sevvostlag" label="SVITL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387895" start="8609" end="8612" title="Special Council of the NKVD" label="OSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018222" start="8637" end="8644" title="Butyrka prison" label="Butyrka"/>
<link wikidata="Q220816" start="9114" end="9129" title="Varlam Shalamov" label="Varlam Shalamov"/>
<link wikidata="Q188526" start="9878" end="9895" title="Marina Tsvetaeva" label="Marina Tsvetayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q80440" start="10156" end="10170" title="Anna Akhmatova" label="Anna Akhmatova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470039" start="10409" end="10428" title="Salomea Andronikova" label="Salomea Andronikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q234765" start="10527" end="10546" title="Nadezhda Mandelstam" label="Nadezhda Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="10550" end="10554" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987131" start="10804" end="10820" title="Mariya Petrovykh" label="Mariya Petrovykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629088" start="11808" end="11817" title="Marjo Tal" label="Marjo Tal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164547" start="11900" end="11915" title="Khrushchev thaw" label="Khrushchev thaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q705943" start="11932" end="11945" title="Rehabilitation (Soviet)" label="rehabilitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546194" start="12242" end="12256" title="George Whalley" label="George Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12323" end="12334" title="John Reeves (composer)" label="John Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="12348" end="12360" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="12362" end="12378" title="3461 Mandelshtam" label="3461 Mandelshtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q318611" start="12412" end="12440" title="Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh" label="Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="12496" end="12507" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175526" start="12543" end="12560" title="Jefferson Lecture" label="Jefferson Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="12569" end="12600" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="12667" end="12672" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="12815" end="12832" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q10337203" start="12990" end="13001" title="Noemi Jaffe" label="Noemi Jaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046107" start="13396" end="13406" title="Oxxxymiron" label="Oxxxymiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q337404" start="13408" end="13421" title="Leonid Agutin" label="Leonid Agutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658597" start="13423" end="13437" title="Ilya Lagutenko" label="Ilya Lagutenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60853654" start="13439" end="13449" title="Shortparis" label="Shortparis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026639" start="13455" end="13463" title="Noize MC" label="Noize MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771936" start="14362" end="14374" title="Gleb Struve" label="Struve, Gleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000906" start="14727" end="14740" title="Burton Raffel" label="Burton Raffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692031" start="15112" end="15118" title="Agenda (poetry journal)" label="Agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q862" start="15254" end="15268" title="Joseph Brodsky" label="Joseph Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q43293" start="16952" end="16965" title="J. M. Coetzee" label="Coetzee, J.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1311302" start="18611" end="18622" title="John Riley (poet)" label="Riley, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397665" start="18689" end="18698" title="Omry Ronen" label="Ronen, O."/>
<link wikidata="Q79082" start="19301" end="19305" title="Kama (river)" label="Kama"/>
<link wikidata="Q234765" start="19389" end="19408" title="Nadezhda Mandelstam" label="Nadezhda Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489449" start="19435" end="19454" title="Larisa Novoseltseva" label="Larisa Novoseltseva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66200" wikidata="Q691389" url="?curid=66200" title="Exquisite corpse">
<text>Exquisite corpse (from the original French term , ) is a method by which a collection of words or images is collectively assembled. Each collaborator adds to a composition in sequence, either by following a rule (e.g., &quot;The &quot;adjective&quot; &quot;noun&quot; &quot;adverb&quot; &quot;verb&quot; the &quot;adjective&quot; &quot;noun&quot;.&quot; as in &quot;The green duck sweetly sang the dreadful dirge.&quot;) or by being allowed to see only the end of what the previous person contributed.

==History==
This technique was invented by surrealists and is similar to an old parlour game called consequences in which players write in turn on a sheet of paper, fold it to conceal part of the writing, and then pass it to the next player for a further contribution. Surrealism principal founder André Breton reported that it started in fun, but became playful and eventually enriching. Breton said the diversion started about 1925, but Pierre Reverdy wrote that it started much earlier, at least as early as 1918.

The name is derived from a phrase that resulted when Surrealists first played the game, &quot; (&quot;The exquisite corpse shall drink the new wine.&quot;) André Breton writes that the game developed at the residence of friends at an old house in Montparnasse, 54 rue du Château (no longer existing). Besides himself he mentions Marcel Duhamel, Jacques Prévert, Yves Tanguy and Benjamin Péret as original participants.
Henry Miller often played the game to pass time in French cafés during the 1930s.

In 1932, artists Frida Kahlo and Lucienne Bloch created two near-nude exquisite corpses. One is titled &quot;Frida&quot; and the other &quot;Diego&quot; (likely meant to represent Kahlo herself and her husband, muralist Diego Rivera).

==Picture consequences==

Later the game was adapted to drawing and collage, in a version called picture consequences, with portions of a person replacing the written sentence fragments of the original. The person is traditionally drawn in four steps: The head, the torso, the legs and the feet with the paper folded after each portion so that later participants cannot see earlier portions. The finished product is similar to children&#x27;s books in which the pages were cut into thirds, the top third pages showing the head of a person or animal, the middle third the torso, and the bottom third the legs, with children having the ability to &quot;mix and match&quot; by turning pages.

Another variation of the exquisite corpse also called &quot;picture consequences&quot; is Telephone Pictionary, a game in which players alternate writing descriptions and matching illustrations based on the previous step.

==In popular culture==

*&quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; (1996) is a Gothic horror novel by Poppy Z. Brite.
* &quot;Space and Time&quot; magazine builds a community exquisite corpse monthly on their website.
*&quot;Naked Came the Stranger&quot; is a 1969 erotic novel written as a literary hoax to parody American literary trends of the time. The credited author is the fictive &quot;Penelope Ashe&quot;, though it was written by twenty-four journalists led by Mike McGrady, with each author writing a chapter without any knowledge of what the others had written. 
* &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; is a literary magazine founded in 1983 (later in online version from 1999) published by Andrei Codrescu.
* &quot;Naked Came the Manatee&quot; (Putnam, 1996) is a mystery thriller parody novel. Each of its thirteen chapters was written, in sequence, by a different Florida writer, beginning with Dave Barry and ending with Carl Hiaasen.
*&quot;Folio of 28 Exquisite corpse drawings&quot; collected from Queensland Art Gallery&#x27;s First Asia Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art (APT1) artists&#x27; retreat, Bangalow, NSW, 20–23 September 1993. Held in the QAGOMA Research Library collection.

=== Art ===
* &quot;The Narrative Corpse&quot; (Gates of Heck, 1995) is a comic book chain-story by 69 all-star cartoonists co-edited by Art Spiegelman and R. Sikoryak.
* The &quot;Breaking Boredom Project&quot; in graphic design, Cairo (2008).
* &quot;The Exquisite Corpse Adventure&quot; (Candlewick, 2011), commissioned by the Library of Congress, uses well-known children&#x27;s authors and illustrators
*Jake and Dinos Chapman have produced a number of exquisite corpses.
* Eric Croes, &quot;Cadavre exquis, Chat Santiag&quot; (2017). Croes used his exquisite corpse drawing to make this clay sculpture.
* &quot;A Cheese and Tomato Spider&quot; (1998) and a number of other books by author Nick Sharratt allow children to construct crazy combinations from images on half-pages.
* &quot;Exquisite Corpus&quot; (2022) by Kevin Blackistone uses machine learning to create &quot;3d chimeras of the human interior&quot; using medical imaging data.

=== Film and television ===
* Apichatpong Weerasethakul&#x27;s 2000 film &quot;Mysterious Object at Noon&quot; uses this technique with a mixture of documentary and fictional film.
* &quot;The Exquisite Corpse Project&quot; is a 2012 feature-length comedy film written using the exquisite corpse technique.
* A &quot;Rick and Morty&quot; 2017 trailer for season 3 titled &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; features a sequence to the song &quot;Thursday in the Danger Room&quot; from the album &quot;Run the Jewels 3&quot; by Run the Jewels.
* &quot;Exquisite Corps&quot; as well as &quot;And So Say All of Us&quot; are choreographic versions by filmmaker Mitchell Rose.
* A sketch in Limmy&#x27;s Show Season 3 Episode 1 involves a game of exquisite corpse being played in a bar.

=== Music ===
*In the 1940s, composers John Cage, Virgil Thomson, Henry Cowell, and Lou Harrison, composed a set of pieces using this same process—writing a measure of music, with 1 or 2 additional notes (sources differ), folding it on the bar line then passing it to the next person. The pieces were later arranged by Robert Hughes and published as &quot;Party Pieces&quot;.
*The band Bauhaus include the track &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; on their third studio album (&quot;The Sky&#x27;s Gone Out&quot;) (1982), which appears to have been created in this collaborative surrealist style. They returned to the method for 2022&#x27;s &quot;Drink the New Wine&quot;, their first new song in 14 years.
*The fifth track on the 1992 album Sacred City by the British rock band Shriekback is &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot;.
* The They Might Be Giants 1996 song &quot;Exquisite Dead Guy.&quot;
* The musical &quot;Hedwig and the Angry Inch&quot; (1998) includes the song &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot;.
* The band Warpaint named their debut EP &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; (2008) because of their collaborative songwriting style.
* George Watsky&#x27;s 2016 album &quot;x Infinity&quot; features the song &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; using this technique featuring verses by several artists.
* In December 2019, French alternative-pop-rock band Therapie TAXI released the album &quot;Cadavre Exquis&quot;, relating to the artistic visuals and collaborative production of the opus.
*Swedish composer Anders Hillborg uses the technique in his 2002 orchestral work &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot;.
* In September 2020, Polyvinyl Records released an 11-track compilation titled &quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot;, featuring over 45 of the label&#x27;s artists including The Get Up Kids, Jeff Rosenstock and American Football, among others. The tracks were recorded remotely in the style of the game during the COVID-19 pandemic and a portion of the physical and digital album sales were donated to the non-profit MusiCares.
* In August 2022, the free improvisation group G.at.0 (Pedro Alcalde, Núria Andorrà, Marina Hervás, Wade Matthews, Henar Rivière) presented &quot;17 minutes of free improvisation (&quot;Cadavre Exquis&quot;)&quot; at the &quot;IF 2022 – Improvisation Festival&quot;, organized and streamed online by the International Institute for Critical Studies in Improvisation (IICSI) at the University of Guelph, Canada. The piece, co-presented by 17, Instituto de Estudios Críticos, was an example of collective spontaneous creation, where each performer contributed unpredictably, resulting in a collaborative and experimental sonic work.

=== Architecture ===

* In 2018, Simon Weir began producing catenary vaults where a dozen designers collaborate blindly using the exquisite corpse method.

=== Games ===
*In &quot;... and then we died&quot;, players use word-fragment tarot cards to form words to tell the story of their collective deaths.

==See also==
* Photoshop tennis
* Poietic Generator
* Comic jam
* Round-robin story
* Mindmap
* Surrealist techniques
* Chinese whispers
* Mad Libs
* Reanimated collaboration

==Notes==
==External links==
*&quot;Exquisite Corpse&quot; (2006–2014), a collaborative digital illustration by artists James apRoberts and Brian Christopher</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q691389" start="0" end="16" title="Exquisite corpse" label="Exquisite corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="235" end="244" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="257" end="261" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="274" end="280" title="adverb" label="adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="293" end="297" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="546" end="556" title="surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947863" start="583" end="595" title="parlour game" label="parlour game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162887" start="603" end="615" title="Consequences (game)" label="consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="801" end="813" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q379931" start="942" end="956" title="Pierre Reverdy" label="Pierre Reverdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211604" start="1268" end="1280" title="Montparnasse" label="Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q350880" start="1350" end="1364" title="Marcel Duhamel" label="Marcel Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165274" start="1366" end="1381" title="Jacques Prévert" label="Jacques Prévert"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809948" start="1383" end="1394" title="Yves Tanguy" label="Yves Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q284769" start="1399" end="1413" title="Benjamin Péret" label="Benjamin Péret"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="1440" end="1452" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="1540" end="1551" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697152" start="1556" end="1570" title="Lucienne Bloch" label="Lucienne Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="1743" end="1755" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q93184" start="1815" end="1822" title="drawing" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="1827" end="1834" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q151939" start="2539" end="2559" title="Telephone Pictionary" label="Telephone Pictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198895" start="2703" end="2719" title="Exquisite Corpse (novel)" label="Exquisite Corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572560" start="2785" end="2799" title="Space and Time (magazine)" label="Space and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130676" start="2884" end="2907" title="Naked Came the Stranger" label="Naked Came the Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958155" start="2950" end="2963" title="Literary forgery" label="literary hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q18473228" start="3130" end="3142" title="Mike McGrady" label="Mike McGrady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907822" start="3353" end="3368" title="Andrei Codrescu" label="Andrei Codrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070923" start="3378" end="3400" title="Naked Came the Manatee" label="Naked Came the Manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q673567" start="3560" end="3570" title="Dave Barry" label="Dave Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q726177" start="3587" end="3599" title="Carl Hiaasen" label="Carl Hiaasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753091" start="3882" end="3902" title="The Narrative Corpse" label="The Narrative Corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q325945" start="3999" end="4013" title="Art Spiegelman" label="Art Spiegelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069084" start="4018" end="4029" title="R. Sikoryak" label="R. Sikoryak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959540" start="4043" end="4067" title="Breaking Boredom Project" label="Breaking Boredom Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="4192" end="4211" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q953124" start="4271" end="4293" title="Jake and Dinos Chapman" label="Jake and Dinos Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027914" start="4557" end="4570" title="Nick Sharratt" label="Nick Sharratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="4709" end="4725" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="4788" end="4803" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q445198" start="4841" end="4866" title="Apichatpong Weerasethakul" label="Apichatpong Weerasethakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331723" start="4890" end="4915" title="Mysterious Object at Noon" label="Mysterious Object at Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732874" start="5000" end="5028" title="The Exquisite Corpse Project" label="The Exquisite Corpse Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q15659308" start="5128" end="5142" title="Rick and Morty" label="Rick and Morty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127628" start="5304" end="5320" title="Run the Jewels 3" label="Run the Jewels 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052731" start="5330" end="5344" title="Run the Jewels" label="Run the Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881379" start="5460" end="5473" title="Mitchell Rose" label="Mitchell Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549618" start="5489" end="5506" title="Limmy&amp;#x27;s Show" label="Limmy&amp;#x27;s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="5625" end="5634" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="5636" end="5650" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="5652" end="5664" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q590911" start="5670" end="5682" title="Lou Harrison" label="Lou Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q180582" start="5972" end="5979" title="Bauhaus (band)" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136135" start="6062" end="6085" title="The Sky&amp;#x27;s Gone Out" label="The Sky&amp;#x27;s Gone Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397065" start="6321" end="6332" title="Sacred City" label="Sacred City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482609" start="6358" end="6368" title="Shriekback" label="Shriekback"/>
<link wikidata="Q420880" start="6408" end="6428" title="They Might Be Giants" label="They Might Be Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064239" start="6445" end="6463" title="Factory Showroom" label="Exquisite Dead Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424058" start="6491" end="6516" title="Hedwig and the Angry Inch (musical)" label="Hedwig and the Angry Inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576623" start="6589" end="6597" title="Warpaint (band)" label="Warpaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546073" start="6707" end="6720" title="George Watsky" label="George Watsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q51530175" start="6920" end="6933" title="Therapie Taxi" label="Therapie TAXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q491037" start="7074" end="7089" title="Anders Hillborg" label="Anders Hillborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q996818" start="7188" end="7205" title="Polyvinyl Records" label="Polyvinyl Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757786" start="7332" end="7347" title="The Get Up Kids" label="The Get Up Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221803" start="7349" end="7364" title="Jeff Rosenstock" label="Jeff Rosenstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464369" start="7369" end="7386" title="American Football (band)" label="American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068077" start="7641" end="7654" title="Pedro Alcalde" label="Pedro Alcalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q795988" start="7967" end="7987" title="University of Guelph" label="University of Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176276" start="8540" end="8556" title="Photoshop tennis" label="Photoshop tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123142" start="8559" end="8576" title="Poietic Generator" label="Poietic Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151787" start="8579" end="8588" title="Comic jam" label="Comic jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443385" start="8591" end="8608" title="Round-robin story" label="Round-robin story"/>
<link wikidata="Q192833" start="8611" end="8618" title="Mindmap" label="Mindmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819938" start="8621" end="8642" title="Surrealist techniques" label="Surrealist techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q151939" start="8645" end="8661" title="Chinese whispers" label="Chinese whispers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883087" start="8664" end="8672" title="Mad Libs" label="Mad Libs"/>
<link wikidata="Q113801533" start="8675" end="8699" title="Reanimated collaboration" label="Reanimated collaboration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66201" wikidata="Q7544029" url="?curid=66201" title="Smart car">
<text>Smart car may refer to:

* Smart (marque), the automobile brand
* Smartcar (company), the API developer platform company
* Autonomous car, an automobile capable of driving itself
* Connected car, an automobile that coordinates its navigation with others&#x27;
* Vehicular automation, using artificial intelligence to enhance or automate control of a vehicle.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156490" start="27" end="41" title="Smart (marque)" label="Smart (marque)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845106" start="66" end="84" title="Smartcar (company)" label="Smartcar (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="123" end="137" title="Autonomous car" label="Autonomous car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161407" start="181" end="194" title="Connected car" label="Connected car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569610" start="262" end="282" title="Vehicular automation" label="Vehicular automation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66203" wikidata="Q215605" url="?curid=66203" title="Chinese dragon">
<text>The Chinese dragon or loong is a legendary creature in Chinese mythology, Chinese folklore, and Chinese culture generally. Chinese dragons have many animal-like forms, such as turtles and fish, but are most commonly depicted as snake-like with four legs. Academicians have identified four reliable theories on the origin of the Chinese dragon: snakes, Chinese alligators, thunder worship and nature worship. They traditionally symbolize potent and auspicious powers, particularly control over water and weather.

== Symbolism ==

Historically, the Chinese dragon was associated with the emperor of China and used as a symbol to represent imperial power. Liu Bang, the founder of the Han dynasty, claimed that he was conceived after his mother dreamt of a dragon. During the Tang dynasty, emperors wore robes with dragon motif as an imperial symbol, and high officials might also be presented with dragon robes. In the Yuan dynasty, the two-horned, five-clawed dragon was designated for use by the Son of Heaven or emperor only, while the four-clawed dragon was used by the princes and nobles. Similarly, during the Ming and Qing dynasty, the five-clawed dragon was strictly reserved for use by the emperor only. The dragon in the Qing dynasty appeared on the flag of the Qing dynasty.

The dragon is sometimes used in the West as a national emblem of China, though such use is not commonly seen in the People&#x27;s Republic of China or Taiwan. Instead, it is generally used as the symbol of culture. In Hong Kong, the dragon was a component of the coat of arms under British rule. It was later to become a feature of the design of Brand Hong Kong, a government promotional symbol.

The Chinese dragon has very different connotations from the European dragon – in European cultures, the dragon is a fire-breathing creature with aggressive connotations, whereas the Chinese dragon is a spiritual and cultural symbol that represents prosperity and good luck, as well as a rain deity that fosters harmony. It was reported that the Chinese government decided against using the dragon as its official 2008 Summer Olympics mascot because of the aggressive connotations that dragons have outside of China and chose more &quot;friendly&quot; symbols instead.
Sometimes Chinese people use the term &quot;Descendants of the Dragon&quot; () as a sign of ethnic identity, as part of a trend started in the 1970s when different Asian nationalities were looking for animal symbols as representations. For example, the wolf may be used by the Mongols as it is considered to be their legendary ancestor.

=== State usage ===
The dragon was the symbol of the Chinese emperor for many dynasties. During the Qing dynasty, the Azure Dragon was featured on the first Chinese national flag. It was featured again on the Twelve Symbols national emblem, which was used during the Republic of China, from 1913 to 1928.

The dragon has been used as a state symbol in Vietnam. During the Nguyễn dynasty, the dragon was featured on the imperial standards. It was also featured on the coats of arms of the State of Vietnam, and later South Vietnam.
== Worship ==
=== Origin ===
The ancient Chinese self-identified as &quot;the gods of the dragon&quot; because the Chinese dragon is an imagined reptile that represents evolution from the ancestors and &quot;qi&quot; energy. Dragon-like motifs of a zoomorphic composition in reddish-brown stone have been found at the Chahai site (Liaoning) in the Xinglongwa culture (6200–5400 BC).
The presence of dragons within Chinese culture dates back several thousands of years with the discovery of a dragon statue dating back to the fifth millennium BC from the Yangshao culture in Henan in 1987, and jade badges of rank in coiled form have been excavated from the Hongshan culture –2900 BC. Some of the earliest Dragon artifacts are the pig dragon carvings from the Hongshan culture.

The coiled dragon or snake form played an important role in early Chinese culture. The character for &quot;dragon&quot; in the earliest Chinese writing has a similar coiled form, as do later jade dragon amulets from the Shang period.

Ancient Chinese referred to unearthed fossil bones as &quot;dragon bones&quot; and documented them as such. For example, Chang Qu in 300 BC documents the discovery of &quot;dragon bones&quot; in Sichuan. &quot;Dragon bones&quot; have been used both historically and in modern times in traditional Chinese medicine. Scientific examination of &quot;dragon bones&quot; from the 19th century to the present suggests they most commonly are remains of fossil Cenozoic mammals, such as the extinct horse &quot;Hipparion&quot;.

=== In mythology ===

From its origins as totems or the stylized depiction of natural creatures, the Chinese dragon evolved to become a mythical animal. The Han dynasty scholar Wang Fu recorded Chinese myths that &quot;long&quot; dragons had nine anatomical resemblances.The people paint the dragon&#x27;s shape with a horse&#x27;s head and a snake&#x27;s tail. Further, there are expressions such as &#x27;three joints&#x27; and &#x27;nine resemblances&#x27; (of the dragon), to wit: from head to shoulder, from shoulder to breast, and from breast to tail. These are the joints; as to the nine resemblances, they are the following: his antlers resemble those of a stag, his head that of a camel, his eyes those of a demon, his neck that of a snake, his belly that of a clam (&quot;shen&quot;, ), his scales those of a carp, his claws those of an eagle, his soles those of a tiger, his ears those of a cow. Upon his head, he has a thing like a broad eminence (a big lump), called [&quot;chimu&quot;] (). If a dragon has no [&quot;chimu&quot;], he cannot ascend to the sky.

Further sources give variant lists of the nine animal resemblances. Sinologist lists these characteristics of an authentic dragon: &quot;The antlers of a deer. The head of a crocodile. A demon&#x27;s eyes. The neck of a snake. A tortoise&#x27;s viscera. A hawk&#x27;s claws. The palms of a tiger. A cow&#x27;s ears. And it hears through its horns, its ears being deprived of all power of hearing&quot;. He notes that, &quot;Others state it has a rabbit&#x27;s eyes, a frog&#x27;s belly, a carp&#x27;s scales&quot;.
Chinese dragons were considered to be physically concise. Of the 117 scales, 81 are of the yang essence (positive) while 36 are of the yin essence (negative). Initially, the dragon was benevolent, wise, and just, but the Buddhists introduced the concept of malevolent influence among some dragons. Just as water destroys, they said, so can some dragons destroy via floods, tidal waves, and storms. They suggested that some of the worst floods were believed to have been the result of a mortal upsetting a dragon.

Many pictures of Chinese dragons show a flaming pearl under their chin or in their claws. The pearl is associated with spiritual energy, wisdom, prosperity, power, immortality, thunder, or the moon. Chinese art often depicts a pair of dragons chasing or fighting over a flaming pearl.

Chinese dragons are occasionally depicted with bat-like wings growing out of the front limbs, but most do not have wings, as their ability to fly (and control rain/water, etc.) is mystical and not seen as a result of their physical attributes.

Even without wings the Chinese dragons can supposedly ascend to the sky and fly. According to legend, the dragon&#x27;s flight is enabled by something on its head named &quot;chimu&quot; (Wade-Giles: &quot;ch&#x27;ih-mu&quot;, , lit. &#x27;foot-long wood/tree&#x27;) that resembled the &quot;boshan&quot; (Wade-Giles: &quot;Po-shan&quot;, incense burner, i.e. &quot;boshanlu&quot; or &quot;Hill censer&quot;), without which the dragon cannot fly. This piece of lore attested in the Tang dynasty tract &quot;Youyang zazu&quot;.
This description accords with the artistic depictions of the dragon down to the present day. The dragon has also acquired an almost unlimited range of supernatural powers. It is said to be able to disguise itself as a silkworm, or become as large as our entire universe. It can fly among the clouds or hide in water (according to the &quot;Guanzi&quot;). It can form clouds, turn into water, change color as an ability to blend in with their surroundings, and be an effective form of camouflage or glow in the dark (according to the &quot;Shuowen Jiezi&quot;).

In many other countries, folktales speak of the dragon having all the attributes of the other 11 creatures of the zodiac, this includes the whiskers of the Rat, the face and horns of the Ox, the claws and teeth of the Tiger, the belly of the Rabbit, the body of the Snake, the legs of the Horse, the goatee of the Goat, the wit of the Monkey, the crest of the Rooster, the ears of the Dog, and the snout of the Pig.

In some circles, it is considered bad luck to depict a dragon facing downward, as it is seen as disrespectful to place a dragon in such a manner that it cannot ascend to the sky. Also, depictions of dragons in tattoos are prevalent as they are symbols of strength and power, especially criminal organisations where dragons hold a meaning all on their own. As such, it is believed that one must be fierce and strong enough, hence earning the right to wear the dragon on his skin, lest his luck be consumed by the dragons.

According to an art historian John Boardman, depictions of Chinese Dragon and Indian Makara might have been influenced by &quot;Cetus&quot; in Greek mythology possibly after contact with silk-road images of the &quot;Kētos&quot; as Chinese dragon appeared more reptilian and shifted head-shape afterwards.

=== Rule over weather and water ===
Chinese dragons are strongly associated with water and weather in popular religion. They are believed to be the rulers of moving bodies of water, such as waterfalls, rivers, or seas. The Dragon god is the dispenser of rain as well as the zoomorphic representation of yang, the masculine power of generation. In this capacity as the rulers of water and weather, the dragon is more anthropomorphic in form, often depicted as a humanoid, dressed in a king&#x27;s costume, but with a dragon head wearing a king&#x27;s headdress.

There are four major Dragon Kings, representing each of the Four Seas: the East Sea (corresponding to the East China Sea), the South Sea (corresponding to the South China Sea), the West Sea (sometimes seen as the Qinghai Lake and beyond), and the North Sea (sometimes seen as Lake Baikal).

Because of this association, they are seen as &quot;in charge&quot; of water-related weather phenomena. In premodern times, many Chinese villages (especially those close to rivers and seas) had temples dedicated to their local &quot;dragon king&quot;. In times of drought or flooding, it was customary for the local gentry and government officials to lead the community in offering sacrifices and conducting other religious rites to appease the dragon, either to ask for rain or a cessation thereof.

The King of Wuyue in the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period was often known as the &quot;Dragon King&quot; or the &quot;Sea Dragon King&quot; because of his extensive hydro-engineering schemes which &quot;tamed&quot; the sea.

In coastal regions of China, Korea, Vietnam, traditional legends and worshipping of whale gods as the guardians of people on the sea have been referred to Dragon Kings after the arrival of Buddhism.

=== Symbol of imperial authority ===
According to Chinese legend, both Chinese primogenitors, the earliest Door and the Yellow Emperor, were closely related to the dragon. At the end of his reign, the first legendary ruler, the Yellow Emperor, was said to have been immortalized into a dragon that resembled his emblem, and ascended to Heaven. The other legendary ruler, the Yan Emperor, was born by his mother&#x27;s telepathy with a mythical dragon. This legend also contributed towards the use of the Chinese dragon as a symbol of imperial power.

Dragons (usually with five claws on each foot) were a symbol for the emperor in many Chinese dynasties. During the Qing dynasty, the imperial dragon was colored yellow or gold, and during the Ming dynasty it was red. The imperial throne was referred to as the &quot;Dragon Throne&quot;. During the late Qing dynasty, the dragon was even adopted as the national flag. Dragons are featured in carvings on the stairs and walkways of imperial palaces and imperial tombs, such as at the Forbidden City in Beijing.

In some Chinese legends, an emperor might be born with a birthmark in the shape of a dragon. For example, one legend tells the tale of a peasant born with a dragon birthmark who eventually overthrows the existing dynasty and founds a new one; another legend might tell of the prince in hiding from his enemies who is identified by his dragon birthmark.

In contrast, the empress of China was often identified with the Chinese phoenix.

=== Modern practice ===
Worship of the Dragon god is celebrated throughout China with sacrifices and processions during the fifth and sixth moons, and especially on the date of his birthday the thirteenth day of the sixth moon. A folk religious movement of associations of good-doing in modern Hebei is primarily devoted to a generic Dragon god whose icon is a tablet with his name inscribed, for which it has been named the &quot;movement of the Dragon Tablet&quot;.

== Depictions ==

=== Neolithic ===
Dragons or dragon-like depictions have been found extensively in neolithic-period archaeological sites throughout China. Some of earliest depictions of dragons were found at Xinglongwa culture sites. Yangshao culture sites in Xi&#x27;an have produced clay pots with dragon motifs. A burial site Xishuipo in Puyang which is associated with the Yangshao culture shows a large dragon mosaic made out of clam shells. The Liangzhu culture also produced dragon-like patterns. The Hongshan culture sites in present-day Inner Mongolia produced jade dragon objects in the form of pig dragons which are the first 3-dimensional representations of Chinese dragons.

One such early form was the pig dragon. It is a coiled, elongated creature with a head resembling a boar. The character for &quot;dragon&quot; in the earliest Chinese writing has a similar coiled form, as do later jade dragon amulets from the Shang dynasty. A snake-like dragon body painted on red pottery wares was discovered at Taosi (Shanxi) from the second phase of the Longshan Culture, and a dragon-like object coated with approximately 2000 pieces of turquoise and jade was discovered at Erlitou.

=== Classical era ===


Chinese literature and myths refer to many dragons besides the famous &quot;long&quot;. The linguist Michael Carr analyzed over 100 ancient dragon names attested in Chinese classic texts.
*&quot;Tianlong&quot;, celestial dragon that guards heavenly palaces and pulls divine chariots; also a name for the constellation Draco
*&quot;Shenlong&quot;, thunder god that controls the weather, appearance of a human head, dragon&#x27;s body, and drum-like stomach
*&quot;Fuzanglong&quot;, underworld guardian of precious metals and jewels, associated with volcanoes
*&quot;Dilong&quot;, controller of rivers and seas
*&quot;Yinglong&quot;, winged dragon associated with rains and floods, used by Yellow Emperor to kill Chi You
*&quot;Jiaolong&quot;, hornless or scaled dragon, leader of all aquatic animals
*&quot;Panlong&quot;, lake dragon that has not ascended to heaven
*&quot;Huanglong&quot;, hornless dragon symbolizing the emperor
*&quot;Feilong&quot;, winged dragon that rides on clouds and mist; also a name for a genus of pterosaur (compare Feilong kick and Fei Long character)
*&quot;Azure Dragon&quot;, the animal associated with the East in the Chinese Four Symbols, mythological creatures in the Chinese constellations
*&quot;Qiulong&quot;, contradictorily defined as both &quot;horned dragon&quot; and &quot;hornless dragon&quot;
*&quot;Zhulong&quot; was a giant red draconic solar deity in Chinese mythology. It supposedly had a human&#x27;s face and snake&#x27;s body, created day and night by opening and closing its eyes, and created seasonal winds by breathing. (Note that this &quot;zhulong&quot; is different from the similarly named Vermilion Dragon or the Pig dragon)
*&quot;Chilong&quot;, a hornless dragon or mountain demon
Fewer Chinese dragon names derive from the word &quot;long&quot; :
*&quot;Longwang&quot;, divine rulers of the Four Seas
*&quot;Longma&quot;, emerged from the Luo River and revealed &quot;bagua&quot; to Fu Xi

Some additional Chinese dragons are not named &quot;long&quot;, for instance,
*Hong, a two-headed dragon or rainbow serpent
*Shen, a shapeshifting dragon or sea monster believed to create mirages
*&quot;Bashe&quot; was a giant python-like dragon that ate elephants
*&quot;Teng&quot; is a flying dragon without legs

Chinese scholars have classified dragons in diverse systems. For instance, Emperor Huizong of Song canonized five colored dragons as &quot;kings&quot;.
*The Azure Dragon [&quot;Qinglong&quot; ] spirits, most compassionate kings.
*The Vermilion Dragon [&quot;Zhulong&quot; or &quot;Chilong&quot; ] spirits, kings that bestow blessings on lakes.
*The Yellow Dragon [&quot;Huanglong&quot; ] spirits, kings that favorably hear all petitions.
*The White Dragon [&quot;Bailong&quot; ] spirits, virtuous and pure kings.
*The Black Dragon [&quot;Xuanlong&quot; or &quot;Heilong&quot; ] spirits, kings dwelling in the depths of the mystic waters.
With the addition of the Yellow Dragon of the center to Azure Dragon of the East, these Vermilion, White, and Black Dragons coordinate with the Four Symbols, including the Vermilion Bird of the South, White Tiger of the West, and Black Tortoise of the North.

Dragons were varyingly thought to be able to control and embody various natural elements in their &quot;mythic form&quot; such as &quot;water, air, earth, fire, light, wind, storm, [and] electricity&quot;. Some dragons who were able to breathe fire were thought to be exiled from &quot;tiān&quot; and banished to Earth.

=== Nine sons of the dragon ===
Several Ming dynasty texts list what were claimed as the Nine Offspring of the Dragon (), and subsequently these feature prominently in popular Chinese stories and writings. The scholar (1567–1624) in his work &quot;Wu Za Zu&quot; (c. 1592) gives the following listing, as rendered by M. W. de Visser:
A well-known work of the end of the sixteenth century, the &quot;Wuzazu&quot; , informs us about the nine different young of the dragon, whose shapes are used as ornaments according to their nature.
*The &quot;Pulao&quot;, four leg small form dragon class which like to scream, are represented on the tops of bells, serving as handles.
*The &quot;qiú niú&quot; , which like music, are used to adorn musical instruments.
*The &quot;Chiwen&quot;, which like swallowing, are placed on both ends of the ridgepoles of roofs (to swallow all evil influences).
*The &quot;cháo fēng&quot; , beasts-like dragon which like adventure, are placed on the four corners of roofs.
*The &quot;yá zì&quot; , which like to kill, are engraved on sword guards.
*The &quot;xì xì&quot; , which have the shape of the &quot;chī hǔ&quot; (One kind small form dragon), and are fond of literature, are represented on the sides of grave-monuments.
*The &quot;bì àn&quot; , which like litigation, are placed over prison gates (to keep guard).
*The &quot;suān ní&quot; , which like to sit down, are represented upon the bases of Buddhist idols (under the Buddhas&#x27; or Bodhisattvas&#x27; feet).
*The &quot;Bixi&quot;, also known as &quot;bà xià&quot; , finally, big tortoises which like to carry heavy objects, are placed under grave-monuments.

Further, the same author enumerates nine other kinds of dragons, which are represented as ornaments of different objects or buildings according to their liking prisons, water, the rank smell of newly caught fish or newly killed meat, wind and rain, ornaments, smoke, shutting the mouth (used for adorning key-holes), standing on steep places (placed on roofs), and fire.
The &quot;Sheng&#x27;an waiji&quot; () collection by the poet Yang Shen (1488–1559) gives different 5th and 9th names for the dragon&#x27;s nine children: the &quot;taotie&quot;, form of beasts, which loves to eat and is found on food-related wares, and the &quot;jiāo tú&quot; (), which looks like a conch or clam, does not like to be disturbed, and is used on the front door or the doorstep. Yang&#x27;s list is &quot;bì xì&quot;, &quot;chī wěn&quot; or &quot;cháo fēng&quot;, &quot;pú láo&quot;, &quot;bì àn&quot;, &quot;tāo tiè&quot;, &quot;qiú niú&quot;, &quot;yá zì&quot;, &quot;suān ní&quot;, and &quot;jiāo tú&quot;. In addition, there are some sayings including &quot;bā xià&quot; , Hybrid of reptilia animal and dragon, a creature that likes to drink water, and is typically used on bridge structures.

The oldest known attestation of the &quot;children of the dragon&quot; list is found in the &quot;Shuyuan zaji&quot; (, &quot;Miscellaneous records from the bean garden&quot;) by Lu Rong (1436–1494); however, he noted that the list enumerates mere synonyms of various antiques, not children of a dragon. The nine sons of the dragon were commemorated by the Shanghai Mint in 2012&#x27;s year of the dragon with two sets of coins, one in silver, and one in brass. Each coin in the sets depicts one of the 9 sons, including an additional coin for the father dragon, which depicts the nine sons on the reverse. It&#x27;s also a Chinese idiom, which means among brothers each one has his good points.

=== Dragon claws ===

Originally, early Chinese dragons are mostly depicted with three claws, but they can range from two to five claws. Different countries that adopted the Chinese dragon have different preferences; in Mongolia and Korea, four-clawed dragons are used, while in Japan, three-clawed dragons are common. In China, three-clawed dragons were popularly used on robes during the Tang dynasty. The usage of the dragon motif was codified during the Yuan dynasty, and the five-clawed dragons became reserved for use by the emperor while the princes used four-clawed dragons. Phoenixes and five-clawed two-horned dragons may not be used on the robes of officials and other objects such as plates and vessels in the Yuan dynasty. It was further stipulated that for commoners, &quot;it is forbidden to wear any cloth with patterns of Qilin, Male Fenghuang (Chinese phoenix), White rabbit, Lingzhi, Five-Toe Two-Horn Dragon, Eight Dragons, Nine Dragons, &#x27;Ten thousand years&#x27;, Fortune-longevity character and Golden Yellow etc.&quot;
The Hongwu Emperor of the Ming dynasty emulated the Yuan dynasty rules on the use of the dragon motif and decreed that the dragon would be his emblem and that it should have five claws. The four-clawed dragon would be used typically for imperial nobility and certain high-ranking officials. The three-clawed dragon was used by lower ranks and the general public (widely seen on various Chinese goods in the Ming dynasty). The dragon, however, was only for select royalty closely associated with the imperial family, usually in various symbolic colors, and it was a capital offense for anyone—other than the emperor himself—to ever use the completely gold-colored, five-clawed &quot;Long&quot; dragon motif. Improper use of claw number or colors was considered treason, punishable by execution of the offender&#x27;s entire clan. During the Qing dynasty, the Manchus initially considered three-clawed dragons the most sacred and used that until 1712 when it was replaced by five-clawed dragons, and portraits of the Qing emperors were usually depicted with five-clawed dragons.

In works of art that left the imperial collection, either as gifts or through pilfering by court eunuchs (a long-standing problem), where practicable, one claw was removed from each set, as in several pieces of carved lacquerware, for example the Chinese lacquerware table in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.

== Cultural references ==

=== Number nine ===

The number nine is special in China as it is seen as the number of heaven, and Chinese dragons are frequently connected with it. For example, a Chinese dragon is normally described in terms of nine attributes and usually has 117 (9×13) scales—81 (9×9) Yang and 36 (9×4) Yin.
This is also why there are nine forms of the dragon and nine sons of the dragon (see Classical depictions above). The Nine-Dragon Wall is a spirit wall with images of nine different dragons, and is found in imperial Chinese palaces and gardens. Because nine was considered the number of the emperor, only the most senior officials were allowed to wear nine dragons on their robes—and then only with the robe completely covered with surcoats. Lower-ranking officials had eight or five dragons on their robes, again covered with surcoats; even the emperor himself wore his dragon robe with one of its nine dragons hidden from view.

There are a number of places in China called &quot;Nine Dragons&quot;, the most famous being Kowloon in Hong Kong. The part of the Mekong in Vietnam is known as &quot;Cửu Long&quot;, with the same meaning.
=== Chinese zodiac ===
The dragon is one of the 12 animals in the Chinese zodiac which is used to designate years in the Chinese calendar. It is thought that each animal is associated with certain personality traits. Dragon years are usually the most popular to have children. There are more people born in Dragon years than in any other animal years of the zodiac.

=== Constellations ===

The Azure Dragon is considered to be the primary of the four celestial guardians, the other three being the Vermilion Bird, White Tiger, Black Tortoise. In this context, the Azure Dragon is associated with the East and the element of Wood.

=== Dragon boat racing ===
At special festivals, especially the Dragon Boat Festival, dragon boat races are an important part of festivities. Typically, these are boats paddled by a team of up to 20 paddlers with a drummer and steersman. The boats have a carved dragon as the head and tail of the boat. Dragon boat racing is also an important part of celebrations outside of China, such as at Chinese New Year. A similar racing is popular in India in the state of Kerala called Vallamkali and there are records on Chinese traders visiting the seashores of Kerala centuries back (Ibn Batuta).

=== Dragon dance ===

On auspicious occasions, including Chinese New Year and the opening of shops and residences, festivities often include dancing with dragon puppets. These are &quot;life sized&quot; cloth-and-wood puppets manipulated by a team of people, supporting the dragon with poles. They perform choreographed moves to the accompaniment of drums, drama, and music. They also wore good clothing made of silk.

=== With fenghuang ===

Fenghuang (), known in Japanese as Hō-ō or Hou-ou, are phoenix-like birds found in East Asian mythology that reign over all other birds. In Chinese symbolism, it is a feminine entity that is paired with the masculine Chinese dragon, as a visual metaphor of a balanced and blissful relationship, symbolic of both a happy marriage and a regent&#x27;s long reign.

=== As nāga ===

In many Buddhist countries, the concept of the nāga has been merged with local traditions of great and wise serpents or dragons, as depicted in this stairway image of a multi-headed nāga emerging from the mouth of a Makara in the style of a Chinese dragon at Phra Maha Chedi Chai Mongkol on the premises of Wat Pha Namthip Thep Prasit Vararam in Nong Phok District, Roi Et Province, Thailand.

=== With tigers ===
The tiger is considered to be the eternal rival to the dragon, thus various artworks depict a dragon and tiger fighting an epic battle. A common chengyu to describe equal rivals is &quot;dragon versus Tiger&quot;. In Chinese martial arts, &quot;Dragon style&quot; is used to describe styles of fighting based more on understanding movement, while &quot;Tiger style&quot; is based on brute strength and memorization of techniques.

=== Botany ===

The elm cultivar &quot;Ulmus pumila&quot; &#x27;Pendula&#x27;, from northern China, called &#x27;weeping Chinese elm&#x27; in the West, is known locally as &quot;Lung chao yü shu&quot; (&#x27;Dragon&#x27;s-claw elm&#x27;) owing to its branching.

=== Language ===
A number of Chinese proverbs and idioms feature references to a dragon, such as &quot;Hoping one&#x27;s child will become a dragon&quot; ().

== In popular culture ==

As a part of traditional folklore, dragons appear in a variety of mythological fiction. Chinese dragons appear in innumerable media across popular culture today, including but not at all limited to: Japanese anime films and television shows, manga, and in Western political cartoons as a personification of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.
* In the classical 16th century novel &quot;Journey to the West&quot;, the son of the Dragon King of the West was condemned to serve as a horse for the travelers because of his indiscretions at a party in the heavenly court. Sun Wukong&#x27;s staff, the Ruyi Jingu Bang, was robbed from Ao Guang, the Dragon King of the East Sea. 
* In &quot;Fengshen Yanyi&quot; and other stories, Nezha, the boy hero, defeats the Dragon Kings and tames the seas. 
* The Chinese respect for dragons is emphasized in Naomi Novik&#x27;s &quot;Temeraire&quot; novels, where they were the first people to tame dragons and are treated as equals, intellectuals, or even royalty, rather than beasts solely bred for war in the West. 

==Related myths==
* Druk, the Thunder Dragon of Bhutanese mythology
* Nāga, a Hindu and Buddhist creature in South Asian and Southeast Asian mythology
** Bakunawa, a moon-eating sea dragon depicted in Philippine mythology.
* Azhdar, snake-like dragons in Iranian mythology
* Pakhangba, a Manipuri dragon

== See also ==
==Explanatory notes==
== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* ,@University of Georgia Library
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="4" end="18" title="Chinese dragon" label="Chinese dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="22" end="27" title="Chinese dragon" label="loong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239243" start="33" end="51" title="legendary creature" label="legendary creature"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="55" end="72" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q837463" start="74" end="90" title="Chinese folklore" label="Chinese folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="96" end="111" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28770" start="176" end="183" title="Bixi (mythology)" label="turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q758019" start="188" end="192" title="Chiwen" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547206" start="344" end="350" title="Snakes in Chinese mythology" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q194422" start="352" end="369" title="Chinese alligator" label="Chinese alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284129" start="372" end="387" title="thunder worship" label="thunder worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189650" start="392" end="406" title="nature worship" label="nature worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="587" end="603" title="emperor of China" label="emperor of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="654" end="662" title="Liu Bang" label="Liu Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="683" end="694" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="774" end="786" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="918" end="930" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147432" start="997" end="1010" title="Son of Heaven" label="Son of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1124" end="1136" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q976372" start="1259" end="1283" title="flag of the Qing dynasty" label="flag of the Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079693" start="1332" end="1347" title="national emblem" label="national emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1437" end="1443" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1504" end="1513" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q752790" start="1549" end="1561" title="coat of arms of Hong Kong" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956496" start="1632" end="1647" title="Brand Hong Kong" label="Brand Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058816" start="1743" end="1758" title="European dragon" label="European dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="2096" end="2116" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q515882" start="2707" end="2719" title="Azure Dragon" label="Azure Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771517" start="2798" end="2828" title="Twelve Symbols national emblem" label="Twelve Symbols national emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="2856" end="2873" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512040" start="2899" end="2905" title="Vietnamese dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="2961" end="2975" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="3077" end="3093" title="State of Vietnam" label="State of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3105" end="3118" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="3328" end="3330" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220304" start="3369" end="3379" title="zoomorphic" label="zoomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q854631" start="3674" end="3690" title="Yangshao culture" label="Yangshao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195031" start="3777" end="3793" title="Hongshan culture" label="Hongshan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193237" start="3850" end="3860" title="pig dragon" label="pig dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="4034" end="4049" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254283" start="4193" end="4205" title="dragon bones" label="dragon bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071661" start="4254" end="4262" title="Chang Qu" label="Chang Qu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="4328" end="4335" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="4418" end="4446" title="Traditional Chinese Medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="4586" end="4594" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q971275" start="4636" end="4645" title="Hipparion" label="Hipparion"/>
<link wikidata="Q290825" start="4831" end="4838" title="Wang Fu (philosopher)" label="Wang Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077710" start="5430" end="5446" title="shen (clam-monster)" label="&amp;quot;shen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q340826" start="6797" end="6810" title="Eight Treasures" label="flaming pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843281" start="7678" end="7689" title="Hill censer" label="Hill censer"/>
<link wikidata="Q121905" start="7795" end="7807" title="Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang" label="Youyang zazu"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="8033" end="8041" title="Bombyx mori" label="silkworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072348" start="8354" end="8367" title="Shuowen Jiezi" label="Shuowen Jiezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="8517" end="8525" title="whiskers" label="whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q721997" start="8533" end="8536" title="Rat (zodiac)" label="Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q599644" start="8564" end="8566" title="Ox (zodiac)" label="Ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q740762" start="8595" end="8600" title="Tiger (zodiac)" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q844723" start="8619" end="8625" title="Rabbit (zodiac)" label="Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q756692" start="8643" end="8648" title="Snake (zodiac)" label="Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q869595" start="8666" end="8671" title="Horse (zodiac)" label="Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014570" start="8677" end="8683" title="goatee" label="goatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q867696" start="8691" end="8695" title="Goat (zodiac)" label="Goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q740674" start="8712" end="8718" title="Monkey (zodiac)" label="Monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589150" start="8724" end="8729" title="Crest (feathers)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q822621" start="8737" end="8744" title="Rooster (zodiac)" label="Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q755126" start="8762" end="8765" title="Dog (zodiac)" label="Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q877261" start="8788" end="8791" title="Pig (zodiac)" label="Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q566658" start="9346" end="9359" title="John Boardman (art historian)" label="John Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136842" start="9401" end="9407" title="Makara" label="Makara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269950" start="9444" end="9449" title="Cetus (mythology)" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="9459" end="9474" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="10039" end="10054" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q939440" start="10206" end="10217" title="Dragon King" label="Dragon King"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925152" start="10245" end="10254" title="Four Seas" label="Four Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="10291" end="10305" title="East China Sea" label="East China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="10344" end="10359" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201294" start="10398" end="10410" title="Qinghai Lake" label="Qinghai Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="10461" end="10472" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193822" start="10989" end="10994" title="Wuyue" label="Wuyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q242115" start="11002" end="11033" title="Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms" label="Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q313336" start="11515" end="11519" title="Shennong" label="Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="11528" end="11542" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="12044" end="12061" title="Chinese dynasties" label="Chinese dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q765382" start="12225" end="12238" title="Dragon Throne" label="Dragon Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="12441" end="12455" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513591" start="12526" end="12535" title="birthmark" label="birthmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918585" start="12840" end="12856" title="List of Chinese consorts" label="empress of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q527525" start="12887" end="12902" title="Fenghuang" label="Chinese phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208411" start="13162" end="13188" title="associations of good-doing" label="associations of good-doing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="13199" end="13204" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154021" start="13584" end="13602" title="Xinglongwa culture" label="Xinglongwa culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q854631" start="13610" end="13626" title="Yangshao culture" label="Yangshao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="13636" end="13646" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107990" start="13705" end="13713" title="Xishuipo" label="Xishuipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q404484" start="13717" end="13723" title="Puyang" label="Puyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204909" start="13827" end="13843" title="Liangzhu culture" label="Liangzhu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195031" start="13884" end="13900" title="Hongshan culture" label="Hongshan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="13922" end="13936" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193237" start="13981" end="13991" title="pig dragon" label="pig dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="14164" end="14168" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="14223" end="14238" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="14307" end="14320" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="14758" end="14779" title="Chinese classic texts" label="Chinese classic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133081" start="14788" end="14796" title="Tianlong" label="Tianlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8675" start="14911" end="14916" title="Draco (constellation)" label="Draco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242181" start="14924" end="14932" title="Shenlong" label="Shenlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364488" start="15056" end="15066" title="Fuzanglong" label="Fuzanglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277030" start="15158" end="15164" title="Dilong" label="Dilong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378070" start="15209" end="15217" title="Yinglong" label="Yinglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="15281" end="15295" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147255" start="15304" end="15311" title="Chi You" label="Chi You"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241852" start="15319" end="15327" title="Jiaolong" label="Jiaolong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493193" start="15399" end="15406" title="Panlong (mythology)" label="Panlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q847544" start="15465" end="15474" title="Huanglong (mythology)" label="Huanglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405048" start="15529" end="15536" title="Feilong (mythology)" label="Feilong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268267" start="15605" end="15625" title="Feilongus" label="a genus of pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405048" start="15635" end="15642" title="Feilong" label="Feilong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15652" end="15660" title="Fei Long" label="Fei Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073260" start="15750" end="15762" title="Four Symbols (Chinese constellation)" label="Four Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074076" start="15794" end="15816" title="Chinese constellations" label="Chinese constellations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267959" start="15824" end="15831" title="Qiulong" label="Qiulong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072517" start="15936" end="15943" title="Zhulong (mythology)" label="Zhulong"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="15975" end="15986" title="solar deity" label="solar deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q758050" start="16283" end="16290" title="Chi (mythology)" label="Chilong"/>
<link wikidata="Q939440" start="16408" end="16416" title="Longwang" label="Longwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352587" start="16462" end="16468" title="Longma" label="Longma"/>
<link wikidata="Q340846" start="16522" end="16527" title="bagua" label="bagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="16537" end="16542" title="Fu Xi" label="Fu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894017" start="16623" end="16627" title="Hong (rainbow-dragon)" label="Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476490" start="16652" end="16667" title="rainbow serpent" label="rainbow serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077710" start="16669" end="16673" title="Shen (clam-monster)" label="Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="16677" end="16690" title="shapeshifting" label="shapeshifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q920028" start="16701" end="16712" title="sea monster" label="sea monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q308762" start="16732" end="16738" title="mirage" label="mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323671" start="16747" end="16752" title="Bashe" label="Bashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699733" start="16816" end="16820" title="Teng (mythology)" label="Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486" start="16935" end="16958" title="Emperor Huizong of Song" label="Emperor Huizong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059392" start="17670" end="17684" title="Vermilion Bird" label="Vermilion Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072455" start="17699" end="17710" title="White Tiger (Chinese constellation)" label="White Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q125696" start="17728" end="17742" title="Black Tortoise" label="Black Tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="17894" end="17899" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="17913" end="17917" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="18119" end="18131" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q757969" start="18623" end="18628" title="pulao (dragon)" label="Pulao"/>
<link wikidata="Q758019" start="18844" end="18850" title="Chiwen" label="Chiwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28770" start="19590" end="19594" title="Bixi (mythology)" label="Bixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q711808" start="20163" end="20172" title="Yang Shen" label="Yang Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q758058" start="20266" end="20272" title="taotie" label="taotie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820709" start="21093" end="21100" title="Lu Rong" label="Lu Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366503" start="21887" end="21895" title="Japanese dragon" label="in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="22450" end="22455" title="Qilin" label="Qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q527525" start="22462" end="22471" title="Fenghuang" label="Fenghuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q622761" start="22491" end="22503" title="Moon rabbit" label="White rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q97958947" start="22505" end="22512" title="Lingzhi mushroom" label="Lingzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184665" start="22575" end="22593" title="Ten thousand years" label="Ten thousand years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633257" start="22601" end="22618" title="Fu Lu Shou" label="Fortune-longevity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="22662" end="22676" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="23358" end="23363" title="motif (art)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="23516" end="23523" title="Manchus" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410715" start="23947" end="23965" title="carved lacquerware" label="carved lacquerware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100825" start="23983" end="24008" title="Chinese lacquerware table" label="Chinese lacquerware table"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="24016" end="24042" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19108" start="24114" end="24118" title="9 (number)" label="nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q836090" start="24434" end="24457" title="nine sons of the dragon" label="nine sons of the dragon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24463" end="24483" title="#Classical depictions" label="Classical depictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103014" start="24496" end="24512" title="Nine-Dragon Wall" label="Nine-Dragon Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600381" start="24518" end="24529" title="spirit wall" label="spirit wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675826" start="24810" end="24817" title="surcoat" label="surcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q239143" start="25102" end="25109" title="Kowloon" label="Kowloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="25140" end="25146" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q731434" start="25242" end="25248" title="Dragon (zodiac)" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976204" start="25281" end="25295" title="Chinese zodiac" label="Chinese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="25336" end="25352" title="Chinese calendar" label="Chinese calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731434" start="25522" end="25528" title="Dragon (zodiac)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="25573" end="25579" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074076" start="25667" end="25686" title="Chinese constellation" label="celestial guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059392" start="25714" end="25728" title="Vermilion Bird (Chinese constellation)" label="Vermilion Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072455" start="25730" end="25741" title="White Tiger (Chinese constellation)" label="White Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q125696" start="25743" end="25757" title="Black Tortoise (Chinese constellation)" label="Black Tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254268" start="25911" end="25931" title="Dragon Boat Festival" label="Dragon Boat Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="26240" end="26256" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="26497" end="26513" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="26938" end="26945" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="27309" end="27313" title="nāga" label="nāga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136842" start="27478" end="27484" title="Makara (Hindu mythology)" label="Makara"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="27531" end="27536" title="stupa" label="Chedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="27569" end="27572" title="Wat" label="Wat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27608" end="27626" title="Amphoe Nong Phok#Places" label="Nong Phok District"/>
<link wikidata="Q625463" start="27628" end="27643" title="Roi Et Province" label="Roi Et Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q28060424" start="27821" end="27828" title="chengyu" label="chengyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="27893" end="27913" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="28127" end="28130" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879636" start="28140" end="28184" title="Ulmus pumila &amp;#x27;Pendula&amp;#x27;" label="&amp;quot;Ulmus pumila&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Pendula&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="28407" end="28414" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q28060424" start="28420" end="28425" title="Chengyu" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949160" start="28621" end="28641" title="mythic fiction" label="mythological fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="28763" end="28768" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="28797" end="28802" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="28819" end="28837" title="political cartoons" label="political cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q70784" start="28943" end="28962" title="Journey to the West" label="Journey to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q11773777" start="29124" end="29134" title="Sun Wukong" label="Sun Wukong"/>
<link wikidata="Q980612" start="29142" end="29147" title="Gun (staff)" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q834090" start="29153" end="29168" title="Ruyi Jingu Bang" label="Ruyi Jingu Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329333" start="29219" end="29227" title="East Sea (Chinese literature)" label="East Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="29241" end="29255" title="Fengshen Yanyi" label="Fengshen Yanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q547105" start="29281" end="29286" title="Nezha" label="Nezha"/>
<link wikidata="Q242643" start="29399" end="29410" title="Naomi Novik" label="Naomi Novik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208412" start="29424" end="29433" title="Temeraire (series)" label="Temeraire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344734" start="29630" end="29634" title="Druk" label="Druk"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="29680" end="29684" title="Nāga" label="Nāga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412334" start="29764" end="29772" title="Bakunawa" label="Bakunawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q747649" start="29835" end="29841" title="Azhdaha" label="Azhdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386066" start="29885" end="29894" title="Pakhangba" label="Pakhangba"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66205" wikidata="Q6781064" url="?curid=66205" title="Maryam (2002 film)">
<text>Maryam is a 2002 film about a young woman who is an Iranian immigrant living in the United States at the time of the Iran hostage crisis. The film was written and directed by Ramin Serry. Mariam Parris plays the young woman. The film also features Shaun Toub as her father, Shohreh Aghdashloo as her mother, and David Ackert as her cousin, Ali, who becomes an Islamic fundamentalist.

Maryam was featured in the third in 2001.

The word &quot;Maryam&quot; is the Aramaic name of Mary, the mother of Jesus and means the same in Persian language. Maryam also means Tuberose in Persian and is a common first name in Iran.

==External links==
*Review by Roger Ebert</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q753338" start="12" end="21" title="2002 in film" label="2002 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="60" end="69" title="immigration" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="117" end="136" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="175" end="186" title="Ramin Serry" label="Ramin Serry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="188" end="201" title="Mariam Parris" label="Mariam Parris"/>
<link wikidata="Q144643" start="248" end="258" title="Shaun Toub" label="Shaun Toub"/>
<link wikidata="Q229766" start="274" end="292" title="Shohreh Aghdashloo" label="Shohreh Aghdashloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140370" start="360" end="382" title="Islamic fundamentalism" label="Islamic fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="479" end="504" title="Mary, the mother of Jesus" label="Mary, the mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42729158" start="563" end="571" title="Tuberose" label="Tuberose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66206" wikidata="Q129079" url="?curid=66206" title="Paul Verhoeven">
<text>Paul Verhoeven (; born 18 July 1938) is a Dutch film director. His films are known for their graphic violence and sexual content, combined with social satire. After receiving attention for the TV series &quot;Floris&quot; in his native Netherlands, Verhoeven&#x27;s breakthrough film was the romantic drama &quot;Turkish Delight&quot; (1973), starring frequent collaborator Rutger Hauer. Verhoeven later directed successful Dutch films including the period drama &quot;Keetje Tippel&quot; (1975), the war film &quot;Soldier of Orange&quot; (1977), the teen drama &quot;Spetters&quot; (1980) and the psychological thriller &quot;The Fourth Man&quot; (1983). 

In 1985, Verhoeven made his first Hollywood film &quot;Flesh and Blood&quot; and later had a successful career in the United States, directing science fiction films such as &quot;RoboCop&quot; (1987), &quot;Total Recall&quot; (1990), &quot;Starship Troopers&quot; (1997) and &quot;Hollow Man&quot; (2000), as well as the erotic thriller &quot;Basic Instinct&quot; (1992).

Verhoeven later returned to Europe, making the Dutch war film &quot;Black Book&quot; (2006), French psychological thriller &quot;Elle&quot; (2016) and the religious drama &quot;Benedetta&quot; (2021), all receiving positive reviews. &quot;Black Book&quot; and &quot;Elle&quot; were both nominated for BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language and &quot;Elle&quot; won Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film and César Award for Best Film. &quot;Black Book&quot; was also voted by the Dutch public, in 2008, as the best Dutch film ever made. In contrast, he won the Golden Raspberry Awards for Worst Picture and Worst Director for &quot;Showgirls&quot; (1995); he is one of the few people to have accepted their Golden Raspberry awards in person, and the first to directly attend the ceremony to receive it. &quot;Showgirls&quot; was a notorious box office flop at its initial theatrical release, but later enjoyed huge success in the home video market and became a cult classic. Verhoeven&#x27;s films have received a total of nine Academy Award nominations, mainly for editing and effects.

==Early life==
Paul Verhoeven was born in Amsterdam on 18 July 1938, the son of a schoolteacher, Wim Verhoeven, and a hatmaker, Nel van Schaardenburg. 

In 1943, the family moved to The Hague, the location of the German headquarters in the Netherlands during World War II. The Verhoeven house was near a German military base with V1- and V2-rocket launchers, which was repeatedly bombed by Allied forces. Their neighbours&#x27; house was hit and Verhoeven&#x27;s parents were almost killed when bombs fell on a street crossing. From this period, Verhoeven mentioned in interviews, he remembers images of violence, burning houses, dead bodies on the street, and continuous danger. As a small child, he experienced the war as an exciting adventure, and has compared himself with the character Bill Rowan in &quot;Hope and Glory&quot; (1987).

Verhoeven&#x27;s father became headteacher at the Van Heutszschool in The Hague, and Paul attended this school. Sometimes the two watched informative films at home with the school&#x27;s film projector. 

Verhoeven and his father went ten times to see &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1953). Verhoeven was a fan of the Dutch comic &quot;Dick Bos&quot;. The character Dick Bos is a private detective who fights crime using jujutsu. Verhoeven liked comic drawing; he created &quot;The Killer&quot;, a character in a detailed story of revenge. Other fiction he liked included &quot;Frankenstein&quot; and the Edgar Rice Burroughs Barsoom series.

Verhoeven attended public secondary school Gymnasium Haganum in The Hague. Later, beginning in 1955, he studied at Leiden University. He graduated with a doctorandus (MSc) with a double major, in mathematics and physics.

==Career==

===Short films and TV series (1960–1969)===
Verhoeven made his first film &quot;Één hagedis teveel&quot; (&quot;&quot;One Lizard Too Many&quot;) for the anniversary of his students&#x27; corps in 1960. In his last years at university Verhoeven also attended classes at the Netherlands Film Academy. After this he made three more short films: &quot;Nothing Special&quot; (1961), &quot;The Hitchhikers&quot; (1962) and &quot;Let&#x27;s Have a Party&quot; (1963).

Verhoeven has not professionally used his mathematics and physics degree, opting instead to invest his energies in a career in film. After his studies, he entered the Royal Dutch Navy as a conscript. He made the documentary &quot;Het Korps Mariniers&quot; (&quot;The Marine Corps&quot;&quot;, 1965), which won the French &#x27;Golden Sun&#x27; award for military films.
When he left the Navy, Verhoeven took his skills to Dutch television. First, he made a documentary about Anton Mussert titled &quot;Mussert&quot; (1968). His first major success was the 1969 television series &quot;Floris&quot;, starring Rutger Hauer in the title role. The concept of &quot;Floris&quot; was inspired by foreign series such as &quot;Ivanhoe&quot; and &quot;Thierry La Fronde&quot;.

===First feature films (1969–1983)===
Verhoeven&#x27;s first feature film &quot;Business Is Business&quot; was released in 1971 and was not well received. His first national success came in 1973 with &quot;Turkish Delight&quot;, starring Rutger Hauer and Monique van de Ven. Based on a novel by bestselling Dutch author Jan Wolkers, &quot;Turkish Delight&quot; tells the passionate love story of an artist and a young liberal girl from a conservative background. It received an Academy Award nomination for Best Foreign Language Film in 1974. In 1999, the film won a Golden Calf for Best Dutch Film of the Century. &quot;Katie Tippel&quot; (1975) again featured Hauer and van de Ven, but it did not match the success of &quot;Turkish Delight&quot;.

Verhoeven built on his reputation and achieved international success with the Golden Globe-nominated &quot;Soldier of Orange&quot; (1977), starring Rutger Hauer and Jeroen Krabbé. Based on a true story about the Dutch resistance in World War II, it was written by Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema. &quot;Soldier of Orange&quot; received the 1979 LA Film Critics Award for best foreign-language film, and it was also nominated for a Golden Globe in 1980.

In 1980, Verhoeven made &quot;Spetters&quot; with Renée Soutendijk and Rutger Hauer. The story is sometimes compared to &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot;, but it has more explicit violence and sexuality (in this case also homosexuality), which are sometimes seen as the director&#x27;s trademarks. &quot;The Fourth Man&quot; (1983) is a horror film starring Jeroen Krabbé and Renée Soutendijk. It was written by Gerard Soeteman from a novel by the Dutch writer Gerard Reve, and was Verhoeven&#x27;s last Dutch production until &quot;Black Book&quot; (2006).

&quot;The Seattle Times&quot; praised Verhoeven by saying he &quot;often appears to be a one-man Dutch movie industry&quot;. &quot;The San Diego Union-Tribune&quot; called Verhoeven &quot;a busy bee whose movies pollinate the festival circuit&quot;.

===Filmmaking in the United States (1983–2000)===
Gerard Soeteman also wrote the script for Verhoeven&#x27;s first English-language film, &quot;Flesh and Blood&quot; (1985), which starred Rutger Hauer and Jennifer Jason Leigh. Verhoeven moved to Hollywood for a wider range of opportunities in filmmaking. Working in the U.S., he made a serious change in style, directing big-budget, violent, special-effects-heavy hits &quot;RoboCop&quot; (1987) and &quot;Total Recall&quot; (1990)⁠ — each of which won an Academy Special Achievement Award: &quot;RoboCop&quot; for Sound Effects Editing and &quot;Total Recall&quot; for Visual Effects.

Verhoeven followed those successes with &quot;Basic Instinct&quot; (1992), an erotic thriller. The film&#x27;s most notorious scene shows Sharon Stone&#x27;s character in a police interrogation, where she uncrosses her legs, briefly revealing her vulva (she does not wear underwear underneath her skirt). The film received two Academy Award nominations, for Film Editing and for Original Music, and was the ninth-highest-grossing film of the year.

During this time, Verhoeven also worked on creating an historical epic based around the Crusades that would have starred Arnold Schwarzenegger. It went into pre-production in 1993, but a year later the studio backing it, Carolco, pulled funding for the project. Verhoeven would continue to discuss it throughout the 1990s.

Verhoeven&#x27;s next film was the poorly received, NC-17-rated &quot;Showgirls&quot; (1995), about a stripper in Las Vegas trying to make a career as a showgirl. It won seven Golden Raspberry Awards, including Worst Film and Worst Director; Verhoeven became the first director to accept his award in person. &quot;Showgirls&quot; enjoyed a large amount of success on the home video market, generating more than $100 million from video rentals, and became one of MGM&#x27;s top twenty all-time bestsellers.

After &quot;Basic Instinct&quot; and &quot;Showgirls&quot;, Verhoeven returned to the science fiction genre, utilizing the graphic violence and special-effects tropes that had marked his earlier films, making &quot;Starship Troopers&quot; (1997), loosely based on the novel of the same name by Robert A. Heinlein, as well as &quot;Hollow Man&quot; (2000). Each film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. He also served as an executive producer on an animated TV series called &quot;&quot;, which was based on the movie and novel of &quot;Starship Troopers&quot;. The series only ran for a single season, from August 1999 until April 2000.

===Return to Europe (2006–2021)===
After about twenty years of working and living in the United States, Verhoeven returned to the Netherlands for the shooting of a new film. Together with his screenwriter Gerard Soeteman, Verhoeven made &quot;Black Book&quot; (2006). The director was hailed by the host of the Netherlands Film Festival with the words &quot;The return of a hero&quot;. &quot;Black Book&quot; won six Golden Calves at this festival, including Best Director. When the shooting of &quot;Black Book&quot; was delayed due to financial issues, there was speculation about a new production. &quot;Beast of Bataan&quot; had been announced, but once the shooting for &quot;Black Book&quot; resumed, the other film was not made.
Verhoeven was knighted in the Order of the Netherlands Lion in 2007.

Since &quot;Black Book&quot;, Verhoeven has been connected to a large number of projects, but in the first decade after his return, none came to fruition. Some of those titles were produced with other directors at the helm, such as &quot;The Paperboy&quot;. In 2016, however, Verhoeven followed &quot;Black Book&quot; by directing a French film: &quot;Elle&quot;, an adaptation of a novel by Philippe Djian. A psychological thriller in which Isabelle Huppert plays a rape victim, &quot;Elle&quot; was selected for the Official Competition at the Cannes International Film Festival, where it obtained very favourable reviews.

In December 2016, it was announced that Verhoeven would be the president of the jury for the 67th Berlin International Film Festival, scheduled to take place in February 2017.

In April 2017, it was announced that filming of &quot;Benedetta&quot;, his next French film, would begin in August of the same year. It is a biopic about the life of Benedetta Carlini, portrayed by &quot;Elle&quot; co-star Virginie Efira, and is an adaptation of the non-fiction book &quot;Immodest Acts: The Life of a Lesbian Nun in Renaissance Italy&quot; by Judith C. Brown. In May 2018, it was announced that Charlotte Rampling would play a key supporting role. The film premiered at the 2021 Cannes Film Festival in competition for the Palme d&#x27;Or.
===Return to filmmaking in the United States (2022–present)===
Verhoeven is currently preparing his next film, &quot;Young Sinner&quot;, which reunites him with &quot;RoboCop&quot; screenwriter Edward Neumeier. An erotic political thriller, it is set in Washington DC and is about a &quot;young staffer who works for a powerful Senator [and] is drawn into a web of international intrigue and danger.&quot; Verhoeven hopes to begin shooting &quot;Young Sinner&quot; in 2024.

===Unrealized projects===
==Other activities==
Verhoeven was a member of the Jesus Seminar, and he was the only member who does not have a degree in biblical studies. He graduated with a degree in mathematics and physics from the University of Leiden. Since he is not a professional biblical exegete, his membership in the Jesus Seminar has occasionally been cited by opponents of the Seminar as a sign that this group is less scholarly than it claims. For example, Luke Timothy Johnson criticizes the Jesus Seminar&#x27;s methods on exegetical grounds, and also criticizes what he perceives to be a dependence on the theatrical and an attempt to manipulate the mainstream media. He singles out Verhoeven as a key player in the media activities of the Jesus Seminar. On the other hand, some Jesus Seminar members were unhappy with Verhoeven&#x27;s portrayal of Jesus as an eschatological prophet.

In 2007, Verhoeven wrote the book &quot;Jesus of Nazareth&quot; () about the life of Jesus of Nazareth. The book reviews the ideas of Jesus of Nazareth and the alleged corruption of these same ideas over the last 2,000 years. Co-written with Verhoeven&#x27;s biographer Rob Van Scheers, the book is the culmination of the research Verhoeven conducted in preparation for &quot;Jesus: The Man&quot;, a motion picture about the life of Christ. The book tells about the Jewish uprising against Roman rule and characterizes Jesus as a radical political activist, downplaying any supernatural events and miracles as unproved or unprovable. &quot;Jesus of Nazareth: A Realistic Portrait&quot; was released in September 2008 in Dutch, and was published in English in May 2010 by Seven Stories Press.

==Personal life==
In 1967, Verhoeven married Martine Tours, with whom he has two daughters.

==Filmography==

==Awards and nominations==
Academy Awards
Golden Globe Awards
BAFTA Awards
César Awards
Saturn Awards
Golden Raspberry Awards


==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129079" start="0" end="14" title="Paul Verhoeven" label="Paul Verhoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826627" start="209" end="215" title="Floris (TV series)" label="Floris"/>
<link wikidata="Q166960" start="313" end="328" title="Turkish Delight (1973 film)" label="Turkish Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q213574" start="374" end="386" title="Rutger Hauer" label="Rutger Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965292" start="469" end="482" title="Keetje Tippel" label="Keetje Tippel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62746" start="516" end="533" title="Soldier of Orange" label="Soldier of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q937734" start="569" end="577" title="Spetters" label="Spetters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127397" start="628" end="642" title="The Fourth Man (1983 film)" label="The Fourth Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428124" start="714" end="729" title="Flesh and Blood (1985 film)" label="Flesh and Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="838" end="845" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="866" end="878" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="Total Recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q478626" start="899" end="916" title="Starship Troopers (film)" label="Starship Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098140" start="940" end="950" title="Hollow Man" label="Hollow Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q146673" start="1002" end="1016" title="Basic Instinct" label="Basic Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q163549" start="1100" end="1110" title="Black Book (film)" label="Black Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544495" start="1161" end="1165" title="Elle (film)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55595776" start="1209" end="1218" title="Benedetta (film)" label="Benedetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925687" start="1333" end="1386" title="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language" label="BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q387380" start="1412" end="1461" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q645595" start="1466" end="1491" title="César Award for Best Film" label="César Award for Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q40237" start="1619" end="1641" title="Golden Raspberry Award" label="Golden Raspberry Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780634" start="1647" end="1660" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Picture" label="Worst Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238714" start="1665" end="1679" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Director" label="Worst Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q532264" start="1690" end="1699" title="Showgirls" label="Showgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633175" start="1750" end="1788" title="List of people who have accepted Golden Raspberry Awards" label="accepted their Golden Raspberry awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="2019" end="2031" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2086" end="2099" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2188" end="2197" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q663375" start="2264" end="2272" title="hatmaker" label="hatmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="2328" end="2337" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2405" end="2417" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q650153" start="2476" end="2503" title="V-weapons" label="V1- and V2-rocket launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912379" start="2636" end="2672" title="Bombing of the Bezuidenhout" label="when bombs fell on a street crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624413" start="2957" end="2971" title="Hope and Glory (film)" label="Hope and Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q668500" start="3174" end="3188" title="film projector" label="film projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="3245" end="3266" title="The War of the Worlds (1953 film)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413549" start="3326" end="3334" title="Dick Bos" label="Dick Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="3411" end="3418" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="3568" end="3580" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q148234" start="3595" end="3615" title="Edgar Rice Burroughs" label="Edgar Rice Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501254" start="3616" end="3623" title="Barsoom" label="Barsoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q367203" start="3676" end="3693" title="Gymnasium Haganum" label="Gymnasium Haganum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="3748" end="3765" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q840627" start="3787" end="3798" title="doctorandus" label="doctorandus"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3829" end="3840" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3845" end="3852" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515311" start="4039" end="4059" title="Student Corps" label="students&amp;#x27; corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164651" start="4140" end="4164" title="Netherlands Film and Television Academy" label="Netherlands Film Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="4496" end="4512" title="Royal Dutch Navy" label="Royal Dutch Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537005" start="4804" end="4817" title="Anton Mussert" label="Anton Mussert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826627" start="4914" end="4920" title="Floris (TV series)" label="Floris"/>
<link wikidata="Q213574" start="4937" end="4949" title="Rutger Hauer" label="Rutger Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331697" start="5048" end="5055" title="Ivanhoe (1958 TV series)" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668270" start="5072" end="5089" title="Thierry La Fronde" label="Thierry La Fronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134605" start="5178" end="5198" title="Business Is Business (1971 film)" label="Business Is Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q166960" start="5304" end="5319" title="Turkish Delight (1973 film)" label="Turkish Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q468259" start="5353" end="5371" title="Monique van de Ven" label="Monique van de Ven"/>
<link wikidata="Q379679" start="5418" end="5429" title="Jan Wolkers" label="Jan Wolkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5576" end="5589" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="5605" end="5631" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q279820" start="5665" end="5676" title="Golden Calf (award)" label="Golden Calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965292" start="5719" end="5731" title="Katie Tippel" label="Katie Tippel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="5926" end="5938" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62746" start="5955" end="5972" title="Soldier of Orange" label="Soldier of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q62845" start="6013" end="6026" title="Jeroen Krabbé" label="Jeroen Krabbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6080" end="6092" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248705" start="6112" end="6136" title="Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema" label="Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q937734" start="6325" end="6333" title="Spetters" label="Spetters"/>
<link wikidata="Q468236" start="6345" end="6361" title="Renée Soutendijk" label="Renée Soutendijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654" start="6421" end="6441" title="Saturday Night Fever" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127397" start="6598" end="6612" title="The Fourth Man (1983 film)" label="The Fourth Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510198" start="6706" end="6721" title="Gerard Soeteman" label="Gerard Soeteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q364153" start="6755" end="6766" title="Gerard Reve" label="Gerard Reve"/>
<link wikidata="Q163549" start="6827" end="6837" title="Black Book (film)" label="Black Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="6859" end="6876" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547109" start="6984" end="7011" title="The San Diego Union-Tribune" label="The San Diego Union-Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428124" start="7248" end="7263" title="Flesh and Blood (1985 film)" label="Flesh and Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q213574" start="7292" end="7304" title="Rutger Hauer" label="Rutger Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q232902" start="7309" end="7329" title="Jennifer Jason Leigh" label="Jennifer Jason Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032630" start="7611" end="7644" title="Academy Special Achievement Award" label="Academy Special Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="7652" end="7659" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="7702" end="7714" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="Total Recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q146673" start="7788" end="7802" title="Basic Instinct" label="Basic Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="7880" end="7892" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="8279" end="8287" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="8312" end="8333" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044291" start="8412" end="8419" title="Carolco Pictures" label="Carolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="8567" end="8572" title="NC-17" label="NC-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q532264" start="8585" end="8594" title="Showgirls" label="Showgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="8629" end="8638" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535215" start="8691" end="8714" title="1995 Golden Raspberry Awards" label="Golden Raspberry Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="8887" end="8897" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="8978" end="8981" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q478626" start="9238" end="9255" title="Starship Troopers (film)" label="Starship Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="9317" end="9335" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098140" start="9354" end="9364" title="Hollow Man" label="Hollow Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510198" start="9892" end="9907" title="Gerard Soeteman" label="Gerard Soeteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q163549" start="9930" end="9940" title="Black Book (film)" label="Black Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q448715" start="9998" end="10023" title="Netherlands Film Festival" label="Netherlands Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q279820" start="10104" end="10117" title="Golden Calf (award)" label="Golden Calves"/>
<link wikidata="Q254004" start="10294" end="10309" title="Beast of Bataan" label="Beast of Bataan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="10453" end="10482" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026872" start="10731" end="10743" title="The Paperboy (2012 film)" label="The Paperboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544495" start="10845" end="10849" title="Elle (film)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q733112" start="10885" end="10899" title="Philippe Djian" label="Philippe Djian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106365" start="10935" end="10951" title="Isabelle Huppert" label="Isabelle Huppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q27885683" start="11212" end="11251" title="67th Berlin International Film Festival" label="67th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q55595776" start="11350" end="11359" title="Benedetta (film)" label="Benedetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638073" start="11462" end="11479" title="Benedetta Carlini" label="Benedetta Carlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560737" start="11519" end="11533" title="Virginie Efira" label="Virginie Efira"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11586" end="11647" title="Immodest Acts: The Life of a Lesbian Nun in Renaissance Italy" label="Immodest Acts: The Life of a Lesbian Nun in Renaissance Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303321" start="11657" end="11672" title="Judith C. Brown" label="Judith C. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q234679" start="11709" end="11727" title="Charlotte Rampling" label="Charlotte Rampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q100231227" start="11788" end="11813" title="2021 Cannes Film Festival" label="2021 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="11837" end="11852" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="12021" end="12028" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q246321" start="12048" end="12063" title="Edward Neumeier" label="Edward Neumeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095565" start="12406" end="12419" title="Jesus Seminar" label="Jesus Seminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="12478" end="12494" title="biblical studies" label="biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="12621" end="12628" title="exegete" label="exegete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702397" start="12795" end="12815" title="Luke Timothy Johnson" label="Luke Timothy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="12863" end="12881" title="Biblical criticism" label="exegetical grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="13202" end="13216" title="Eschatology" label="eschatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="13217" end="13224" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="13370" end="13378" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457481" start="13998" end="14017" title="Seven Stories Press" label="Seven Stories Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66207" wikidata="Q5331835" url="?curid=66207" title="Ebertfest">
<text>Ebertfest is an annual film festival held every April in Champaign, Illinois, United States, organized by the College of Media at the University of Illinois. Roger Ebert, the TV and &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; film critic, was a native of the adjoining town of Urbana, Illinois, and is an alumnus of the University. Founded in 1999 as Roger Ebert&#x27;s Overlooked Film Festival, this event is the only long-running film festival created by a critic. Despite Ebert&#x27;s death in 2013, the festival continues to operate based on Ebert&#x27;s notes and vision for the kinds of films he championed.

The 2020 festival was postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic. The 22nd edition of the event was rescheduled three times, eventually opening on April 20, 2022.

== Origins ==
The festival is a direct descendant of a program put on at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign in 1997 called Cyberfest which used the supposed birthday of HAL (the computer in the film &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;) to highlight the University&#x27;s involvement in the history of computers and computing. The film was to be shown as part of Cyberfest, Roger Ebert had agreed to host and actor Gary Lockwood was a special guest.

It was suggested that the film should ideally be shown as it was originally, in 70 mm format. The original plan was to have the screening at the University&#x27;s performing arts center but time constraints vs. the need to install projection equipment and elaborate six channel sound made this impossible. Someone suggested looking at the Virginia Theatre, as 70 mm films had been shown there in the past. At this point the theatre was in the hands of a local live theatre group and had not run films since sold by a theatre chain. All concerned were pleasantly surprised to learn the chain had left behind not only what is reputed to be the finest 35/70 mm projector made but also the screen and speakers. The rest of the equipment was brought in for the special showing which went perfectly.

== Venue ==
Since its inception in 1999, Ebertfest has been held at the Virginia Theatre, an old-time movie palace in Champaign built in 1921 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The theatre is now owned by the Champaign Park District. Ebert spoke of having attended films at the Virginia while growing up in Champaign-Urbana and attending the University. It was Ebert&#x27;s intention that all festival attendees see all of the films in a single theatre in order to create a sense of community among film lovers.

In 2014, a bronze statue of Roger Ebert was unveiled outside of the Virginia Theatre as tribute to both Ebert and Ebertfest.

=== Growth ===
Through donations, the Virginia has been able to fully equip its projection and sound system with a second projector, the latest in digital sound equipment and top quality lenses. The theatre&#x27;s screen is 56 feet wide by 23 feet high, with a viewable image of up to 50 feet wide x 21½ feet high. The main speakers sit directly behind the screen during film presentations and are augmented by 36 surround sound speakers.

Instrumental in these upgrades has been notable Chicago-based projection expert James Bond who doubles as one of the projectionists during the festival.

=== Capacity ===
Since 2013, the Virginia Theatre has a seating capacity of 1,463. The theatre was closed from 2012 until April 2013 for renovations that included replacing all of the seats. Capacity dropped from about 1,550 to 1,463 but the new seats are more comfortable and the theatre offers wheelchair and companion access.

== Name change ==
In April 2007, it was announced that beginning in 2008 with the tenth festival &quot;Overlooked&quot; would be dropped from the name and subsequent events would be known as &quot;Roger Ebert&#x27;s Film Festival&quot;, but commonly referred to as simply Ebertfest. This did not necessarily indicate any change in the philosophy or theme but simply eliminated the need to explain when current or even unreleased films were included which had sometimes been the case. They had sometimes been jokingly referred to as &quot;pre-overlooked.&quot;

== Selection criteria ==
Unlike typical film festivals, Ebertfest does not accept submissions. Roger Ebert selected films for the festival which in his opinion are excellent, but have been overlooked by the public or by film distribution companies. All films were selected from those that Ebert saw in the course of his normal reviewing work. Since Ebert&#x27;s death, all films have been selected by the Festival Committee.

The original purpose of the Overlooked Film Festival, as reflected in the name, was to showcase films that had not been given enough attention by the public, film critics, or even distributors. Ebert had cheerfully admitted that he could bend the definition of &quot;overlooked&quot; to accommodate any film that he would like to include, since entire genres and formats can be overlooked as well as individual films. The selection philosophy is expected to continue, but with the name change there will no longer be a need to come up with a pretext for including any film.

=== 70 mm ===
For many years, the festival opened with a film in the 70 mm format. The films may be major releases, like &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; or &quot;Patton&quot;, or less well-known, like 2005&#x27;s showing of the French film &quot;Playtime.&quot; These films were all chosen primarily due to their use of the 70 mm process, which Ebert felt was overlooked.

=== Silent film ===
Each year a silent film is shown with live orchestral accompaniment. The films selected are generally well-known (for example, &quot;Nosferatu&quot;), but Ebert felt that silent films in general are overlooked by the majority of moviegoers. The festival also strives to include a musical film for the same reason. Performers providing live accompaniment have included the Champaign-Urbana Symphony Orchestra and the Alloy Orchestra.

== Festival format ==
Twelve to fourteen films are presented at each festival, opening with a single film on a Wednesday night and concluding with a single movie the following Sunday. On each day during the interim three or four films are presented. As of 2019, the format excluded the Sunday screening.

For the first eight festivals, before each screening Roger Ebert would make a few introductory remarks. After the film was shown he would have a discussion on stage with the filmmakers or others connected with the film, sometimes hosting a brief panel discussion.

After Ebert lost his speaking voice due to cancer, starting with the ninth festival in 2007, his wife Chaz assumed many of the hosting duties. Post-show panels are led by his &quot;Far-Flung Correspondents&quot; or other respected film professionals, such as film historian David Bordwell and film critic Christy Lemire.

On April 4, 2013, Ebert died after a long battle with cancer. Despite his death, the film festival went along as scheduled, simultaneously acting as a tribute to Ebert&#x27;s legacy. At the opening of the 15th annual Ebertfest, it was announced by Ebert&#x27;s wife, Chaz, that his alma mater, the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, will be establishing a new Film Studies program within the College of Media in honor of his legacy. The program will be funded in part by a $1 million grant from Ebert and his wife to the University. The non-degree program will be both a collection of film-related seminars and classes as well as a platform for Ebertfest to continue.

=== Festival guests ===
Since its inception, many film directors, actors, producers, cinematographers and other crew members, as well as studio executives have been invited to participate in Ebertfest. Examples include Werner Herzog, Spike Lee, and Tilda Swinton.

For the tenth Ebertfest in 2010, many of the international invited guests were unable to attend due to the volcanic eruptions in Iceland that disrupted air travel in Europe.

For the 2022 festival, actor Gilbert Gottfried was scheduled to appear as a panelist to discuss the documentary film about him, &quot;Gilbert&quot;. In the aftermath of his death on April 12, 2022, Ebertfest announced it was dedicating the event to the memories of Gottfried and Sidney Poitier.

=== Awards ===
As a non-competitive film festival, Ebertfest does not have jury or audience awards. But beginning with the sixth festival in 2004, all invited guests have been given an award originally referred to by Ebert as the Order of the Silver Thumb, but subsequently known as the Golden Thumb Award. The Golden Thumb trophy is a casting of Roger Ebert&#x27;s thumb in the up position, made by the R.S. Owens &amp; Company, which is the same business that makes the Oscar statuette.

The first Roger Ebert Humanitarian Award was presented in 2016 to co-directors Andrew Young and Stephen Apkon for their documentary film &quot;Disturbing the Peace.&quot; The film focuses on the work of Combatants for Peace, a group of former Israeli soldiers and Palestinian fighters who put down their weapons and began working together for peace in the region.

In 2017, the second Ebert Humanitarian Award was presented to Norman Lear for &quot;a lifetime of empathy&quot;. Lear was the first person to receive the award, because the 2016 award was given to the film &quot;Disturbing the Peace&quot;. Lear was a special guest at the 2017 festival, to screen the documentary about his life.

In 2019, the third Ebert Humanitarian Award was presented to Morgan Neville for his film &quot;Won&#x27;t You Be My Neighbor?&quot;. That same year, Chaz Ebert presented the first-ever Ebertfest Icon Award to Rita Coburn Whack for the documentary film she co-directed about poet and civil rights activist Maya Angelou, titled &quot;Maya Angelou: And Still I Rise&quot;.

=== Academic panel discussions ===
Co-sponsored by the University of Illinois College of Media, every Ebertfest since its inception has included panel discussions with invited festival guests and scholars from academia, covering a variety of film-related topics. These discussions are free and open to the public, and are held in the mornings during the festival. From 1999 to 2016, the panels were held on the University of Illinois campus. Beginning in 2017, the panel discussions are held in a hotel close to the Virginia Theatre.

=== Live streaming ===
Beginning in 2010, the panel discussions, film introductions, and post-film discussions/question and answer sessions with festival guests have been streamed live, and then archived on Ebertfest&#x27;s YouTube channel.

=== Admission ===
Festival goers can purchase tickets to individual shows or full-festival passes. The number of passes sold is limited to 1,000 with the remainder of seats allotted for individual tickets or sponsors. As passholders do not necessarily attend every show, it is often possible to obtain tickets at the last minute after empty seats are counted. At every festival since 2002, all patrons waiting in line for sold-out films were able to gain entry to the theatre.

Passes for the first Ebertfest in 1999 cost $30, and individual film tickets were $5. In 2016, passes cost $150, and individual film tickets were $15. In 2023, passes cost $200 and individual film tickets were $20.

The first sell-out of passes was in 2004.

== Festival administration ==
Festival founder, programmer and host, 1999–2012: Roger Ebert

Festival producer, 1999–2006: Nancy Casey

Festival producer and host, 2007–present: Chaz Ebert

Festival director, 1999–present: Nate Kohn

== Films ==
The following is a complete list of films presented at Ebertfest.

===2024===
Festival schedule

===2023===
Festival schedule

===2022===
Festival schedule

===2019===
Festival schedule

=== 2018 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2017 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2016 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2015 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2014 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2013 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2012 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2011 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2010 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2009 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2008 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2007 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2006 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2005 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2004 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2003 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2002 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2001 ===
Festival schedule

=== 2000 ===
Festival schedule

=== 1999 ===
Festival schedule

== External links ==
*Rotten Tomatoes feature from 2003, archived April 21, 2008
*Critic Doctor feature on Ebertfest 2001, archived March 14, 2007

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5331835" start="0" end="9" title="Ebertfest" label="Ebertfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q220505" start="23" end="36" title="film festival" label="film festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q577964" start="57" end="66" title="Champaign, Illinois" label="Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="68" end="76" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864729" start="110" end="126" title="UIUC College of Media" label="College of Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="134" end="156" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="158" end="169" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="188" end="205" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482" start="212" end="223" title="Film criticism" label="film critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q462184" start="263" end="279" title="Urbana, Illinois" label="Urbana, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331835" start="337" end="380" title="Ebertfest" label="Roger Ebert&amp;#x27;s Overlooked Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="644" end="664" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q833933" start="945" end="948" title="HAL 9000" label="HAL"/>
<link wikidata="" start="981" end="1002" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q640929" start="1188" end="1201" title="Gary Lockwood" label="Gary Lockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934627" start="1563" end="1579" title="Virginia Theatre (Champaign)" label="Virginia Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934627" start="2091" end="2107" title="Virginia Theatre (Champaign)" label="Virginia Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2179" end="2215" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069913" start="2249" end="2272" title="Champaign Park District" label="Champaign Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q130210617" start="2571" end="2592" title="statue of Roger Ebert" label="statue of Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3167" end="3174" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q261242" start="5234" end="5246" title="70 mm film" label="70 mm format"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5292" end="5313" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q217220" start="5329" end="5335" title="Patton (film)" label="Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454574" start="5413" end="5421" title="Playtime" label="Playtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="5572" end="5583" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q151895" start="5693" end="5702" title="Nosferatu" label="Nosferatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069910" start="5932" end="5967" title="Champaign-Urbana Symphony Orchestra" label="Champaign-Urbana Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733258" start="5976" end="5991" title="Alloy Orchestra" label="Alloy Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q81746034" start="6666" end="6670" title="Chaz Ebert" label="Chaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q638397" start="6838" end="6852" title="David Bordwell" label="David Bordwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113651" start="6869" end="6883" title="Christy Lemire" label="Christy Lemire"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="7184" end="7226" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="7783" end="7796" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="7798" end="7807" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q200534" start="7813" end="7826" title="Tilda Swinton" label="Tilda Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q269442" start="7936" end="7954" title="2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull" label="volcanic eruptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="8033" end="8050" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605553" start="8138" end="8145" title="Gilbert (film)" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="8283" end="8297" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741343" start="8666" end="8690" title="Thumbs signal" label="thumb in the up position"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917205" start="8704" end="8728" title="R.S. Owens &amp;amp; Company" label="R.S. Owens &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904133" start="8993" end="9013" title="Combatants for Peace" label="Combatants for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270283" start="9217" end="9228" title="Norman Lear" label="Norman Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885146" start="9546" end="9560" title="Morgan Neville" label="Morgan Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151494" start="9580" end="9610" title="Won&amp;#x27;t You Be My Neighbor? (film)" label="Won&amp;#x27;t You Be My Neighbor?"/>
<link wikidata="Q19526" start="9790" end="9802" title="Maya Angelou" label="Maya Angelou"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="11450" end="11461" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66215" wikidata="Q639433" url="?curid=66215" title="Night Gallery">
<text>Night Gallery is an American anthology television series that aired on NBC from December 16, 1970, to May 27, 1973, featuring stories of horror and the macabre. Rod Serling, who had gained fame from an earlier series, &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, served both as the on-air host of &quot;Night Gallery&quot; and as a major contributor of scripts, although he did not have the same control of content and tone as he had on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. Serling viewed &quot;Night Gallery&quot; as a logical extension of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, but while both series shared an interest in thought-provoking dark fantasy, more of &quot;Zone&quot;″s offerings were science fiction while &quot;Night Gallery&quot; focused on horrors of the supernatural.

==Background==
===Format and style===

Serling appeared in an art gallery setting as the curator and introduced the macabre tales that made up each episode by unveiling paintings (by artists Thomas J. Wright and Jaroslav &quot;Jerry&quot; Gebr) that depicted the stories. His intro usually was, “Good evening, and welcome to a private showing of three paintings, displayed here for the first time. Each is a collector’s item in its own way—not because of any special artistic quality, but because each captures on a canvas, suspended in time and space, a frozen moment of a nightmare.”
&quot;Night Gallery&quot; regularly presented adaptations of classic fantasy tales by authors such as H. P. Lovecraft, as well as original works, many of which were by Serling himself. &quot;Night Gallery&quot;&#x27;s multi-segment presentation mirrored the EC horror comics of the 1950s, and hadn&#x27;t been seen on television before, except for on the one-off &quot;Trio for Terror&quot; episode of &quot;Thriller&quot; in 1961. 

The series was introduced with a pilot television film consisting of three segments or movies, that aired on November 8, 1969. The second segment of the film, &quot;Eyes,&quot; was the directorial debut of Steven Spielberg, as well as one of the last acting performances by Joan Crawford.

According to Rod Serling&#x27;s wife Carol, NBC envisioned &quot;Night Gallery&quot; as being a show about &quot;action, ghouls and gore&quot;. While Serling was fine with having horror elements, he wanted it to be infused with social commentary. Some of Serling&#x27;s scripts were rejected by producer Jack Laird. He was a fan of the classic Universal horror films, and preferred NBC&#x27;s vision of the show. 

In its second season, the series began using original comic blackout sketches between the longer story segments in some episodes, with this concept being conceived by Jack Laird. Most of the blackout sketches were written by Laird himself, and they often featured supernatural characters (such as vampires) in black comedy situations. The inclusion of the short blackout sketches meant that some episodes in the second season had up to four different segments. Rod Serling opposed their presence on the show, due to their contrasting tone, and several of them have no introduction from Serling. He stated &quot;I thought they [the blackout sketches] distorted the thread of what we were trying to do on &quot;Night Gallery&quot;. I don&#x27;t think one can show Edgar Allan Poe and then come back with Flip Wilson for 34 seconds. I just don&#x27;t think they fit.&quot; In another interview, he referred to them as &quot;foreign and substantially incorrect&quot;, complaining that &quot;you can&#x27;t sustain the mood of horror or suspense and then intersperse light laughter in the middle of it and then expect to be able to go back in a neutral fashion to an element of horror. You spend fifteen minutes creating a mood for an audience and then you dispel it arbitrarily by trying to make them laugh.&quot; These types of segments were much less frequent in the third and final season. For the third season, the show had a lower budget, and shifted towards a shorter half-hour format, featuring either a single segment, or a single segment and one short blackout sketch. During this season, NBC explicitly asked for no more philosophical &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;-esque stories. They also demanded less adaptations of classic European-inspired fiction, in favor of more American-centric stories. NBC moved the show from Wednesday to Sunday, but it was still placed in the same 10 p.m. timeslot. Regarding the changes in the third season, Serling said at the time, &quot;I&#x27;m fucking furious. These people are taking what could have been a good series and they&#x27;re so commercializing it it&#x27;s not going to be commercial.&quot; Serling added that they wanted &quot;considerable action as opposed to anything insightful, cerebral or sensitive.&quot; It has been claimed that NBC pushed for &quot;Night Gallery&quot; to become strictly an action show for the third season, with no supernatural elements, although this would not end up being the case.

&quot;Night Gallery&quot; was initially part of a rotating anthology or wheel series called &quot;Four in One&quot;. This 1970–1971 television series rotated four separate shows, including &quot;McCloud&quot;, &quot;SFX&quot; (&quot;San Francisco International Airport&quot;) and &quot;The Psychiatrist&quot;. Two of these, &quot;Night Gallery&quot; and &quot;McCloud,&quot; were renewed for the 1971–1972 season, with &quot;McCloud&quot; becoming the most popular and longest running of the four.

===Writing===
Serling wrote many of the teleplays, including &quot;Camera Obscura&quot; (based on a short story by Basil Copper), &quot;The Caterpillar&quot; (based on a short story by Oscar Cook), &quot;Class of &#x27;99&quot;, &quot;Cool Air&quot; (based on a short story by H.P. Lovecraft), &quot;The Doll&quot;, &quot;Green Fingers&quot;, &quot;Lindemann&#x27;s Catch&quot;, and &quot;The Messiah on Mott Street&quot; (heavily influenced by Bernard Malamud&#x27;s &quot;Angel Levine&quot;). Non-Serling efforts include &quot;The Dead Man&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ll Never Leave You—Ever&quot;, &quot;Pickman&#x27;s Model&quot; (based on a short story by H.P. Lovecraft), &quot;A Question of Fear&quot;, &quot;Silent Snow, Secret Snow&quot;, and &quot;The Sins of the Fathers&quot;.

Robert Bloch wrote two teleplays for the show. &quot;Logoda&#x27;s Heads&quot; was based on the story by August Derleth. &quot;Last Rites for a Dead Druid&quot; originally was an adaptation by Bloch of the H.P. Lovecraft/Hazel Heald collaboration &quot;Out of the Aeons&quot;; however, Bloch&#x27;s script was not used, and the episode was rewritten and retitled. As a result, &quot;Last Rites for a Dead Druid&quot; bears no resemblance to &quot;Out of the Aeons&quot;.

===Music===
The show featured various composers. The original pilot theme and background music was composed by Billy Goldenberg. The theme for the first two seasons, composed by Gil Mellé, is noted for being one of the first television openings to use electronic instruments. For the third season, Mellé&#x27;s theme was replaced with a more frantic orchestral piece by Eddie Sauter. Currently, no music from the show has been released commercially.

==Episodes==

==Legacy==
While Serling was displeased with the creative interference on &quot;Night Gallery&quot;, he still mentioned &quot;They&#x27;re Tearing Down Tim Riley&#x27;s Bar&quot; as one of the best pieces of work he&#x27;d written, putting it above even his &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; material. Serling&#x27;s &quot;Night Gallery&quot; introductions were parodied on &quot;The Simpsons&quot;&#x27; fourth annual Treehouse of Horror special in 1993. It had a wraparound structure featuring Bart Simpson in the Serling role, introducing several paintings. &quot;Night Gallery&quot; was also parodied on a 1995 episode of &quot;Tiny Toons&quot;, titled &quot;Night Ghoulery&quot;. The series was produced by former &quot;Night Gallery&quot; director Steven Spielberg. 

In 2023, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; included it on their list of the 21 best horror anthology shows of all time.

===Award nominations===
&quot;Night Gallery&quot; was nominated for an Emmy Award for its first-season episode &quot;They&#x27;re Tearing Down Tim Riley&#x27;s Bar&quot; as the Outstanding Single Program on American television in 1971. In 1972, the series received another nomination (Outstanding Achievement in Makeup) for the second-season episode &quot;Pickman&#x27;s Model&quot;. Serling himself received an Edgar Allan Poe Award for writing the pilot.

==Syndication==
Shortly after &quot;Night Gallery&quot; was cancelled, the 60-minute episodes from the first two seasons were re-edited for a 30-minute time slot. This was in order to increase the number of episodes that were available for syndication. Many segments were severely cut, and others extended by inserting &quot;new&quot; scenes of recycled, previously discarded, or stock footage to fill up the time. For example, the segment &quot;The Different Ones&quot; was extended from 15 minutes to 24 minutes, which made it long enough to air as its own stand-alone episode. This was achieved using stock footage from &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;, &quot;Silent Running&quot; and the Apollo space missions. One of the most heavily cut segments was &quot;They&#x27;re Tearing Down Tim Riley&#x27;s Bar&quot;, which was edited down from 41 minutes to 24 minutes. For time reasons, some of the segments were paired with segments that they didn&#x27;t originally air alongside. The three segments from the 1969 TV movie pilot were not included as part of the syndication package, because they had already entered syndication as a stand-alone movie.

The syndication edits for &quot;Night Gallery&quot; were overseen by Harry Tatelman of Universal. In their book &quot;Rod Serling&#x27;s Night Gallery: An After-Hours Tour&quot;, authors Scott Skelton and Jim Benson identify 39 of the 98 individual segments that were produced for &quot;Night Gallery&quot; as being &quot;severely altered&quot; in syndication. Segments such as &quot;Green Fingers&quot; and &quot;Lindemann&#x27;s Catch&quot; had new music inserted, which leaned towards more of a typical horror sound. The music was changed in an attempt to heighten the tension, and it was also a by-product of having to either cut down segments or pad them out. Richard Bracken, one of Harry Tatelman&#x27;s editors on &quot;Night Gallery&quot;, later said &quot;Harry was given the assignment by the studio and it was a job he knew that he could do one way or the other, and he did. I don&#x27;t know if there was any particular glee in changing the style and content of the show, as much as getting the job done.&quot;

25 episodes of an unrelated, short-lived supernatural series from 1972, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot;, were also incorporated into the syndicated version of the series. Serling was paid 100,000 dollars to film introductions for the episodes from &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot;, with new paintings also being commissioned for them. Serling&#x27;s introductions for &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; were written by an unknown member of Harry Tatelman&#x27;s staff. As &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; was originally a one-hour show, these episodes were all severely edited to fit into the half-hour timeslot. In order to have more commercials, some television stations required a few extra minutes be cut from episodes, in addition to the edits that had already been made by Tatelman. These edits were done by people working at their respective stations, and are described as having less care put into them when compared to Tatelman&#x27;s edits. In later years, stations would simply speed up the episodes instead of creating their own edits, which would lead to a higher pitch in the voice of the actors. 

Rod Serling and Jack Laird were both said to be &quot;livid&quot; with the syndication edits. Some directors were allowed input before their segments were edited for syndication, including Jeannot Szwarc. When asked what he thought about the show&#x27;s syndicated version, Szwarc said in 1998, &quot;what they&#x27;ve done to it is absolutely criminal. But they don&#x27;t give a shit. That has always been the disease of Hollywood. They don&#x27;t care about the past, all they care about is making a lot of money &quot;now&quot;.&quot; Szwarc additionally said that he had stopped watching the show, since the syndicated version was still being heavily used on television at that point.

The original, uncut and un-edited hour-long version of the series (and without the additional &quot;Sixth Sense&quot; episodes) has been shown on STARZ!’s Encore Mystery premium movie cable network. The show has aired in the 30-minute syndicated format in several markets through the Retro Television Network in the past.

MeTV had broadcast rights for &quot;Night Gallery&quot; and aired the show in its syndicated, 30-minute format, including the edited &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; episodes.

From May 21 to May 23, 2016, Decades aired a marathon of the series.

On December 6, 2018, Syfy announced that it had plans to revive the &quot;Night Gallery&quot; series.

On April 6, 2020, Comet TV began airing the syndicated version of the show.

==Home media==

Universal Studios has released all 3 seasons on DVD in Region 1 as well as the first season on DVD in the UK.

On September 12, 2017, Universal released &quot;Night Gallery: The Complete Series&quot; on DVD in Region 1.

==See also==
Similar series

* &quot;Alcoa Presents: One Step Beyond&quot;
* &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot;
* &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;
* &quot;Creepshow&quot;
* &quot;Darkroom&quot;
* &quot;Fear Itself&quot;
* &quot;Masters of Horror&quot;
* &quot;Masters of Science Fiction&quot;
* &quot;Monsters&quot;
* &quot;Night Visions&quot;
* &quot;Science Fiction Theatre&quot;
* &quot;Tales from the Crypt&quot;
* &quot;Tales from the Darkside&quot;
* &quot;Tales of Tomorrow&quot;
* &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;
* &quot;The Ray Bradbury Theater&quot;
* &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;
* &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; franchise
* &quot;Thriller&quot;
* &quot;Way Out&quot;
==References==
==External links==
* Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;Night Gallery&quot;: A Shadowy Museum of the Outre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="29" end="56" title="anthology series" label="anthology television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="71" end="74" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="137" end="143" title="horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705215" start="152" end="159" title="macabre" label="macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="161" end="172" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="224" end="241" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q794912" start="614" end="626" title="dark fantasy" label="dark fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="670" end="685" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="744" end="756" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007870" start="821" end="832" title="art gallery" label="art gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525240" start="950" end="966" title="Thomas J. Wright" label="Thomas J. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="1414" end="1421" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="1447" end="1462" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274252" start="1603" end="1605" title="EC Comics" label="EC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990884" start="1753" end="1761" title="Thriller (American TV series)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136834" start="1812" end="1833" title="Night Gallery (film)" label="pilot television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="1985" end="2001" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="2053" end="2066" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157240" start="2373" end="2383" title="Jack Laird" label="Jack Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037884" start="2413" end="2435" title="Universal Classic Monsters" label="Universal horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923223" start="2544" end="2559" title="Blackout gag" label="blackout sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="3246" end="3261" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073760" start="3286" end="3297" title="Flip Wilson" label="Flip Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566423" start="5019" end="5031" title="wheel series" label="wheel series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475686" start="5045" end="5056" title="Four in One (TV series)" label="Four in One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030989" start="5142" end="5149" title="McCloud (TV series)" label="McCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671562" start="5174" end="5221" title="San Francisco International Airport (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;San Francisco International Airport&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988876" start="5233" end="5249" title="The Psychiatrist (TV series)" label="The Psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886798" start="5561" end="5573" title="Basil Copper" label="Basil Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105927" start="5631" end="5641" title="Oscar Cook" label="Oscar Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071759" start="5681" end="5689" title="Cool Air" label="Cool Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="5723" end="5737" title="H.P. Lovecraft" label="H.P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q351547" start="5891" end="5906" title="Bernard Malamud" label="Bernard Malamud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317316" start="6045" end="6065" title="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model" label="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514678" start="6154" end="6178" title="Silent Snow, Secret Snow" label="Silent Snow, Secret Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="6228" end="6240" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q509002" start="6333" end="6347" title="August Derleth" label="August Derleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336366" start="6449" end="6460" title="Hazel Heald" label="Hazel Heald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700840" start="6481" end="6497" title="Out of the Aeons" label="Out of the Aeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q328637" start="6811" end="6827" title="Billy Goldenberg" label="Billy Goldenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382704" start="6878" end="6887" title="Gil Mellé" label="Gil Mellé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282967" start="7070" end="7082" title="Eddie Sauter" label="Eddie Sauter"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="7537" end="7549" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444196" start="7562" end="7575" title="Treehouse of Horror IV" label="fourth annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982595" start="7576" end="7595" title="List of The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror episodes" label="Treehouse of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="7653" end="7665" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q387943" start="7789" end="7799" title="Tiny Toons" label="Tiny Toons"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7946" end="7966" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="8122" end="8132" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317316" start="8407" end="8427" title="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model" label="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="8463" end="8484" title="Edgar Allan Poe Award" label="Edgar Allan Poe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q202009" start="9138" end="9152" title="Fahrenheit 451" label="Fahrenheit 451"/>
<link wikidata="Q770904" start="9166" end="9180" title="Silent Running" label="Silent Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="9195" end="9201" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958238" start="10760" end="10775" title="The Sixth Sense (American TV series)" label="The Sixth Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="12611" end="12617" title="STARZ!" label="STARZ!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525868" start="12620" end="12634" title="Encore (TV network)" label="Encore Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077724" start="12749" end="12773" title="Retro Television Network" label="Retro Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="12788" end="12792" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350875" start="12989" end="12996" title="Decades (TV network)" label="Decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="13051" end="13055" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189282" start="13151" end="13159" title="Comet TV" label="Comet TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="13226" end="13243" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13484" end="13515" title="Alcoa Presents: One Step Beyond" label="Alcoa Presents: One Step Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="13530" end="13555" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="13570" end="13585" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042594" start="13600" end="13609" title="Creepshow (TV series)" label="Creepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821555" start="13624" end="13632" title="Darkroom (TV series)" label="Darkroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q465776" start="13647" end="13658" title="Fear Itself (TV series)" label="Fear Itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q586486" start="13673" end="13690" title="Masters of Horror" label="Masters of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q973399" start="13705" end="13731" title="Masters of Science Fiction" label="Masters of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797615" start="13746" end="13754" title="Monsters (American TV series)" label="Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269054" start="13769" end="13782" title="Night Visions (TV series)" label="Night Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952334" start="13797" end="13820" title="Science Fiction Theatre" label="Science Fiction Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q715013" start="13835" end="13855" title="Tales from the Crypt (TV series)" label="Tales from the Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759140" start="13870" end="13893" title="Tales from the Darkside" label="Tales from the Darkside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676592" start="13908" end="13925" title="Tales of Tomorrow" label="Tales of Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q839437" start="13940" end="13956" title="The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q896891" start="13971" end="13995" title="The Ray Bradbury Theater" label="The Ray Bradbury Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="14010" end="14027" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="14036" end="14071" title="The Twilight Zone" label="&amp;quot;Twilight Zone&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990884" start="14080" end="14088" title="Thriller (American TV series)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034268" start="14103" end="14110" title="Way Out (TV series)" label="Way Out"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66217" wikidata="Q4750856" url="?curid=66217" title="Anagrams (game)">
<text>Anagrams (also published under names including Anagram, Snatch and Word Making and Taking) is a tile-based word game that involves rearranging letter tiles to form words.

The game pieces are a set of tiles with letters on one side. Tiles are shuffled face-down then turned over one by one, players forming words by combining them with existing words, their own or others&#x27;. The game has never been standardized and there are many varieties of sets and rules. Anagrams is often played with tiles from another word game, such as &quot;Scrabble&quot; or &quot;Bananagrams&quot;.

==History==
Reputed to have originated as a Victorian word game, Anagrams has appeared in many versions since then.

An early modern version is Charles Hammett&#x27;s &quot;Word Making and Taking&quot;, released in 1877. The first version to include the word &quot;Anagrams&quot; in its name may have been &quot;The Game of Letters and Anagrams on Wooden Blocks&quot;, published by Parker Brothers around 1890. Another game called &quot;Anagrams&quot; was published in 1934 by Selchow and Righter, which published &quot;Scrabble&quot; in 1953. &quot;Spelling and Anagrams&quot; (a set incorporating two distinct games, &quot;Spelling&quot; and &quot;Anagrams&quot;) was also published in the 1930s. In 1975, Selchow published &quot;Scrabble Scoring Anagrams&quot;, which featured tiles with point values like those in &quot;Scrabble&quot;. Another version was published in the 1960s by the now defunct Transogram. The Embossing Company, formerly Halsam Products Company, also produced a yellow-on-black &quot;Eye-Rest&quot; set. Leslie Scott (the creator of &quot;Jenga&quot;) published a variation called &quot;Swipe&quot; in the early 1980s, and since 1990, Scott&#x27;s company, Oxford Games Ltd, has published &quot;Anagram&quot;. Tyco published &quot;Up For Grabs&quot; in 1995. Prodijeux has been marketing a variant, &quot;WordXchange&quot;, since 2000, and Portobello Games produced a version, &quot;Snatch-It&quot;, in 2001. &quot;One Up!&quot; is a version that adds a &quot;wild&quot; tile that can be any letter, like a blank tile in &quot;Scrabble&quot;.

Some players use several sets of tiles from games such as &quot;Scrabble&quot; or &quot;Upwords&quot; to play Anagrams, and a version of the game is popular among tournament &quot;Scrabble&quot; players. Writers John Ciardi, James Merrill, John Malcolm Brinnin, and Richard Wilbur reputedly played together regularly in Key West, Florida, sometimes also with novelist John Hersey.

==Rules==
Different editions of the game use different rules, and players now often play by house rules, but most are variants of the rules given here, taken from Snatch-It.

To begin, all tiles are placed face down in a pool in the middle of the table. Players then take turns flipping over tiles until somebody notices a word of three or more letters. A word can be formed by either:
* Using a number of face-up tiles from the pool
* &quot;Stealing&quot; a word from a player by combining it with one or more tiles from the pool to make a new word (e.g., the word TRACK may be formed with a K from the pool and a player&#x27;s CART). Players may also combine their own words with additional tiles from the pool in the same way.

When a player sees a word, they call it immediately (irrespective of who flipped the last tile) and place the word in front of them. The game then continues with further tiles being flipped.

All words must be at least three letters long. When a word is expanded with tiles from the pool, the added tiles may not simply be a suffix (like -S or -ING).

The game ends when all tiles are face up and no further words can be formed. Players then score according to the words they have in front of them: a 3-letter word is worth 1 point, a 4-letter word 2 points, and so on.

== Variations ==
A host of variations come from both different versions and players&#x27; house rules.

===Scoring===
Other scoring systems include:

*Simple letter count. The most tiles win.
*Simple word count. The most words win.
*Add letter point values, using &quot;Scrabble&quot; letter values.
*Remove one or two letters from each word and count the remaining tiles, rewarding longer words.
*Sum of the squares of the lengths of the words, rewarding long words more.
*The first player to spell or steal some number of (in the Selchow &amp; Righter, eight) words wins.

===Word length===

The minimum acceptable word length can be adjusted to a player&#x27;s skill level (for example, in a game with adults and children playing together, the children may be permitted to form four-letter words while the adults are restricted to words of at least five or six letters). Tournament &quot;Scrabble&quot; players often play with a minimum length of six or seven.

===Turn-taking===
In some editions of the game, such as the Milton Bradley and Selchow &amp; Righter versions, only the player whose turn it is may form words. In the Selchow &amp; Righter edition, a word may be stolen by any player &quot;immediately&quot; after it was made if they form a longer word with tiles from the pool.

===National &quot;Scrabble&quot; Association===
The National Scrabble Association has published a set of rules for competitive Anagrams play in tournament setting. On a player&#x27;s turn, after revealing a tile, they have a ten-second window during which only they can call a word. If a player calls a word on their own turn they take an extra turn. After 100 turns, the order of play reverses. Minimum word length is six letters.

=== Tile banks ===
One variation is to have each player have a &quot;bank&quot; of tiles in front of themselves, which affords players a clearer view of the &quot;pool&quot; of face-up letter tiles in the middle of the table.

===Alaskan rules===
A faster-paced version—sometimes known as &quot;Alaskan rules&quot;—has each of the players (or several, if there are too many) simultaneously put a tile into the pool. This results in many more possibilities being available at a time.

===Miscellaneous variations===

Players may not create a word by creating a word that is already on the table or steal one resulting in such a word.

Some versions of the game name the winner as the person who, after the round of turns has finished, first acquires eight words. If more than one player has done so, then the winner is the player is the one with the most tiles. There may be a tie. A very similar rule found in The Embossing Company set simply says the &quot;first player to complete ten words, wins.&quot;

Players are permitted to combine two or more existing words with zero or more letters from the pool to create a single new word. This is often difficult in practice.

== In popular culture ==
A game of Anagrams is played in the Alfred Hitchcock 1941 thriller film &quot;Suspicion&quot;.

A game of Anagrams is played in Ira Levin&#x27;s debut novel, &quot;A Kiss Before Dying&quot;.

== Letter distribution ==
Though there are many variants, one standard letter distribution of 188 letters (given in the Rust Hills article) is as follows: 
A variant with 220 letters:
The distribution of 180 letters for &quot;Scrabble Scoring Anagrams&quot; (according to a review on funagain.com):
==See also==
* Anatree

==References==
== External links ==
*www.gtoal.com&#x27;s large collection images of various Anagrams sets and other wordgames.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4750856" start="0" end="8" title="Anagrams (game)" label="Anagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272194" start="96" end="106" title="Tile-based game" label="tile-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220419" start="107" end="116" title="word game" label="word game"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="131" end="142" title="anagram" label="rearranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="538" end="546" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853883" start="562" end="573" title="Bananagrams" label="Bananagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="626" end="635" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501379" start="964" end="979" title="Parker Brothers" label="Parker Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267898" start="1059" end="1078" title="Selchow and Righter" label="Selchow and Righter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="1102" end="1110" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742239" start="1484" end="1494" title="Transogram" label="Transogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531128" start="1611" end="1623" title="Leslie Scott (board game designer)" label="Leslie Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q869870" start="1646" end="1651" title="Jenga" label="Jenga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1764" end="1777" title="Oxford Games " label="Oxford Games "/>
<link wikidata="Q3542657" start="1817" end="1821" title="Tyco Toys" label="Tyco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899503" start="2239" end="2246" title="Upwords" label="Upwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q947519" start="2363" end="2374" title="John Ciardi" label="John Ciardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368437" start="2376" end="2389" title="James Merrill" label="James Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246502" start="2391" end="2411" title="John Malcolm Brinnin" label="John Malcolm Brinnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333582" start="2417" end="2431" title="Richard Wilbur" label="Richard Wilbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q485186" start="2471" end="2488" title="Key West, Florida" label="Key West, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q535812" start="2519" end="2530" title="John Hersey" label="John Hersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="2787" end="2794" title="Player (game)" label="Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q455282" start="3925" end="3936" title="house rules" label="house rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="4726" end="4734" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091351" start="5181" end="5210" title="National Scrabble Association" label="National Scrabble Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="6797" end="6813" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509470" start="6839" end="6848" title="Suspicion (1941 film)" label="Suspicion"/>
<link wikidata="Q317631" start="6889" end="6898" title="Ira Levin" label="Ira Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383533" start="6925" end="6944" title="A Kiss Before Dying (novel)" label="A Kiss Before Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012341" start="7267" end="7274" title="Anatree" label="Anatree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66219" wikidata="Q4271834" url="?curid=66219" title="Love and Mr Lewisham">
<text>Love and Mr Lewisham (subtitled &quot;The Story of a Very Young Couple&quot;) is a 1900 novel set in the 1880s by H. G. Wells. It was among his first fictional writings outside the science fiction genre. Wells took considerable pains over the manuscript and said that &quot;the writing was an altogether more serious undertaking than I have ever done before.&quot; He later included it in a 1933 anthology, &quot;Stories of Men and Women in Love&quot;.

Events in the novel closely resemble events in Wells&#x27;s own life. According to Geoffrey H. Wells: &quot;referring to the question of autobiography in fiction, H. G. Wells has somewhere made a remark to the effect that it is not so much what one has done that counts, as where one has been, and the truth of that statement is particularly evident in this novel. ... Both Mr Lewisham and Mr Wells were at the age of eighteen, assistant masters at country schools, and that three years later both were commencing their third year at The Normal School of Science, South Kensington, as teachers in training under Thomas Henry Huxley. The account of the school, of the students there and of their social life and interests, may be taken as true descriptions of those things during the period 1883-1886.&quot;

==Plot==
At the beginning of the novel, Mr Lewisham is an 18-year-old teacher at a boys&#x27; school in Sussex, earning forty pounds a year. He meets and falls in love with Ethel Henderson, who is paying a visit to relatives. His involvement with her makes him lose his position, but he is unable to find her when he moves to London.

After a two-and-a-half-year break in the action, Mr Lewisham is in his third year of study at the Normal School of Science in South Kensington. He has become a socialist, declaring his politics with a red tie, and is an object of interest to Alice Heydinger, an older student. However, chance brings him together again with his first love at a séance. Ethel&#x27;s stepfather, Mr Chaffery, is a spiritualist charlatan, and Mr Lewisham is determined to extricate her from association with Chaffery&#x27;s dishonesty.

They marry, and Mr Lewisham is forced to abandon his plans for a brilliant scientific career followed by a political ascent. When Chaffery absconds to Continental Europe with money he has embezzled from his clients, Lewisham agrees to move into his shabby Clapham house to look after Ethel and Ethel&#x27;s elderly mother (Chaffery&#x27;s abandoned wife). Wells&#x27;s friend Sir Richard Gregory wrote to him after reading the novel: &quot;I cannot get that poor devil Lewisham out of my mind head, and I wish I had an address, for I would go to him and rescue him from the miserable life in which you leave him.&quot;

==Reception==
&quot;Love and Mr Lewisham&quot; was well received, and Charles Masterman told Wells that he believed that along with &quot;Kipps&quot;, it was the novel most likely to endure. Sir Richard Gregory compared the novel to Thomas Hardy&#x27;s &quot;Jude the Obscure&quot;.

More recent critics have also praised the novel. Richard Higgins claims the novel elaborates a &quot;close examination of the relationship between class and the emotions&quot;, adding that &quot;these emotions have much to add to conventional class analysis. Many of these emotions are more prosaic than we have been accustomed to observe—more passive frustration, for example, than class rage.&quot; And Adam Roberts argues that the novel uses Chaffrey&#x27;s fake séance as an expressive metaphor for a Wellsian engagement with questions of sexual desire and disillusionment.

==References==
;Notes
;Sources
*Smith, David C. (1986). &quot;H.G. Wells: Desperately Mortal: A Biography.&quot; New Haven and London: Yale University Press

==External links==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2345276" start="83" end="87" title="1900 in literature" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="114" end="125" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="181" end="196" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="1066" end="1085" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="Thomas Henry Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="1366" end="1372" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373985" start="1695" end="1719" title="Royal College of Science" label="Normal School of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045096" start="1723" end="1739" title="South Kensington" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093522" start="1941" end="1947" title="séance" label="séance"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="1992" end="2004" title="Spiritualism (religious movement)" label="spiritualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="2265" end="2283" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528588" start="2490" end="2509" title="Sir Richard Gregory, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Richard Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898523" start="2804" end="2821" title="Charles Masterman" label="Charles Masterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249082" start="2872" end="2877" title="Kipps" label="Kipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="2967" end="2979" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248773" start="2993" end="3009" title="Jude the Obscure" label="Jude the Obscure"/>
<link wikidata="Q350734" start="3423" end="3435" title="Adam Roberts (British writer)" label="Adam Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093522" start="3484" end="3490" title="séance" label="séance"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="3732" end="3753" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66220" wikidata="Q10858400" url="?curid=66220" title="Political corruption">
<text>Political corruption is the use of powers by government officials or their network contacts for illegitimate private gain. Forms of corruption vary but can include bribery, lobbying, extortion, cronyism, nepotism, parochialism, patronage, influence peddling, graft, and embezzlement. Corruption may facilitate criminal enterprise, such as drug trafficking, money laundering, and human trafficking, although it is not restricted to these activities. 

Over time, corruption has been defined differently. For example, while performing work for a government or as a representative, it is unethical to accept a gift. Any free gift could be construed as a scheme to lure the recipient towards some biases. In most cases, the gift is seen as an intention to seek certain favors, such as work promotion, tipping in order to win a contract, job, or exemption from certain tasks in the case of junior worker handing in the gift to a senior employee who can be key in winning the favor.

Some forms of corruption, now called &quot;institutional corruption&quot;, are distinguished from bribery and other kinds of obvious personal gain. For example, certain state institutions may consistently act against the interests of the public, such as by misusing public funds for their own interest, or by engaging in illegal or immoral behavior with impunity. Bribery and overt criminal acts by individuals may not necessarily be evident but the institution nonetheless acts immorally as a whole. The mafia state phenomenon is an example of institutional corruption.

An illegal act by an officeholder constitutes political corruption only if the act is directly related to their official duties, is done under color of law or involves trading in influence. The activities that constitute illegal corruption differ depending on the country or jurisdiction. For instance, some political funding practices that are legal in one place may be illegal in another. In some cases, government officials have broad or ill-defined powers, which make it difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal actions. Worldwide, bribery alone is estimated to involve over 1 trillion US dollars annually. A state of unrestrained political corruption is known as a kleptocracy, literally meaning &quot;rule by thieves&quot;.

== Definition ==

Corruption is a difficult concept to define. A proper definition of corruption requires a multi-dimensional approach. Machiavelli popularized the oldest dimension of corruption as the decline of virtue among political officials and the citizenry. The psychologist Horst-Eberhard Richter&#x27;s modernized version defines corruption as the undermining of political values. Corruption as the decline of virtue has been criticized as too broad and far too subjective to be universalized. The second dimension of corruption is corruption as deviant behavior. Sociologist Christian Höffling and economist J. J. Sentuira both characterized corruption as social illness; the latter defined corruption as the misuse of public power for one&#x27;s profit. The third dimension is the quid pro quo. Corruption always is an exchange between two or more persons/parties where the persons/parties possess economic goods, and the other person/parties possess a transferred power to be used, according to fixed rules and norms, toward a common good. Fourth, there are also different levels of societal perception of corruption. Heidenheimer divides corruption into three categories. The first category is called white corruption; this level of corruption is mostly viewed with tolerance and may even be lawful and legitimate; typically based on family ties and patron-client systems. The type of corruption often occurring in constitutional states or state transitioning to a more democratic society is called grey corruption is considered reprehensible according to a society&#x27;s moral norms, but the persons involved are still mostly lacking any sense of doing something wrong. The third category, black corruption is so severe that it violates a society&#x27;s norms and laws. The final dimension is called &quot;shadow politics&quot;; this is part of the informal political process that goes beyond legitimate informal political agreements to behavior that is purposefully concealed.

==Consequences==
===Consequences on politics, administration, and institutions===

Political corruption undermines democracy and good governance by flouting or even subverting formal processes. Corruption in elections and in the legislature reduces accountability and distorts representation in policymaking; corruption in the judiciary compromises the rule of law; and corruption in public administration results in the inefficient provision of services. For republics, it violates a basic principle of republicanism regarding the centrality of civic virtue.
More generally, corruption erodes the institutional capacity of government if procedures are disregarded, resources are siphoned off, and public offices are bought and sold. Corruption undermines the legitimacy of government and democratic values such as political trust. Recent evidence suggests that variation in the levels of corruption amongst high-income democracies can vary significantly depending on the level of accountability of decision-makers.

Evidence from fragile states shows that corruption and bribery can adversely impact trust in institutions. Corruption can also impact government&#x27;s provision of goods and services. It increases the costs of goods and services which arise from efficiency loss. In the absence of corruption, governmental projects might be cost-effective at their true costs; however, once corruption costs are included projects may not be cost-effective so they are not executed distorting the provision of goods and services.

===Consequences on economy===
In the private sector, corruption increases the cost of business through the price of illicit payments themselves, the management cost of negotiating with officials and the risk of breached agreements or detection. Although some claim corruption reduces costs by cutting bureaucracy, the availability of bribes can also induce officials to contrive new rules and delays. Openly removing costly and lengthy regulations are better than covertly allowing them to be bypassed by using bribes. Where corruption inflates the cost of business, it also distorts the field of inquiry and action, shielding firms with connections from competition and thereby sustaining inefficient firms.

Corruption may have a direct impact on the firm&#x27;s effective marginal tax rate. Bribing tax officials can reduce tax payments of the firm if the marginal bribe rate is below the official marginal tax rate. However, in Uganda, bribes have a higher negative impact on firms&#x27; activity than taxation. Indeed, a one percentage point increase in bribes reduces firm&#x27;s annual growth by three percentage points, while an increase in 1 percentage point on taxes reduces firm&#x27;s growth by one percentage point.

Corruption also generates economic distortion in the public sector by diverting public investment into capital projects where bribes and kickbacks are more plentiful. Officials may increase the technical complexity of public sector projects to conceal or pave the way for such dealings, thus further distorting investment. Corruption also lowers compliance with construction, environmental, or other regulations, reduces the quality of government services and infrastructure, and increases budgetary pressures on government. Economists argue that one of the factors behind the differing economic development in Africa and Asia is that in Africa, corruption has primarily taken the form of rent extraction with the resulting financial capital moved overseas rather than invested at home (hence the stereotypical, but often accurate, image of African dictators having Swiss bank accounts). In Nigeria, for example, more than $400 billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria&#x27;s leaders between 1960 and 1999.

University of Massachusetts Amherst researchers estimated that from 1970 to 1996, capital flight from 30 Sub-Saharan countries totaled $187bn, exceeding those nations&#x27; external debts. (The results, expressed in retarded or suppressed development, have been modeled in theory by economist Mancur Olson.) In the case of Africa, one of the factors for this behavior was political instability and the fact that new governments often confiscated previous government&#x27;s corruptly obtained assets. This encouraged officials to stash their wealth abroad, out of reach of any future expropriation. In contrast, Asian administrations such as Suharto&#x27;s New Order often took a cut on business transactions or provided conditions for development, through infrastructure investment, law and order, etc.

===Environmental and social effects===
Corruption is often most evident in countries with the smallest per capita incomes, relying on foreign aid for health services. Local political interception of donated money from overseas is especially prevalent in Sub-Saharan African nations, where it was reported in the 2006 World Bank Report that about half of the funds that were donated for health usages were never invested into the health sectors or given to those needing medical attention. Instead, the donated money was expended through &quot;counterfeit drugs, siphoning off of drugs to the black market, and payments to ghost employees&quot;. Ultimately, there is a sufficient amount of money for health in developing countries, but local corruption denies the wider citizenry the resource they require.

Corruption facilitates environmental destruction. While corrupt societies may have formal legislation to protect the environment, it cannot be enforced if officials can easily be bribed. The same applies to social rights worker protection, unionization prevention, and child labor. Violation of these laws rights enables corrupt countries to gain illegitimate economic advantage in the international market. The Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen has observed that &quot;there is no such thing as an apolitical food problem.&quot; While drought and other naturally occurring events may trigger famine conditions, it is government action or inaction that determines its severity, and often even whether or not a famine will occur.

Governments with strong tendencies towards kleptocracy can undermine food security even when harvests are good. Officials often steal state property. In Bihar, India, more than 80% of the subsidized food aid to poor is stolen by corrupt officials. Similarly, food aid is often robbed at gunpoint by governments, criminals, and warlords alike, and sold for a profit. The 20th century is full of many examples of governments undermining the food security of their own nations – sometimes intentionally.

===Effects on humanitarian aid===
The scale of humanitarian aid to the poor and unstable regions of the world grows, but it is highly vulnerable to corruption, with food aid, construction and other highly valued assistance as the most at risk. Food aid can be directly and physically diverted from its intended destination, or indirectly through the manipulation of assessments, targeting, registration and distributions to favor certain groups or individuals.

In construction and shelter there are numerous opportunities for diversion and profit through substandard workmanship, kickbacks for contracts and favouritism in the provision of valuable shelter material. Thus while humanitarian aid agencies are usually most concerned about aid being diverted by including too many, recipients themselves are most concerned about exclusion. Access to aid may be limited to those with connections, to those who pay bribes or are forced to give sexual favors. Equally, those able to do so may manipulate statistics to inflate the number of beneficiaries and siphon off additional assistance.

Malnutrition, illness, wounds, torture, harassment of specific groups within the population, disappearances, extrajudicial executions and the forcible displacement of people are all found in many armed conflicts. Aside from their direct effects on the individuals concerned, the consequences of these tragedies for local systems must also be considered: the destruction of crops and places of cultural importance, the breakdown of economic infrastructure and of health-care facilities such as hospitals, etc.

===Effects on health===
Corruption plays a huge role in health care system starting from the hospital, to the government and lifted to the other institutions that promote quality and affordable health care to the people. The efficiency of health care delivery in any country is heavily dependent on accountable and transparent systems, proper management of both financial and human resources and timely supply of services to the vulnerable populace of the nation.

At the basic level, greed skyrockets corruption. When the structure of the health care system is not adequately addressed beginning from oversight in healthcare delivery and supply of drugs and tendering process, mismanagement and misappropriation of funds will always be observed. Corruption also can undermine health care service delivery which in turn disorients the lives of the poor. Corruption leads to violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms as people supposed to benefit from the basic health care from the governments are denied due to unscrupulous processes driven by greed. Therefore, for a country to keep citizens healthy there must be efficient systems and proper resources that can tame the evils like corruption that underpin it.

=== Effects on education ===

Education forms the basis and the fabric in which a society is transformed and different facets of well-being are shaped. Corruption in higher education has been prevalent and calls for immediate intervention. Increased corruption in higher education has led to growing global concern among governments, students and educators and other stakeholders. Those offering services in the higher education institutions are facing pressure that highly threatens the integral value of higher education enterprise. Corruption in higher education has a larger negative influence, it destroys the relation between personal effort and reward anticipation. Moreover, employees and students develop a belief that personal success does not come from hard work and merit but through canvassing with teachers and taking other shortcuts.

Academic promotions in the higher education institutions have been disabled by unlimited corruption. Presently, promotion is based on personal connections than professional achievements. This has led to dramatic increase in the number of professors and exhibits their rapid status loss. Utmost the flawed processes in the academic institutions has led to unbaked graduates who are not well fit to the job market. Corruption hinders the international standards of an education system. Additionally, Plagiarism is a form of corruption in academic research, where it affects originality and disables learning. Individual violations are in close relation to the operation ways of a system.
Furthermore, the universities may be in relationships and dealings with business and people in government, which majority of them enrol in doctoral studies without the undergraduate program. Consequently, money, power and related influence compromise education standards since they are fueling factors. A Student may finish thesis report within a shorter time upon which compromises the quality of work delivered and questions the threshold of the higher education.

=== Other areas: public safety, trade unions, police corruption, etc. ===
Corruption is not specific to poor, developing, or transition countries. In western countries, cases of bribery and other forms of corruption in all possible fields exist: under-the-table payments made to reputed surgeons by patients attempting to be on top of the list of forthcoming surgeries, bribes paid by suppliers to the automotive industry in order to sell low-quality connectors used for instance in safety equipment such as airbags, bribes paid by suppliers to manufacturers of defibrillators (to sell low-quality capacitors), contributions paid by wealthy parents to the &quot;social and culture fund&quot; of a prestigious university in exchange for it to accept their children, bribes paid to obtain diplomas, financial and other advantages granted to unionists by members of the executive board of a car manufacturer in exchange for employer-friendly positions and votes, etc. Examples are endless.

These various manifestations of corruption can ultimately present a danger for public health; they can discredit specific, essential institutions or social relationships. Osipian summarized a 2008 &quot;study of corruption perceptions among Russians ... .30 percent of the respondents marked the level of corruption as very high, while another 44 percent as high. 19 percent considered it as average and only 1 percent as low. The most corrupt in people&#x27;s minds are traffic police (33 percent), local authorities (28 percent), police (26 percent), healthcare (16 percent), and education (15 percent). 52 percent of the respondents had experiences of giving money or gifts to
medical professionals while 36 percent made informal payments to educators.&quot; He claimed that this corruption lowered the rate of economic growth in Russia, because the students disadvantaged by this corruption could not adopt better work methods as quickly, lowering thereby total factor productivity for Russia.

Corruption can affect the various components of sports activities (referees, players, medical and laboratory staff involved in anti-doping controls, members of national sport federation and international committees deciding about the allocation of contracts and competition places). Cases exist against (members of) various types of non-profit and non-government organizations, as well as religious organizations. Ultimately, the distinction between public and private sector corruption sometimes appears rather artificial, and national anti-corruption initiatives may need to avoid legal and other loopholes in the coverage of the instruments.

==Types==

===Bribery===
In the context of political corruption, a bribe may involve a payment given to a government official in exchange of his use of official powers. Bribery requires two participants: one to give the bribe, and one to take it. Either may initiate the corrupt offering; for example, a customs official may demand bribes to let through allowed (or disallowed) goods, or a smuggler might offer bribes to gain passage. In some countries the culture of corruption extends to every aspect of public life, making it extremely difficult for individuals to operate without resorting to bribes. Bribes may be demanded in order for an official to do something he is already paid to do. They may also be demanded in order to bypass laws and regulations. In addition to their role in private financial gain, bribes are also used to intentionally and maliciously cause harm to another (i.e. no financial incentive). In some developing nations, up to half of the population has paid bribes during the past 12 months.

The Council of Europe dissociates active and passive bribery and to incriminates them as separate offences:
* One can define active bribery as &quot;the promising, offering or giving by any person, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage to any of its public officials, for himself or herself or for anyone else, for him or her to act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her functions&quot; (article 2 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173) of the Council of Europe). 
* Passive bribery can be defined as &quot;when committed intentionally, the request or receipt by any ... public officials, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage, for himself or herself or for anyone else, or the acceptance of an offer or a promise of such an advantage, to act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her functions&quot; (article 3 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173)).

This dissociation aims to make the early steps (offering, promising, requesting an advantage) of a corrupt deal already an offence and, thus, to give a clear signal (from a criminal-policy point-of-view) that bribery is not acceptable. Furthermore, such a dissociation makes the prosecution of bribery offences easier since it can be very difficult to prove that two parties (the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker) have formally agreed upon a corrupt deal. In addition, there is often no such formal deal but only a mutual understanding, for instance when it is common knowledge in a municipality that to obtain a building permit one has to pay a &quot;fee&quot; to the decision maker to obtain a favorable decision. A working definition of corruption is also provided as follows in article 3 of the Civil Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 174): For the purpose of this Convention, &quot;corruption&quot; means requesting, offering, giving or accepting, directly or indirectly, a bribe or any other undue advantage or prospect thereof, which distorts the proper performance of any duty or behavior required of the recipient of the bribe, the undue advantage or the prospect thereof.

===Trading in influence===
Trading in influence, or influence peddling, refers to a person selling his/her influence over the decision-making process to benefit a third party (person or institution). The difference with bribery is that this is a tri-lateral relation. From a legal point of view, the role of the third party (who is the target of the influence) does not really matter although he/she can be an accessory in some instances. It can be difficult to make a distinction between this form of corruption and some forms of extreme and loosely regulated lobbying where for instance law- or decision-makers can freely &quot;sell&quot; their vote, decision power or influence to those lobbyists who offer the highest compensation, including where for instance the latter act on behalf of powerful clients such as industrial groups who want to avoid the passing of specific environmental, social, or other regulations perceived as too stringent, etc. Where lobbying is (sufficiently) regulated, it becomes possible to provide for a distinctive criteria and to consider that trading in influence involves the use of &quot;improper influence&quot;, as in article 12 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173) of the Council of Europe.

===Patronage===
Patronage refers to favoring supporters, for example with government employment. This may be legitimate, as when a newly elected government changes the top officials in the administration in order to effectively implement its policy. It can be seen as corruption if this means that incompetent persons, as a payment for supporting the regime, are selected before more able ones. In nondemocracies many government officials are often selected for loyalty rather than ability. They may be almost exclusively selected from a particular group (for example, Sunni Arabs in Saddam Hussein&#x27;s Iraq, the nomenklatura in the Soviet Union, or the Junkers in Imperial Germany) that support the regime in return for such favors. A similar problem can also be seen in Eastern Europe, for example in Romania, where the government is often accused of patronage (when a new government comes to power it rapidly changes most of the officials in the public sector).
===Nepotism and cronyism===
Favoring relatives (nepotism) or personal friends (cronyism) of an official is a form of illegitimate private gain. This may be combined with bribery, for example demanding that a business should employ a relative of an official controlling regulations affecting the business. The most extreme example is when the entire state is inherited, as in North Korea or Syria. A lesser form might be in the Southern United States with Good ol&#x27; boys, where women and minorities are excluded. A milder form of cronyism is an &quot;old boy network&quot;, in which appointees to official positions are selected only from a closed and exclusive social network – such as the alumni of particular universities – instead of appointing the most competent candidate. Seeking to harm enemies becomes corruption when official powers are illegitimately used as means to this end. For example, trumped-up charges are often brought up against journalists or writers who bring up politically sensitive issues, such as a politician&#x27;s acceptance of bribes.

===Gombeenism and parochialism===
Gombeenism refers to an individual who is dishonest and corrupt for the purpose of personal gain, often monetary, while parochialism, which is also known as parish pump politics, relates to placing local or vanity projects ahead of the national interest. For instance in Irish politics, populist left wing political parties will often apply these terms to mainstream establishment political parties and will cite the many cases of Corruption in Ireland, such as the Irish Banking crisis, which found evidence of bribery, cronyism and collusion, where in some cases politicians who were coming to the end of their political careers would receive a senior management or committee position in a company they had dealings with.

===Electoral fraud===

Electoral fraud is illegal interference with the process of an election. Acts of fraud affect vote counts to bring about an election result, whether by increasing the vote share of the favored candidate, depressing the vote share of the rival candidates, or both. Also called voter fraud, the mechanisms involved include illegal voter registration, intimidation at polls, voting computer hacking, and improper vote counting.

===Embezzlement===
Embezzlement is the theft of entrusted funds. It is political when it involves public money taken by a public official for use by anyone not specified by the public. Ponzi schemes are an example of embezzlement. Some embezzlers &quot;skim off the top&quot; so that they continually acquire a small amount over a particular time interval. This method reduces the likelihood of being caught. On the other hand, some embezzlers steal a very large amount of goods or funds in a single instance and then disappear. Sometimes company managers underreport income to their supervisors and keep the difference. A common type of embezzlement is that of personal use of entrusted government resources; for example, when an official assigns public employees to renovate his own house.

===Kickbacks===
A kickback is an official&#x27;s share of misappropriated funds allocated from his or her organization to an organization involved in corrupt bidding. For example, suppose that a politician is in charge of choosing how to spend some public funds. He can give a contract to a company that is not the best bidder, or allocate more than they deserve. In this case, the company benefits, and in exchange for betraying the public, the official receives a kickback payment, which is a portion of the sum the company received. This sum itself may be all or a portion of the difference between the actual (inflated) payment to the company and the (lower) market-based price that would have been paid had the bidding been competitive. Another example of a kickback would be if a judge receives a portion of the profits that a business makes in exchange for his judicial decisions. Kickbacks are not limited to government officials; any situation in which people are entrusted to spend funds that do not belong to them are susceptible to this kind of corruption.

===Unholy alliance===

An unholy alliance is a coalition among seemingly antagonistic groups for ad hoc or hidden gain, generally some influential non-governmental group forming ties with political parties, supplying funding in exchange for favorable treatment. Like patronage, unholy alliances are not necessarily illegal, but unlike patronage, by its deceptive nature and often great financial resources, an unholy alliance can be more dangerous to the public interest. An early use of the term was by former United States president Theodore Roosevelt (&quot;To destroy this invisible Government, to dissolve the unholy alliance between corrupt business and corrupt politics is the first task of the statesmanship of the day&quot;) from the 1912 Progressive Party platform, which is attributed to Roosevelt, and also quoted again in his autobiography, where he connects trusts and monopolies (sugar interests, Standard Oil, etc.) to Woodrow Wilson, Howard Taft, and consequently both major political parties.

===Involvement in organized crime===

An illustrative example of official involvement in organized crime can be found from the 1920s and 1930s Shanghai, where Huang Jinrong was a police chief in the French concession, while simultaneously being a gang boss and co-operating with Du Yuesheng, the local gang ringleader. The relationship kept the flow of profits from the gang&#x27;s gambling dens, prostitution, and protection rackets undisturbed and safe. The United States accused Manuel Noriega&#x27;s government in Panama of being a &quot;narcokleptocracy&quot;, a corrupt government profiting on illegal drug trade. Later the U.S. invaded Panama and captured Noriega.

==Conditions favorable for corruption==

Some research indicates that political corruption is contagious: the revelation of corruption in a sector leads others in the sector to engage in corruption. It is argued that the following conditions are favorable for corruption:
* Information deficits
** Lacking freedom of information legislation. In contrast, for example: The Indian Right to Information Act 2005 is perceived to have &quot;already engendered mass movements in the country that is bringing the lethargic, often corrupt bureaucracy to its knees and changing power equations completely.&quot;
** Lack of investigative reporting in the local media. 
** Contempt for or negligence of exercising freedom of speech and freedom of the press.
** Weak accounting practices, including lack of timely financial management.
** Lack of measurement of corruption. For example, using regular surveys of households and businesses in order to quantify the degree of perception of corruption in different parts of a nation or in different government institutions may increase awareness of corruption and create pressure to combat it. This will also enable an evaluation of the officials who are fighting corruption and the methods used.
** Tax havens which tax their own citizens and companies but not those from other nations and refuse to disclose information necessary for foreign taxation. This enables large-scale political corruption in the foreign nations.
* Lacking control of the government.
** Lacking civic society and non-governmental organizations which monitor the government.
** An individual voter may have a rational ignorance regarding politics, especially in nationwide elections, since each vote has little weight.
** Weak civil service, and slow pace of reform.
** Weak rule of law.
** Weak legal profession.
** Weak judicial independence.
** Lacking protection of whistleblowers.
***Government Accountability Project
** Lack of benchmarking, that is continual detailed evaluation of procedures and comparison to others who do similar things, in the same government or others, in particular comparison to those who do the best work. The Peruvian organization Ciudadanos al Dia has started to measure and compare transparency, costs, and efficiency in different government departments in Peru. It annually awards the best practices which has received widespread media attention. This has created competition among government agencies in order to improve.
** Individual officials routinely handle cash, instead of handling payments by giro or on a separate cash desk – illegitimate withdrawals from supervised bank accounts are much more difficult to conceal.
** Public funds are centralized rather than distributed. For example, if $1,000 is embezzled from a local agency that has $2,000 funds, it is easier to notice than from a national agency with $2,000,000 funds. See the principle of subsidiarity.
** Large, unsupervised public investments.
** Pay disproportionately lower than that of the average citizen. 
** Government licenses needed to conduct business, e.g., import licenses, encourage bribing and kickbacks.
** Long-time work in the same position may create relationships inside and outside the government which encourage and help conceal corruption and favoritism. Rotating government officials to different positions and geographic areas may help prevent this; for instance certain high rank officials in French government services (e.g. treasurer-paymasters general) must rotate every few years.
** Costly political campaigns, with expenses exceeding normal sources of political funding, especially when funded with taxpayer money.
** A single group or family controlling most of the key government offices. Lack of laws forbidding and limiting number of members of the same family to be in office .
** Less interaction with officials reduces the opportunities for corruption. For example, using the Internet for sending in required information, like applications and tax forms, and then processing this with automated computer systems. This may also speed up the processing and reduce unintentional human errors. See e-Government.
** A windfall from exporting abundant natural resources may encourage corruption. &quot;(See Resource curse)&quot;
** War and other forms of conflict correlate with a breakdown of public security.
* Social conditions
** Self-interested closed cliques and &quot;old boy networks&quot;.
** Family-, and clan-centered social structure, with a tradition of nepotism/favouritism being acceptable.
** A gift economy, such as the Soviet blat system, emerges in a Communist centrally planned economy.
** Lacking literacy and education among the population.
** Frequent discrimination and bullying among the population.
** Tribal solidarity, giving benefits to certain ethnic groups. In the Indian political system, for example, it has become common that the leadership of national and regional parties are passed from generation to generation, creating a system in which a family holds the center of power. Some examples are most of the Dravidian parties of south India and also the Nehru-Gandhi family of the Congress party, which is one of the two major political parties in India.
** Lack of strong laws which forbid members of the same family to contest elections and be in office as in India where local elections are often contested between members of the same powerful family by standing in opposite parties so that whoever is elected that particular family is at tremendous benefit.

===Media===
Thomas Jefferson observed a tendency for &quot;The functionaries of every government ... to command at will the liberty and property of their constituents. There is no safe deposit [for liberty and property] ... without information. Where the press is free, and every man able to read, all is safe.&quot; Recent research supports Jefferson&#x27;s claim. Brunetti and Weder found &quot;evidence of a significant relationship between more press freedom and less corruption in a large cross-section of countries.&quot; They also presented &quot;evidence which suggests that the direction of causation runs from higher press freedom to lower corruption.&quot; Adserà, Boix, and Payne found that increases in newspaper readership led to increased political accountability and lower corruption in data from roughly 100 countries and from different states in the US.

Snyder and Strömberg found &quot;that a poor fit between newspaper markets and political districts reduces press coverage of politics. ... Congressmen who are less covered by the local press work less for their constituencies: they are less likely to stand witness before congressional hearings ... . Federal spending is lower in areas where there is less press coverage of the local members of congress.&quot; Schulhofer-Wohl and Garrido found that the year after the &quot;Cincinnati Post&quot; closed in 2007, &quot;fewer candidates ran for municipal office in the Kentucky suburbs most reliant on the Post, incumbents became more likely to win re-election, and voter turnout and campaign spending fell.

An analysis of the evolution of mass media in the United States and European Union since World War II noted mixed results from the growth of the Internet: &quot;The digital revolution has been good for freedom of expression [and] information [but] has had mixed effects on freedom of the press&quot;: It has disrupted traditional sources of funding, and new forms of Internet journalism have replaced only a tiny fraction of what&#x27;s been lost. Media responses to whistleblower incidents or reports, and to matters which generate skepticism in established law and government but may not technically be whistleblower incidents, are limited by the prevalence of political correctness and speech codes in many Western nations. In China and many other East Asian countries the state-enforced speech codes limit or, in their view, channel the efforts of the media and civil society to reduce public corruption.

===Size of public sector===
Extensive and diverse public spending is, in itself, inherently at risk of cronyism, kickbacks, and embezzlement. Complicated regulations and arbitrary, unsupervised official conduct exacerbate the problem. This is one argument for privatization and deregulation. Opponents of privatization see the argument as ideological. The argument that corruption necessarily follows from the opportunity is weakened by the existence of countries with low to non-existent corruption but large public sectors, like the Nordic countries. These countries score high on the Ease of Doing Business Index, due to good and often simple regulations and have rule of law firmly established. Therefore, due to their lack of corruption in the first place, they can run large public sectors without inducing political corruption. Recent evidence that takes both the size of expenditures and regulatory complexity into account has found that high-income democracies with more expansive state sectors do indeed have higher levels of corruption.

Like other governmental economic activities, privatization, such as in the sale of government-owned property, is particularly at the risk of cronyism. Privatizations in Russia, Latin America, and East Germany were accompanied by large-scale corruption during the sale of the state-owned companies. Those with political connections unfairly gained large wealth, which has discredited privatization in these regions. While media have reported widely the grand corruption that accompanied the sales, studies have argued that in addition to increased operating efficiency, daily petty corruption is, or would be, larger without privatization and that corruption is more prevalent in non-privatized sectors. Furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that extralegal and unofficial activities are more prevalent in countries that privatized less. In the European Union, the principle of subsidiarity is applied: a government service should be provided by the lowest, most local authority that can competently provide it. An effect is that distribution of funds in multiple instances discourages embezzlement because even small sums missing will be noticed. In contrast, in a centralized authority, even minute proportions of public funds can be large sums of money.

== Conditions unfavorable for corruption ==
Wealth and power can have a compounding effect on political corruption, however, the immunity from the law that money and influence bring will not come into effect when a powerful individual injures or harms another powerful individual. An example of this immunity being broken is Bernie Madoff, who while being rich and powerful himself, stole from other rich and powerful individuals. This resulted in his eventual arrest despite his status. Level of political competitiveness can affect the degree of political corruption. Increasing salaries can decrease political corruption in lower income countries, while another study found an increase of political corruption with larger salaries of politicians relative to the average wage. Lower political corruption was found for incumbent politicians seeking re-election.

==Governmental corruption==
If the highest echelons of the governments take advantage of corruption or embezzlement from the state&#x27;s treasury, it is sometimes referred to the neologism &quot;kleptocracy&quot;. Members of the government can take advantage of the natural resources (e.g., diamonds and oil in a few prominent cases) or state-owned productive industries. A number of corrupt governments have enriched themselves via foreign aid. Indeed, there is a positive correlation between aid flows and high levels of corruption within recipient countries.
Corruption in Sub-Saharan Africa consists primarily of extracting economic rent and moving the resulting financial capital overseas instead of investing at home. Authors Leonce Ndikumana and James K. Boyce estimate that from 1970 to 2008, capital flight from 33 sub-Saharan countries totalled $700 billion. A corrupt dictatorship typically results in many years of general hardship and suffering for the vast majority of citizens as civil society and the rule of law disintegrate. In addition, corrupt dictators routinely ignore economic and social problems in their quest to amass ever more wealth and power. The classic case of a corrupt, exploitive dictator often given is the regime of Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko, who ruled the Democratic Republic of the Congo (which he renamed Zaire) from 1965 to 1997. It is said that usage of the term kleptocracy gained popularity largely in response to a need to accurately describe Mobutu&#x27;s regime. Another classic case is Nigeria, especially under the rule of General Sani Abacha who was &quot;de facto&quot; president of Nigeria from 1993 until his death in 1998. He is reputed to have stolen some US$3 billion–4 billion. He and his relatives are often mentioned in Nigerian 419 letter scams claiming to offer vast fortunes for &quot;help&quot; in laundering his stolen &quot;fortunes&quot;, which in reality turn out not to exist. More than $400 billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria&#x27;s leaders between 1960 and 1999.

===Judiciary corruption===
There are two methods of corruption of the judiciary: the state (through budget planning and various privileges), and the private. Budget of the judiciary in many transitional and developing countries is almost completely controlled by the executive. The latter undermines the separation of powers, as it creates a critical financial dependence of the judiciary. The proper national wealth distribution including the government spending on the judiciary is subject of the constitutional economics. Judicial corruption can be difficult to completely eradicate, even in developed countries.

==Opposition to corruption==

Mobile telecommunications and radio broadcasting help to fight corruption, especially in developing regions like Africa, where other forms of communications are limited. In India, the anti-corruption bureau fights against corruption, and a new ombudsman bill called Jan Lokpal Bill is being prepared. In the 1990s, initiatives were taken at an international level (in particular by the European Community, the Council of Europe, the OECD) to put a ban on corruption: in 1996, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, for instance, adopted a comprehensive Programme of Action against Corruption and, subsequently, issued a series of anti-corruption standard-setting instruments:
* the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173);
* the Civil Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 174);
* the Additional Protocol to the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 191);
* the Twenty Guiding Principles for the Fight against Corruption (Resolution (97) 24);
* the Recommendation on Codes of Conduct for Public Officials (Recommendation No. R (2000) 10);
* the Recommendation on Common Rules against Corruption in the Funding of Political Parties and Electoral Campaigns (Rec(2003)4)

The purpose of these instruments was to address the various forms of corruption (involving the public sector, the private sector, the financing of political activities, etc.) whether they had a strictly domestic or also a transnational dimension. To monitor the implementation at national level of the requirements and principles provided in those texts, a monitoring mechanism – the Group of States Against Corruption (also known as GRECO) (French: Groupe d&#x27;Etats contre la corruption) was created. Further conventions were adopted at the regional level under the aegis of the Organization of American States (OAS or OEA), the African Union, and in 2003, at the universal level under that of the United Nations Convention against Corruption where it is enabled with mutual legal assistance between the states parties regarding investigations, processes and judicial actions related to corruption crimes, as established in article 46.

==Whistleblowers==

A whistleblower (also written as whistle-blower or whistle blower) is a person who exposes any kind of information or activity that is deemed illegal, unethical, or not correct within an organization that is either private or public. The information of alleged wrongdoing can be classified in many ways: violation of company policy/rules, law, regulation, or threat to public interest/national security, as well as fraud, and corruption. Those who become whistleblowers can choose to bring information or allegations to the surface either internally or externally. Internally, a whistleblower can bring his/her accusations to the attention of other people within the accused organization such as an immediate supervisor. Externally, a whistleblower can bring allegations to light by contacting a third party outside of an accused organization such as the media, government, law enforcement, or those who are concerned.

Because of this, a number of laws exist to protect whistleblowers. Some third-party groups even offer protection to whistleblowers, but that protection can only go so far. Whistleblowers face legal action, criminal charges, social stigma, and termination from any position, office, or job. Two other classifications of whistleblowing are private and public. The classifications relate to the type of organizations someone chooses to whistle-blow on private sector, or public sector. Depending on many factors, both can have varying results. However, whistleblowing in the public sector organization is more likely to result in criminal charges and possible custodial sentences. A whistleblower who chooses to accuse a private sector organization or agency is more likely to face termination and legal and civil charges.

Deeper questions and theories of whistleblowing and why people choose to do so can be studied through an ethical approach. Whistleblowing is a topic of ongoing ethical debate. Leading arguments in the ideological camp that whistleblowing is ethical to maintain that whistleblowing is a form of civil disobedience, and aims to protect the public from government wrongdoing. In the opposite camp, some see whistleblowing as unethical for breaching confidentiality, especially in industries that handle sensitive client or patient information. Legal protection can also be granted to protect whistleblowers, but that protection is subject to many stipulations. Hundreds of laws grant protection to whistleblowers, but stipulations can easily cloud that protection and leave whistleblowers vulnerable to retaliation and legal trouble. However, the decision and action have become far more complicated with recent advancements in technology and communication. Whistleblowers frequently face reprisal, sometimes at the hands of the organization or group they have accused, sometimes from related organizations, and sometimes under law. Questions about the legitimacy of whistleblowing, the moral responsibility of whistleblowing, and the appraisal of the institutions of whistleblowing are part of the field of political ethics.

==Measuring corruption==
Measuring corruption accurately is difficult if not impossible due to the illicit nature of the transaction and imprecise definitions of corruption. Few reliable measures of the magnitude of corruption exists and among those, there is a high level of heterogeneity. One of the most common ways to estimate corruption is through perception surveys. They have the advantage of good coverage, however, they do not measure corruption precisely. While &quot;corruption&quot; indices first appeared in 1995 with the Corruption Perceptions Index CPI, all of these metrics address different proxies for corruption, such as public perceptions of the extent of the problem. However, over time the refinement of methods and validation checks against objective indicators has meant that, while not perfect, many of these indicators are getting better at consistently and validly measuring the scale of corruption.

Transparency International, an anti-corruption NGO, pioneered this field with the CPI, first released in 1995. This work is often credited with breaking a taboo and forcing the issue of corruption into high-level development policy discourse. Transparency International currently publishes three measures, updated annually: a CPI (based on aggregating third-party polling of public perceptions of how corrupt different countries are); a Global Corruption Barometer (based on a survey of general public attitudes toward and experience of corruption); and a Bribe Payers Index, looking at the willingness of foreign firms to pay bribes. The Corruption Perceptions Index is the best known of these metrics, though it has drawn much criticism and may be declining in influence. In 2013 Transparency International published a report on the &quot;Government Defence Anti-corruption Index&quot;. This index evaluates the risk of corruption in countries&#x27; military sector.

The World Bank collects a range of data on corruption, including survey responses from over 100,000 firms worldwide and a set of indicators of governance and institutional quality. Moreover, one of the six dimensions of governance measured by the Worldwide Governance Indicators is Control of Corruption, which is defined as &quot;the extent to which power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and grand forms of corruption, as well as &#x27;capture&#x27; of the state by elites and private interests.&quot; While the definition itself is fairly precise, the data aggregated into the Worldwide Governance Indicators is based on any available polling: questions range from &quot;is corruption a serious problem?&quot; to measures of public access to information, and not consistent across countries. Despite these weaknesses, the global coverage of these datasets has led to their widespread adoption, most notably by the Millennium Challenge Corporation.

A number of parties have collected survey data, from the public and from experts, to try to gauge the level of corruption and bribery, as well as its impact on political and economic outcomes.
A second wave of corruption metrics has been created by Global Integrity, the International Budget Partnership, and many lesser known local groups. These metrics include the Global Integrity Index, first published in 2004. These second wave projects aim to create policy change by identifying resources more effectively and creating checklists toward incremental reform. Global Integrity and the International Budget Partnership each dispense with public surveys and instead uses in-country experts to evaluate &quot;the opposite of corruption&quot; – which Global Integrity defines as the public policies that prevent, discourage, or expose corruption. These approaches complement the first wave, awareness-raising tools by giving governments facing public outcry a checklist which measures concrete steps toward improved governance.

Typical second wave corruption metrics do not offer the worldwide coverage found in first wave projects and instead focus on localizing information gathered to specific problems and creating deep, &quot;unpackable&quot; content that matches quantitative and qualitative data. Alternative approaches, such as the British aid agency&#x27;s Drivers of Change research, skips numbers and promotes understanding corruption via political economy analysis of who controls power in a given society. Another approach, suggested for when conventional measures of corruption are unavailable, is to look at the bodyfat of officials, after finding that obesity of cabinet ministers in post-Soviet states was highly correlated with more accurate measures.

==Institutions monitoring political corruption==

* Financial Action Task Force
* FreedomGuard, Ltd., a United States public benefit authority empowered to identify, investigate, and civilly prosecute federal &amp; state government corruption
* Global Witness, an international NGO established in 1993 that works to break the links between natural resource exploitation, conflict, poverty, corruption, and human rights abuses worldwide
* Group of States Against Corruption, a body established under the Council of Europe to monitor the implementation of instruments adopted by member states to combat political corruption
* Independent Commission Against Corruption (disambiguation)
* International Anti-Corruption Academy
* Transparency International, a non-governmental organization that monitors and publicizes corporate and political corruption in international development and publishing annually the Corruption Perceptions Index

==In fiction ==
The following are examples of works of fiction that portray political corruption in various forms:
==See also==

==References==
==Further reading==
* Peter Bratsis. (2003) &quot;The Construction of Corruption; or, Rules of Separation and Illusions of Purity in Bourgeois Societies&quot;, &quot;Social Text&quot;.
* Peter Bratsis. (2014) &quot;Political Corruption in the Age of Transnational Capitalism: From the Relative Autonomy of the State to the White Man&#x27;s Burden&quot;, &quot;Historical Materialism&quot;.
*Garifullin Ramil Ramzievich (2012) Bribe-taking mania as one of the causes of bribery. The concept of psychological and psychotherapeutic approaches to the problem of bribery and bribe-taking mania. J. Aktualnye Problemy Ekonomiki i Prava (&quot;Current Problems in Economics and Law&quot;), no. 4(24), pp. 9-15 
* Michael W. Collier. (2009) &quot;Political Corruption in the Caribbean Basin: Constructing a Theory to Combat Corruption&quot; excerpt and text search
* Charles Copeman and Amy McGrath (eds.)(1997), &quot;Corrupt Elections. Ballot Rigging in Australia&quot;, Towerhouse Publications, Kensington, NSW
* Donatella della Porta, and Alberto Vannucci, (1999). &quot;Corrupt Exchanges: Actors, Resources, and Mechanisms of Political Corruption&quot;. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
* Axel Dreher, Christos Kotsogiannis, Steve McCorriston (2004), Corruption Around the World: Evidence from a Structural Model.
* Kimberly Ann Elliott, (ed.) (1997) &quot;Corruption and the Global Economy&quot;
* Robert M. Entman (2012) &quot;Scandal and Silence: Media Responses to Presidential Misconduct&quot; (Polity Press) 269 pages; case studies from USA 1998 to 2008 indicate the news media neglects many more incidents of corruption than it covers.
* Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin, (eds.) (2006), &quot;Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America&#x27;s Economic History&quot; U. of Chicago Press, 386 pp. .
* Mark Grossman. &quot;Political Corruption in America: An Encyclopedia of Scandals, Power, and Greed&quot; (2 vol. 2008)
* Arnold J. Heidenheimer, Michael Johnston and Victor T. LeVine (eds.) (1989), &quot;Political Corruption: A Handbook&quot; 1017 pages.
* Kim Hyoung-Kook. (2012) &quot;The Pre-conditions for entrenching transparency in local governance, a policy report of master&#x27;s course in Public Administration from the University of York&quot;.
* Richard Jensen. (2001) &quot;Democracy, Republicanism and Efficiency: The Values of American Politics, 1885–1930&quot;, in Byron Shafer and Anthony Badger, eds, &quot;Contesting Democracy: Substance and Structure in American Political History, 1775–2000&quot; pp 149–180; online edition
* Michael Johnston, Victor T. LeVine, and Arnold Heidenheimer, eds. (1970) &quot;Political Corruption: Readings in Comparative Analysis&quot;
* Michael Johnston (2005), &quot;Syndromes of Corruption: Wealth, Power, and Democracy&quot;
* Junichi Kawata. (2006) &quot;Comparing Political Corruption And Clientelism&quot; excerpt and text search
* George C. Kohn (2001). &quot;The New Encyclopedia of American Scandal&quot;
* Johann Graf Lambsdorff (2007), &quot;The Institutional Economics of Corruption and Reform: Theory, Evidence and Policy&quot; Cambridge University Press
* Amy McGrath, (1994), &quot;The Forging of Votes&quot;, Tower House Publications, Kensington, NSW
* Amy McGrath, (2003), &quot;Frauding of Elections&quot;, Tower House Publications and H.S. Chapman Society, Brighton-le Sands, NSW
* Amy McGrath, (1994), &quot;The Frauding of Votes&quot;, Tower House Publications, Kensington, NSW
* Amy McGrath, (2005), &quot;The Stolen Election, Australia 1987 According to Frank Hardy, Author of Power Without Glory&quot;, Towerhouse Publications and H.S. Chapman Society, Brighton-le Sands, NSW
* John Mukum Mbaku. (1999) &quot;Bureaucratic and Political Corruption in Africa: The Public Choice Perspective&quot;
* Stephen D. Morris. (2009) &quot;Political Corruption in Mexico: The Impact of Democratization&quot;
* Aaron G. Murphy. (2010) &quot;Foreign Corrupt Practices Act: A Practical Resource for Managers and Executives&quot;
* Peter John Perry. (2002) &quot;Political Corruption in Australia: A Very Wicked Place?&quot;
* John F. Reynolds. (1988). &quot;Testing Democracy: Electoral Behavior and Progressive Reform in New Jersey, 1880–1920&quot; on corrupt voting methods
* Robert North Roberts. (2001) &quot;Ethics in U.S. Government: An Encyclopedia of Investigations, Scandals, Reforms, and Legislation&quot;
* Susan Rose-Ackerman, (1999) &quot;Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform&quot; excerpt &amp; text search
* Susan Rose-Ackerman, ed. (2011) &quot;International Handbook on the Economics of Corruption – Volume 2&quot; excerpt and text search
* Susan Rose-Ackerman. (1978) &quot;Corruption: a study in political economy&quot;
* James C. Scott. (1972) &quot;Comparative Political Corruption&quot;
* Pietro Semeraro,(2008) Trading in influence and Lobbying in the Spanish Criminal Code
* Robert Alan Sparling (2019) Political Corruption The Underside of Civic Morality. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia. 
* Zephyr Teachout. &quot;Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin&#x27;s Snuff Box to Citizens United&quot; (2014)
* Dennis Thompson. (1995) &quot;Ethics in Congress: From Individual to Institutional Corruption&quot;, Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC. 
* Mark Wahlgren Summers. (1993) &quot;The Era of Good Stealings&quot;, corruption in American politics 1868–1877
* Darrell M. West (2000), &quot;Checkbook Democracy. How Money Corrupts Political Campaigns&quot;, Northeastern University Press, Boston (Mass.) 
* Woodward, C. Vann, ed. &quot;Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct&quot; (1975), American presidents from Washington to Lyndon Johnson
* Alexandra Wrage (2007) Bribery and Extortion: Undermining Business, Governments and Security
==External links==
* 
* UNODC – United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime – on corruption
* World Bank&#x27;s Worldwide Governance Indicators Worldwide ratings of country performances on six governance dimensions from 1996 to present.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="0" end="20" title="Political corruption" label="Political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="132" end="142" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="164" end="171" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="173" end="181" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="183" end="192" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="194" end="202" title="cronyism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="204" end="212" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323949" start="214" end="226" title="parochialism" label="parochialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="228" end="237" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q521933" start="239" end="257" title="influence peddling" label="influence peddling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592497" start="259" end="264" title="Graft (politics)" label="graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="270" end="282" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="310" end="329" title="criminal enterprise" label="criminal enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="339" end="355" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="357" end="373" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="379" end="396" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872437" start="1021" end="1045" title="institutional corruption" label="institutional corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q604883" start="1483" end="1494" title="mafia state" label="mafia state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148543" start="1693" end="1705" title="color of law" label="color of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="2230" end="2241" title="kleptocracy" label="kleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="3083" end="3095" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345314" start="4414" end="4429" title="good governance" label="good governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="4534" end="4548" title="accountability" label="accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="4638" end="4649" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="4669" end="4690" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="4789" end="4802" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="5045" end="5069" title="Legitimacy (political)" label="legitimacy of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210296" start="5100" end="5115" title="Political efficacy" label="political trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252703" start="5316" end="5329" title="fragile state" label="fragile state"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="5853" end="5867" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="6117" end="6128" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="7099" end="7112" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q14743875" start="7183" end="7192" title="Kickback (bribery)" label="kickbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="7633" end="7653" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="7657" end="7663" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="7668" end="7672" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428800" start="7735" end="7750" title="rent seeking" label="rent extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="7770" end="7787" title="financial capital" label="financial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="7912" end="7931" title="Swiss bank" label="Swiss bank accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="7937" end="7944" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="8061" end="8096" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656849" start="8143" end="8157" title="capital flight" label="capital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="8166" end="8177" title="Sub-Saharan" label="Sub-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q519898" start="8354" end="8366" title="Mancur Olson" label="Mancur Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="8644" end="8657" title="Nationalization" label="expropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="8702" end="8709" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q497163" start="8717" end="8726" title="Orde Baru" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="9119" end="9137" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="9182" end="9199" title="World Bank" label="World Bank Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140895" start="9408" end="9425" title="Counterfeit medications" label="counterfeit drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="9912" end="9924" title="Trade union" label="unionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="9941" end="9952" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="10084" end="10095" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="10114" end="10125" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="10273" end="10279" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="10453" end="10464" title="kleptocracy" label="kleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="10479" end="10492" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="10563" end="10568" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="10570" end="10575" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="10959" end="10975" title="humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q581445" start="11046" end="11056" title="social vulnerability" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936153" start="17684" end="17709" title="total factor productivity" label="total factor productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="19396" end="19413" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="19517" end="19531" title="active bribery" label="active bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="19876" end="19893" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="19899" end="19914" title="Passive bribery" label="Passive bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="22065" end="22073" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="22734" end="22751" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="23323" end="23328" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="23338" end="23352" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="23370" end="23382" title="nomenklatura" label="nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23390" end="23402" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101989" start="23411" end="23417" title="Junker" label="Junker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="23422" end="23438" title="Imperial Germany" label="Imperial Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="23560" end="23567" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="23610" end="23619" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="23892" end="23899" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="23955" end="23963" title="kinship" label="relative"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="24097" end="24108" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="24112" end="24117" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343249" start="24276" end="24291" title="old boy network" label="old boy network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900614" start="25113" end="25149" title="Left-wing populism" label="populist left wing political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="25182" end="25224" title="The Establishment" label="mainstream establishment political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173075" start="25257" end="25278" title="Corruption in Ireland" label="Corruption in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613071" start="25292" end="25312" title="Post-2008 Irish banking crisis" label="Irish Banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="25338" end="25345" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="25347" end="25355" title="cronyism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q701521" start="25360" end="25369" title="collusion" label="collusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="25637" end="25645" title="election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="25655" end="25660" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="25962" end="25969" title="hacker (computer security)" label="hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q219407" start="26185" end="26197" title="Ponzi scheme" label="Ponzi scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464773" start="26811" end="26819" title="Money trail" label="kickback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276328" start="26951" end="26958" title="bidding" label="bidding"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="27070" end="27078" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q289612" start="27084" end="27091" title="General contractor" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="27960" end="27966" title="ad hoc" label="ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q29627" start="28318" end="28333" title="public interest" label="public interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="28398" end="28416" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="28611" end="28628" title="Bull Moose Party" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133938" start="28735" end="28741" title="trust (19th century)" label="trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="28746" end="28756" title="monopoly" label="monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="28775" end="28787" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="28798" end="28812" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="28814" end="28825" title="Howard Taft" label="Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="28855" end="28872" title="political parties" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="28964" end="28979" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="29018" end="29026" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571993" start="29074" end="29091" title="French concession" label="French concession"/>
<link wikidata="Q699442" start="29154" end="29165" title="Du Yuesheng" label="Du Yuesheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q17588" start="29171" end="29181" title="Green Gang" label="local gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q192667" start="29357" end="29371" title="Manuel Noriega" label="Manuel Noriega"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="29393" end="29399" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="29417" end="29433" title="narcokleptocracy" label="narcokleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="29475" end="29493" title="illegal drug trade" label="illegal drug trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="29854" end="29888" title="freedom of information legislation" label="freedom of information legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725604" start="29927" end="29951" title="Right to Information Act" label="Right to Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="30251" end="30268" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="30273" end="30293" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="30303" end="30313" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="30782" end="30791" title="Tax haven" label="Tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="31072" end="31101" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q519846" start="31167" end="31185" title="rational ignorance" label="rational ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="31285" end="31298" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124695" start="31317" end="31323" title="Civil service reform in developing countries" label="reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="31333" end="31344" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="31354" end="31370" title="Lawyer" label="legal profession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="31380" end="31401" title="judicial independence" label="judicial independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="31428" end="31441" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588662" start="31447" end="31480" title="Government Accountability Project" label="Government Accountability Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q816754" start="31492" end="31504" title="benchmarking" label="benchmarking"/>
<link wikidata="Q79375" start="32096" end="32100" title="Giro (banking)" label="giro"/>
<link wikidata="Q466938" start="32439" end="32464" title="subsidiarity" label="principle of subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120017" start="32633" end="32647" title="import license" label="import license"/>
<link wikidata="Q11953074" start="33015" end="33043" title="Trésor public" label="treasurer-paymasters general"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="33084" end="33102" title="political campaign" label="political campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q211017" start="33696" end="33708" title="e-Government" label="e-Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q72596" start="33803" end="33817" title="Resource curse" label="Resource curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="33828" end="33831" title="War" label="War"/>
<link wikidata="Q294240" start="33890" end="33905" title="public security" label="public security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343249" start="33971" end="33986" title="old boy network" label="old boy network"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="34063" end="34071" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233575" start="34107" end="34119" title="gift economy" label="gift economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715389" start="34140" end="34144" title="Blat (term)" label="blat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="34176" end="34201" title="centrally planned economy" label="centrally planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="34214" end="34222" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="34227" end="34236" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="34271" end="34285" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="34290" end="34298" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q952037" start="34575" end="34581" title="Political family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441340" start="34685" end="34704" title="Nehru–Gandhi family" label="Nehru-Gandhi family"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="34712" end="34726" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="35106" end="35122" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="35848" end="35872" title="political accountability" label="political accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723045" start="36442" end="36457" title="Cincinnati Post" label="Cincinnati Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36725" end="36738" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="36743" end="36757" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="37338" end="37359" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313185" start="37364" end="37376" title="speech codes" label="speech codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313185" start="37466" end="37478" title="speech codes" label="speech codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="37845" end="37858" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="37863" end="37875" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="38120" end="38136" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="38172" end="38200" title="Ease of Doing Business Index" label="Ease of Doing Business Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="38252" end="38263" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="40220" end="40233" title="Bernie Madoff" label="Bernie Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q106795595" start="40392" end="40417" title="Electoral competition" label="political competitiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131350" start="40620" end="40643" title="List of heads of state and government salaries" label="salaries of politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624410" start="40660" end="40672" title="average wage" label="average wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="40715" end="40724" title="incumbent" label="incumbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="40955" end="40966" title="kleptocracy" label="kleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="41026" end="41042" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="41336" end="41354" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="41388" end="41401" title="economic rent" label="economic rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="41427" end="41444" title="financial capital" label="financial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q21694721" start="41492" end="41508" title="Leonce Ndikumana" label="Leonce Ndikumana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656849" start="41561" end="41575" title="capital flight" label="capital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="41639" end="41651" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="41755" end="41768" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="41777" end="41788" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="41864" end="41870" title="society" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q164535" start="42012" end="42036" title="Mobutu Sese Seko" label="Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="42052" end="42084" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="42103" end="42108" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="42163" end="42174" title="kleptocracy" label="kleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="42292" end="42299" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="42338" end="42349" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="42364" end="42372" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="42469" end="42472" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q830193" start="42537" end="42549" title="Nigerian 419" label="Nigerian 419"/>
<link wikidata="Q41263" start="42963" end="42969" title="Budget" label="Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="43012" end="43032" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489796" start="43304" end="43328" title="constitutional economics" label="constitutional economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="43330" end="43349" title="Judicial corruption" label="Judicial corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="43452" end="43477" title="Mobile telecommunications" label="Mobile telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="43482" end="43500" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="43565" end="43571" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="43594" end="43607" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518180" start="43718" end="43733" title="Jan Lokpal Bill" label="Jan Lokpal Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="43838" end="43856" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="43862" end="43879" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="43885" end="43889" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q866996" start="45028" end="45062" title="Group of States Against Corruption" label="Group of States Against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="45227" end="45258" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="45277" end="45290" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q547979" start="45346" end="45390" title="United Nations Convention against Corruption" label="United Nations Convention against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="46749" end="46762" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="49205" end="49233" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="49598" end="49624" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="49645" end="49648" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q913338" start="50154" end="50172" title="Bribe Payers Index" label="Bribe Payers Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="50380" end="50406" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163513" start="50815" end="50846" title="Worldwide Governance Indicators" label="Worldwide Governance Indicators"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="51055" end="51060" title="elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425405" start="51504" end="51536" title="Millennium Challenge Corporation" label="Millennium Challenge Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839322" start="51788" end="51804" title="Global Integrity" label="Global Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="53240" end="53258" title="Eastern Bloc" label="post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="53363" end="53390" title="Financial Action Task Force" label="Financial Action Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53393" end="53411" title="FreedomGuard, Ltd." label="FreedomGuard, Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q3108981" start="53556" end="53570" title="Global Witness" label="Global Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q866996" start="53749" end="53783" title="Group of States Against Corruption" label="Group of States Against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q836824" start="53935" end="53993" title="Independent Commission Against Corruption (disambiguation)" label="Independent Commission Against Corruption (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q876957" start="53996" end="54033" title="International Anti-Corruption Academy" label="International Anti-Corruption Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="54036" end="54062" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="54217" end="54245" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713715" start="55399" end="55420" title="Donatella della Porta" label="Donatella della Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097475" start="56051" end="56065" title="Claudia Goldin" label="Claudia Goldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490731" start="58775" end="58794" title="Susan Rose-Ackerman" label="Susan Rose-Ackerman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66221" wikidata="Q296474" url="?curid=66221" title="ARC">
<text>ARC may refer to:
==Business==
* Aircraft Radio Corporation, a major avionics manufacturer from the 1920s to the &#x27;50s
* Airlines Reporting Corporation, an airline-owned company that provides ticket distribution, reporting, and settlement services
* Airport Regions Conference, a European organization of major airports
* Alignment Research Center, an AI alignment research organization
* Amalgamated Roadstone Corporation, a British stone quarrying company
* American Record Company (1904–1908, re-activated 1979), one of two United States record labels by this name
* American Record Corporation (1929–1938), a United States record label also known as American Record Company
* ARC (American Recording Company) (1978-present), a vanity label for Earth, Wind &amp; Fire
* ARC Document Solutions, a company based in California, formerly American Reprographics Company
* Amey Roadstone Construction, a former British construction company
* Aqaba Railway Corporation, a freight railway in Jordan
* ARC/Architectural Resources Cambridge, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts
* ARC Diversified, a Cookeville, Tennessee non-profit that employs the severely disabled
* ARC International, a computer processor designer, and a subsidiary of Synopsys 
* ARC Resources, a Canadian oil and natural gas company
* Arena Racing Company, a British racecourse owning group

==Computing==
* Adaptive replacement cache, a cache management algorithm
* Advanced Resource Connector, middleware for computational grids
* Advanced RISC Computing, a specification
* Google App Runtime for Chrome, a compatibility layer and sandboxing technology to run Android applications on Chromebook computers
* ARC (file format), a lossless data compression and archival file format
* Automatic Relay Computer, an early electromechanical computer
* ARC (processor), a family of embedded microprocessors
* ARC Macro Language, a high-level algorithmic language
* Audio Return Channel, a feature of HDMI 1.4
* Authenticated Received Chain, an email authentication system
* Automatic Reference Counting, an Objective-C and Swift memory management feature
* Intel Arc, a brand of graphics processing units designed by Intel
* Arc (web browser), a chromium based web browser &quot;reimagination&quot; released in 2022 with a focus on modern design

==Culture==
* Advance reading copy of a book, for reviewers, librarians, and booksellers
* &quot;A.R.C.&quot; (album), a 1971 album by Chick Corea, Dave Holland, and Barry Altschul
* ARC Europe, association of motoring clubs
* ARChive of Contemporary Music, a music repository in New York City, US
* &quot;ARC Magazine&quot; (Art. Recognition. Culture.), Caribbean
* Art Renewal Center, online realist art museum
* Canadian artist-run centres

==Government and politics==
* Administrative Reforms Commission, an Indian Government commission
* Administrative Reform Council, the military regime that governed Thailand following the 2006 coup d&#x27;état
* &quot;, the French-language name for the Canada Revenue Agency
* Alien registration card (Japan), for foreign residents of Japan
* Alien Resident Certificate, for foreign residents of Taiwan
* Appalachian Regional Commission, a United States federal-state partnership
* Atlanta Regional Commission, a regional planning and intergovernmental coordination agency
* Auckland Regional Council, a former New Zealand local government entity
* Australian Research Council, a government agency for allocating research funding
* Autonomous Republic of Crimea, an internationally recognized autonomous republic in Ukraine
* &quot;, the French-language name for the Royal Canadian Air Force

==Humanitarian, activist and religious organizations==
* Abortion Rights Campaign, Ireland
* African Rainforest Conservancy
* Alliance for Responsible Citizenship
* Alliance of Reformed Churches
* Alliance of Religions and Conservation, UK
* American Red Cross
* American Refugee Committee
* Anti-Recidivism Coalition, Los Angeles, US
* ARC Association for Real Change, of UK providers of services to people with a learning disability
* Arc of the United States
* Arthritis Research Campaign, UK
* Australian Red Cross
* Autism Resource Centre (Singapore), a Singapore-based non-profit organisation
* Society for the Arts, Religion and Contemporary Culture, US
* Alliance Rose Croix, another name for the Order of the Solar Temple

==Research and science==
* Agricultural Research Council, a former British organisation that funded agricultural research
* Agulhas Return Current, an ocean current in the Indian Ocean
* AIDS-related complex, a condition in which antibody tests are positive for HIV
* Alberta Research Council, government funded applied R&amp;D corporation
* Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, inflammation of the conjunctiva and nose due to allergy
* American Rocketry Challenge, an American model rocketry competition for high school students
* Ames Research Center, a NASA facility located at Moffett Federal Airfield, California
* ARC fusion reactor, Affordable, Robust Compact reactor, a reactor design from MIT
* ARC (protein) (activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein)
* &quot;Archaeological Review from Cambridge&quot;, a UK journal
* Archival Research Catalog, National Archives and Records Administration catalog
* Arcuate nucleus (hypothalamus), an aggregation of neurons in the mediobasal hypothalamus
* Arthritis Research Campaign, a British medical research charity
* Astrophysical Research Consortium, the organization that operates the Apache Point Observatory
* Augmentation Research Center, a center founded by electrical engineer Douglas Engelbart
* Augmented renal clearance, a pharmacokinetic consideration in critically ill persons
* Australian Research Council, the Australian Government&#x27;s main research funding body for tertiary institutions
* Auto Research Center, a specialized aerodynamics and automotive research and consulting company
* &quot;Automation and Remote Control&quot;, a Russian periodical
* Aviation Research Centre, a part of the Research and Analysis Wing (R&amp;AW) of the Cabinet Secretariat, India

==Sports==
* Adelaide Rowing Club, in Adelaide, South Australia
* African Rally Championship, international automobile rally
* Anteater Recreation Center, an indoor gym at the University of California, Irvine 
* American Rivers Conference, an NCAA Division III athletic conference operating mainly in Iowa with one member in Nebraska
* Americas Rugby Championship
* SV ARC (Alphense Racing Club), Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands, a Dutch football club
* Athletics–Recreation Center, a 5,000-seat multi-purpose arena on the campus of Valparaiso University in Valparaiso, Indiana
* Atlanta Rowing Club, Roswell, Georgia
* Atlantic Rally for Cruisers, a transatlantic sailing competition
* Australian Rally Championship
* Australian Rugby Championship (August–October 2007), rugby union

==Other uses==
* Advanced Recon Commandos (ARC troopers), a variant of clone trooper in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise
* Anti-reflective coating
* American River College, Sacramento County, California, US
* Academy of Richmond County, Augusta, Georgia, US
* Access to the Region&#x27;s Core, cancelled commuter rail project, New York, US
* Anaheim Rapid Connection, a proposed streetcar line
* Activity relationship chart, of closeness between activities
* A US Navy hull classification symbol: Cable repair ship (ARC)
* Army Reconnaissance Course, US Army Armor School, Fort Knox, Kentucky
* ARC (Callsign), Colombian Navy abbreviation and ship prefix
* ARC triangle, Affinity, Reality and Communication, in Scientology
* &quot;Attack Retrieve Capture&quot;, a computer game
* arc, the ISO 639-2 code for the Aramaic language
**Aramaic Wikipedia, which uses &quot;arc&quot; as its url prefix
* Alarm monitoring center, also known as alarm receiving center (ARC)
* ARC West Michigan, an independent digital subchannel of WWMT in Kalamazoo, Michigan

==See also==
* Arch (disambiguation)
* ARCS (disambiguation)
* Ark (disambiguation)
* ARQ (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q296474" start="0" end="3" title="ARC" label="ARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404822" start="33" end="59" title="Aircraft Radio Corporation" label="Aircraft Radio Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698797" start="125" end="155" title="Airlines Reporting Corporation" label="Airlines Reporting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698937" start="254" end="280" title="Airport Regions Conference" label="Airport Regions Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q117834778" start="326" end="351" title="Alignment Research Center" label="Alignment Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739364" start="393" end="426" title="Amalgamated Roadstone Corporation" label="Amalgamated Roadstone Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466592" start="464" end="487" title="American Record Company" label="American Record Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q466599" start="574" end="601" title="American Record Corporation" label="American Record Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28974" start="752" end="774" title="Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire" label="Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744822" start="777" end="799" title="ARC Document Solutions" label="ARC Document Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745963" start="874" end="901" title="Amey Roadstone Construction" label="Amey Roadstone Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q607381" start="943" end="968" title="Aqaba Railway Corporation" label="Aqaba Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653584" start="1000" end="1043" title="ARC/Architectural Resources Cambridge, Inc." label="ARC/Architectural Resources Cambridge, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4744396" start="1072" end="1087" title="ARC Diversified" label="ARC Diversified"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1231" end="1239" title="Synopsys#ARC International" label="Synopsys"/>
<link wikidata="Q296498" start="1243" end="1256" title="ARC Resources" label="ARC Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062465" start="1299" end="1319" title="Arena Racing Company" label="Arena Racing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322437" start="1372" end="1398" title="Adaptive replacement cache" label="Adaptive replacement cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q20089046" start="1431" end="1458" title="Advanced Resource Connector" label="Advanced Resource Connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4477863" start="1497" end="1520" title="Advanced RISC Computing" label="Advanced RISC Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880945" start="1540" end="1569" title="Google App Runtime for Chrome" label="Google App Runtime for Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q296496" start="1673" end="1690" title="ARC (file format)" label="ARC (file format)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1747" end="1771" title="APEXC#ARC_and_SEC" label="Automatic Relay Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22041439" start="1811" end="1826" title="ARC (processor)" label="ARC (processor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653628" start="1867" end="1885" title="ARC Macro Language" label="ARC Macro Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q184292" start="1923" end="1943" title="Audio Return Channel" label="Audio Return Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688801" start="1969" end="1997" title="Authenticated Received Chain" label="Authenticated Received Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q859846" start="2032" end="2060" title="Automatic Reference Counting" label="Automatic Reference Counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q108523499" start="2115" end="2124" title="Intel Arc" label="Intel Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q120176610" start="2183" end="2200" title="Arc (web browser)" label="Arc (web browser)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686085" start="2319" end="2339" title="Advance reading copy" label="Advance reading copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647274" start="2396" end="2422" title="A.R.C. (album)" label="&amp;quot;A.R.C.&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819356" start="2488" end="2498" title="ARC Europe" label="ARC Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653639" start="2532" end="2561" title="ARChive of Contemporary Music" label="ARChive of Contemporary Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162234" start="2611" end="2623" title="ARC Magazine" label="ARC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864562" start="2672" end="2690" title="Art Renewal Center" label="Art Renewal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16020664" start="2720" end="2747" title="Canadian artist-run centres" label="Canadian artist-run centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683485" start="2779" end="2812" title="Administrative Reforms Commission" label="Administrative Reforms Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192601" start="2848" end="2877" title="Administrative Reform Council" label="Administrative Reform Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032002" start="3001" end="3022" title="Canada Revenue Agency" label="Canada Revenue Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726493" start="3025" end="3056" title="Alien registration card (Japan)" label="Alien registration card (Japan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315431" start="3091" end="3117" title="Alien Resident Certificate" label="Alien Resident Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="3153" end="3184" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816131" start="3230" end="3257" title="Atlanta Regional Commission" label="Atlanta Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819548" start="3323" end="3348" title="Auckland Regional Council" label="Auckland Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824612" start="3397" end="3424" title="Australian Research Council" label="Australian Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q756294" start="3480" end="3509" title="Autonomous Republic of Crimea" label="Autonomous Republic of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="3615" end="3639" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015594" start="3698" end="3722" title="Abortion Rights Campaign" label="Abortion Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689894" start="3734" end="3764" title="African Rainforest Conservancy" label="African Rainforest Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123295676" start="3767" end="3803" title="Alliance for Responsible Citizenship" label="Alliance for Responsible Citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q110540193" start="3806" end="3835" title="Alliance of Reformed Churches" label="Alliance of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732463" start="3838" end="3876" title="Alliance of Religions and Conservation" label="Alliance of Religions and Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="3883" end="3901" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744809" start="3904" end="3930" title="American Refugee Committee" label="American Refugee Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714457" start="3933" end="3958" title="Anti-Recidivism Coalition" label="Anti-Recidivism Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653623" start="3978" end="4009" title="ARC Association for Real Change" label="ARC Association for Real Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785033" start="4078" end="4102" title="Arc of the United States" label="Arc of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797635" start="4105" end="4132" title="Arthritis Research Campaign" label="Arthritis Research Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824610" start="4139" end="4159" title="Australian Red Cross" label="Australian Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826006" start="4162" end="4196" title="Autism Resource Centre (Singapore)" label="Autism Resource Centre (Singapore)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552283" start="4242" end="4297" title="Society for the Arts, Religion and Contemporary Culture" label="Society for the Arts, Religion and Contemporary Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571099" start="4304" end="4323" title="Alliance Rose Croix" label="Alliance Rose Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693945" start="4400" end="4429" title="Agricultural Research Council" label="Agricultural Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23578938" start="4497" end="4519" title="Agulhas Return Current" label="Agulhas Return Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651855" start="4560" end="4580" title="AIDS-related complex" label="AIDS-related complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639219" start="4641" end="4665" title="Alberta Research Council" label="Alberta Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q471521" start="4715" end="4743" title="Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis" label="Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691428" start="4803" end="4830" title="American Rocketry Challenge" label="American Rocketry Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="4898" end="4918" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304067" start="4986" end="5004" title="ARC fusion reactor" label="ARC fusion reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037024" start="5070" end="5083" title="ARC (protein)" label="ARC (protein)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785447" start="5145" end="5181" title="Archaeological Review from Cambridge" label="Archaeological Review from Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="5231" end="5275" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q253246" start="5286" end="5316" title="Arcuate nucleus (hypothalamus)" label="Arcuate nucleus (hypothalamus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797635" start="5377" end="5404" title="Arthritis Research Campaign" label="Arthritis Research Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q616529" start="5443" end="5476" title="Astrophysical Research Consortium" label="Astrophysical Research Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q616529" start="5513" end="5537" title="Apache Point Observatory" label="Apache Point Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820422" start="5540" end="5568" title="Augmentation Research Center" label="Augmentation Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038258" start="5630" end="5655" title="Augmented renal clearance" label="Augmented renal clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824612" start="5717" end="5744" title="Australian Research Council" label="Australian Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245504" start="5834" end="5854" title="Auto Research Center" label="Auto Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056305" start="5938" end="5967" title="Automation and Remote Control" label="Automation and Remote Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828666" start="5998" end="6022" title="Aviation Research Centre" label="Aviation Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681776" start="6124" end="6144" title="Adelaide Rowing Club" label="Adelaide Rowing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q386443" start="6177" end="6203" title="African Rally Championship" label="African Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961667" start="6238" end="6264" title="Anteater Recreation Center" label="Anteater Recreation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064498" start="6323" end="6349" title="American Rivers Conference" label="American Rivers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q580749" start="6447" end="6474" title="Americas Rugby Championship" label="Americas Rugby Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509595" start="6477" end="6483" title="SV ARC" label="SV ARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815594" start="6566" end="6593" title="Athletics–Recreation Center" label="Athletics–Recreation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816142" start="6692" end="6711" title="Atlanta Rowing Club" label="Atlanta Rowing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q756430" start="6732" end="6759" title="Atlantic Rally for Cruisers" label="Atlantic Rally for Cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824599" start="6799" end="6828" title="Australian Rally Championship" label="Australian Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158747" start="6831" end="6860" title="Australian Rugby Championship" label="Australian Rugby Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6957" end="6981" title="Clone trooper#ARC troopers" label="variant of clone trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q583040" start="7023" end="7046" title="Anti-reflective coating" label="Anti-reflective coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791079" start="7049" end="7071" title="American River College" label="American River College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671525" start="7109" end="7135" title="Academy of Richmond County" label="Academy of Richmond County"/>
<link wikidata="Q296472" start="7160" end="7192" title="Access to the Region&amp;#x27;s Core" label="Access to the Region&amp;#x27;s Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926726" start="7242" end="7266" title="Anaheim Rapid Connection" label="Anaheim Rapid Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677632" start="7296" end="7323" title="Activity relationship chart" label="Activity relationship chart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7397" end="7420" title="List of auxiliaries of the United States Navy#Cable repair ships (ARC)" label="Cable repair ship (ARC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451227" start="7423" end="7449" title="Army Reconnaissance Course" label="Army Reconnaissance Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526431" start="7495" end="7509" title="ARC (Callsign)" label="ARC (Callsign)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155179" start="7557" end="7569" title="ARC triangle" label="ARC triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817914" start="7631" end="7654" title="Attack Retrieve Capture" label="Attack Retrieve Capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="7712" end="7728" title="Aramaic language" label="Aramaic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8569951" start="7731" end="7748" title="Aramaic Wikipedia" label="Aramaic Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708391" start="7797" end="7820" title="Alarm monitoring center" label="Alarm monitoring center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957379" start="7923" end="7927" title="WWMT" label="WWMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q632009" start="7967" end="7988" title="Arch (disambiguation)" label="Arch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653614" start="7991" end="8012" title="ARCS (disambiguation)" label="ARCS (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q344964" start="8015" end="8035" title="Ark (disambiguation)" label="Ark (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238558" start="8038" end="8058" title="ARQ (disambiguation)" label="ARQ (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66222" wikidata="Q726687" url="?curid=66222" title="Jacques Roubaud">
<text>Jacques Roubaud (; 5 December 1932 – 5 December 2024) was a French poet, writer, and mathematician.

==Life and career==
Jacques Roubaud taught mathematics at University of Paris X Nanterre and poetry at EHESS. A member of the Oulipo group, he has published poetry, plays, novels, and translated English poetry and books into French, such as Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;The Hunting of the Snark&quot;. French poet and novelist Raymond Queneau had Roubaud&#x27;s first book, a collection of mathematically structured sonnets, published by Éditions Gallimard, and then invited Roubaud to join the Oulipo as the organization&#x27;s first new member outside the founders.

Roubaud&#x27;s fiction often suppresses the rigorous constraints of the Oulipo (while mentioning their suppression, thereby indicating that such constraints are indeed present), yet takes the Oulipian self-consciousness of the writing act to an extreme. This simultaneity both appears playfully, in his Hortense novels (&quot;Our Beautiful Heroine&quot;, &quot;Hortense Is Abducted&quot; and &quot;Hortense in Exile&quot;), and with gravity and reflection in &quot;The Great Fire of London&quot;, considered the pinnacle of his prose. &quot;The Great Fire of London&quot; (1989), &quot;The Loop&quot; (1993), and &quot;Mathematics&quot; (2012) are the first three volumes of a long, experimental, autobiographical work known as &quot;the project&quot; (or &quot;the minimal project&quot;), and the only volumes of &quot;the project&quot;, at present, to have been translated into English. Seven volumes of &quot;the project&quot; have been completed and published in French. To compose &quot;The Loop&quot;, Roubaud began with a childhood memory of a snowy night in Carcassonne and then wrote nightly, without returning to correct his writing from previous nights. Roubaud&#x27;s goals in writing &quot;The Loop&quot; were to discover &quot;My &quot;own&quot; memory, how does it work?&quot; and to &quot;destroy&quot; his memories through writing them down.

Roubaud participated in readings and lectures at the European Graduate School (2007), the Salon du Livre de Paris (2008), and the &quot;Dire Poesia&quot; series at Palazzo Leoni Montanari in Venice (2011).

In 1980, he married Alix Cléo Roubaud; she died three years later. Jacques Roubaud died on 5 December 2024, his 92nd birthday.

==Selected bibliography==
*&quot;La Belle Hortense&quot; (1985). &quot;Our Beautiful Heroine&quot;, trans. David Kornacker (Overlook Press, 1987).
*&quot;Quelque chose noir&quot; (1986). &quot;Some Thing Black&quot;, trans. Rosmarie Waldrop. Photographs by Alix Cléo Roubaud (Dalkey Archive Press, 1990).
*&quot;L&#x27;Enlèvement d&#x27;Hortense&quot; (1987). &quot;Hortense Is Abducted&quot;, trans. Dominic Di Bernardi (Dalkey Archive Press, 1989).
*&quot;Échanges de la lumière&quot; (1990). &quot;Exchanges on Light&quot;, trans. Eleni Sikélianòs (La Presse, 2009).
*&quot;Le Grand Incendie de Londres&quot; (Branch 1 of the Project) (1989). &quot;The Great Fire of London&quot;, trans. Dominic Di Bernardi (Dalkey Archive Press, 1991).
*&quot;La Princesse Hoppy ou Le Conte du Labrador&quot; (1990). &quot;The Princess Hoppy, or The Tale of Labrador&quot;, trans. Bernard Hœpffner (Dalkey Archive Press, 1993).
*&quot;L&#x27;Exil d&#x27;Hortense&quot; (1990). &quot;Hortense in Exile&quot;, trans. Dominic Di Bernardi (Dalkey Archive Press, 1992).
*&quot;La Pluralité des mondes de Lewis&quot; (1991). &quot;The Plurality of Worlds of Lewis&quot;, trans. Rosmarie Waldrop (Dalkey Archive Press, 1995).
*&quot;La Boucle&quot; (Branch 2 of the Project) (1993). &quot;The Loop&quot;, trans. Jeff Fort (Dalkey Archive Press, 2009).
*&quot;Poésie, etcetera : ménage&quot; (1995). &quot;Poetry, etcetera: Cleaning House&quot;, trans. Guy Bennett (Green Integer, 2006).
*&quot;Mathématique&quot; (Branch 3, Part 1, of the Project) (1997). &quot;Mathematics&quot;, trans. Ian Monk (Dalkey Archive Press, 2012).
*&quot;La forme d&#x27;une ville change plus vite, hélas, que le cœur des humains&quot; (1999). &quot;The Form of a City Changes Faster, Alas, than the Human Heart: 150 Poems, 1991–1998&quot;, trans. Rosmarie Waldrop and Keith Waldrop (Dalkey Archive Press, 2006).
*&quot;Poésie&quot; (Branch 4 of the Project) (2000).
*&quot;La Bibliothèque de Warburg&quot; (Branch 5 of the Project) (2002)
*&quot;Impératif catégorique&quot; (Branch 3, Part 2, of the Project) (2008)
*&quot;La Dissolution&quot; (Branch 6 (Final) of the Project) (2008)

== Awards and honors ==
* 1986: Prix France Culture, for &quot;Quelque chose noir&quot;
* 1990: Grand prix national de la poésie du ministère de la Culture, for his body of work
* 1999: America Award in Literature
* 2008: Grand prix de littérature Paul-Morand, for his body of work

==References==
==Further reading==
* Poucel, Jean-Jacques. &quot;Jacques Roubaud and the Invention of Memory&quot;. North Carolina Studies in Romance Languages and Literatures. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006. 
* Puff, Jean-François. &quot;Mémoire de la mémoire. Jacques Roubaud et la lyrique médiévale&quot;. Paris : Editions Classiques Garnier, coll. &quot;Etudes de littérature des XXe et XXIe siècles&quot;, 2009.
* Reig, Christophe. &quot;Mimer, Miner, Rimer : le cycle romanesque de Jacques Roubaud (La Belle Hortense, L&#x27;Enlèvement d&#x27;Hortense, L&#x27;Exil d&#x27;Hortense)&quot; – préface de Bernard Magné, New-York/Amsterdam, Rodopi, coll. &quot; Faux-Titre&quot; n°275, 2006. ()

==External links==
* 
* Documentation critique sur J. Roubaud / commented bibliography about Jacques Roubaud
* Jacques Roubaud reading an English translation of one of his poems</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726687" start="0" end="15" title="Jacques Roubaud" label="Jacques Roubaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394262" start="159" end="189" title="Paris Nanterre University" label="University of Paris X Nanterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273518" start="204" end="209" title="School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences" label="EHESS"/>
<link wikidata="Q744609" start="227" end="233" title="Oulipo" label="Oulipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="326" end="332" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="342" end="355" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079681" start="369" end="393" title="The Hunting of the Snark" label="The Hunting of the Snark"/>
<link wikidata="Q218690" start="426" end="441" title="Raymond Queneau" label="Raymond Queneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q273819" start="537" end="555" title="Éditions Gallimard" label="Éditions Gallimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="1734" end="1745" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837264" start="2255" end="2272" title="Alix Cléo Roubaud" label="Alix Cléo Roubaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563120" start="2587" end="2603" title="Rosmarie Waldrop" label="Rosmarie Waldrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211071" start="2639" end="2659" title="Dalkey Archive Press" label="Dalkey Archive Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978088" start="3809" end="3822" title="Green Integer" label="Green Integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563120" start="4171" end="4187" title="Rosmarie Waldrop" label="Rosmarie Waldrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385175" start="4192" end="4205" title="Keith Waldrop" label="Keith Waldrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974791" start="4696" end="4723" title="America Award in Literature" label="America Award in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114798" start="4732" end="4769" title="Grand prix de littérature Paul-Morand" label="Grand prix de littérature Paul-Morand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66225" wikidata="Q15866" url="?curid=66225" title="Curtis LeMay">
<text>Curtis Emerson LeMay (November 15, 1906 – October 1, 1990) was a US Air Force general who implemented an effective but controversial strategic bombing campaign in the Pacific theater of World War II. He later served as Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, from 1961 to 1965.

LeMay joined the United States Army Air Corps, the precursor to the United States Air Force, in 1929 while studying civil engineering at Ohio State University. He had risen to the rank of major by the time of Japan&#x27;s attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and the United States&#x27;s entry into World War II. He commanded the 305th Bombardment Group from October 1942 until September 1943, and the 3rd Air Division in the European theatre of World War II until August 1944, when he was transferred to the China Burma India Theater. He was then placed in command of strategic bombing operations against Japan, planning and executing a massive fire bombing campaign against Japanese cities, and Operation Starvation, a crippling minelaying campaign in Japan&#x27;s internal waterways.

After the war, he was assigned to command USAF Europe and coordinated the Berlin Airlift. He served as commander of the Strategic Air Command (SAC) from 1948 to 1957, where he presided over the transition to an all–jet aircraft force that had a strong emphasis on the delivery of nuclear weapons in the event of war. As Chief of Staff of the Air Force, he called for the bombing of Cuban missile sites during the Cuban Missile Crisis and sought a sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam during the Vietnam War.

After retiring from the Air Force in 1965, LeMay agreed to serve as pro-segregation Alabama Governor George Wallace&#x27;s running mate on the far-right American Independent Party ticket in the 1968 United States presidential election. The ticket won 46 electoral votes, 5 states, and 13.5% of the popular vote, a strong tally for a third party campaign, but the Wallace campaign came to see LeMay as a liability due to his controversial stance promoting the use of nuclear weapons. After the election, LeMay retired to Newport Beach, California, and he died in 1990 at age 83.

==Early life==
LeMay was born in Columbus, Ohio, on November 15, 1906. LeMay was of English and distant French Huguenot heritage. His father, Erving Edwin LeMay, was at times an ironworker and general handyman, but he never held a job longer than a few months. His mother, Arizona Dove (née Carpenter) LeMay, did her best to hold her family together. With very limited income, his family moved around the country as his father looked for work, going as far as Montana and California. Eventually they returned to his native city of Columbus. LeMay attended Columbus public schools, graduating from Columbus South High School, and studied civil engineering at Ohio State University. Working his way through college, he graduated with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in civil engineering. While at Ohio State he was a member of the National Society of Pershing Rifles and the Professional Engineering Fraternity Theta Tau.

==Career==
LeMay was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Air Corps Reserve in October 1929. He received a regular commission in the United States Army Air Corps in January 1930. While finishing at Ohio State, he took flight training at Norton Field in Columbus, in 1931–32. On June 9, 1934, he married Helen Maitland.

LeMay became a pursuit pilot with his first duty station at Selfridge Field with the 27th Pursuit Squadron. After having served in various assignments in fighter operations, LeMay transferred to bomber aircraft in 1937. While stationed in Hawaii, he became one of the first members of the Air Corps to receive specialized training in aerial navigation. In August 1937, as navigator under pilot and commander Caleb V. Haynes on a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, he helped locate the battleship despite being given the wrong coordinates by Navy personnel, in exercises held in misty conditions off California, after which the group of B-17s bombed it with water bombs. In March 1938, LeMay as a member of the 2nd Bombardment Group participated in a good will flight to Buenos Aires. For this flight, the 2nd Bombardment Group was awarded the Mackay Trophy in 1939. For Haynes again, in May 1938 he navigated three B-17s over the Atlantic Ocean to intercept the Italian liner to illustrate the ability of land-based airpower to defend the American coasts. In 1940 he was navigator for Haynes on the prototype Boeing XB-15 heavy bomber, flying a survey from Panama over the Galapagos islands. By the end of 1940, he was stationed at Westover Air Reserve Base, as the operations officer of the 34th Bombardment Group. War brought rapid promotion and increased responsibility.

When his crews were not flying missions, they were subjected to relentless training, as LeMay believed that training was the key to saving their lives. &quot;You fight as you train&quot; was one of his cardinal rules. It expressed his belief that, in the chaos, stress, and confusion of combat (aerial or otherwise), troops or airmen would perform successfully only if their individual acts were second nature, performed nearly instinctively due to repetitive training. Throughout his career, LeMay was widely and fondly known among his troops as &quot;Old Iron Pants&quot;, and the &quot;Big Cigar&quot;.

==World War II==
When the U.S. entered World War II in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, LeMay was a major in the United States Army Air Forces (he had been a first lieutenant as recently as 1940), and the commander of a newly created B-17 Flying Fortress unit, the 305th Bomb Group. He took this unit to England in October 1942 as part of the Eighth Air Force, and led it in combat until May 1943, notably helping to develop the combat box formation. In September 1943, he became the first commander of the newly formed 3rd Air Division. He personally led several dangerous missions, including the Regensburg section of the Schweinfurt–Regensburg mission of August 17, 1943. In that mission, he led 146 B-17s to Regensburg, Germany, beyond the range of escorting fighters, and, after bombing, continued on to bases in North Africa, losing 24 bombers in the process.

The heavy losses in veteran crews on this and subsequent deep penetration missions in the autumn of 1943 led the Eighth Air Force to limit missions to targets within escort range. Finally, with the deployment in the European theater of the P-51 Mustang in January 1944, the Eighth Air Force gained an escort fighter with range to match the bombers.

In a discussion of a report into high abort rates in bomber missions during World War II, which Robert McNamara suspected was because of pilot cowardice, McNamara described LeMay&#x27;s character:

In August 1944, LeMay transferred to the China-Burma-India theater and directed first the XX Bomber Command in China and then the XXI Bomber Command in the Pacific. LeMay was later placed in charge of all strategic air operations against the Japanese home islands.

LeMay soon concluded that the techniques and tactics developed for use in Europe against the Luftwaffe were unsuitable against Japan. His Boeing B-29 Superfortress bombers flying from China were dropping their bombs near their targets only 5% of the time. Operational losses of aircraft and crews were unacceptably high owing to Japanese daylight air defenses and continuing mechanical problems with the B-29. In January 1945, LeMay was transferred from China to relieve Brigadier General Haywood S. Hansell as commander of the XXI Bomber Command in the Marianas.

He became convinced that high-altitude precision bombing would be ineffective, given the usually cloudy weather over Japan. Furthermore, bombs dropped from the B-29s at high altitude (above ) were often blown off of their trajectories by a consistently powerful jet stream over the Japanese home islands, which dramatically reduced the effectiveness of the high-altitude raids. Because Japanese air defenses made daytime bombing below jet stream-affected altitudes too perilous, LeMay finally switched to low-altitude nighttime incendiary attacks on Japanese targets, a tactic senior commanders had been preparing for some time, manufacturing and stockpiling incendiary bombs for this purpose. Japanese cities were largely constructed of combustible materials such as wood and paper. Precision high-altitude daylight bombing was ordered to proceed only when weather permitted or when specific critical targets were not vulnerable to area bombing.

LeMay commanded subsequent B-29 Superfortress combat operations against Japan, including massive incendiary attacks on 67 Japanese cities and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This included the firebombing of Tokyoknown in official documents as the &quot;Operation Meetinghouse&quot; air raid on the night of March 9–10, 1945which proved to be the single most destructive bombing raid of the war. For this first attack, LeMay ordered the defensive guns removed from 325 B-29s, loaded each plane with Model M-47 incendiary clusters, magnesium bombs, white phosphorus bombs, and napalm, and ordered the bombers to fly in streams at over Tokyo. LeMay described Operation Meetinghouse by saying &quot;the US had finally stopped swatting at flies and gone after the manure pile&quot;.

The first pathfinder airplanes arrived over Tokyo just after midnight on March 10 and marked the target area with a flaming &quot;X&quot;. In a three-hour period, the main bombing force dropped 1,665 tons of incendiary bombs, killing 100,000 civilians, destroying 250,000 buildings, and incinerating of the city. Aircrews at the tail end of the bomber stream reported that the stench of burned human flesh permeated the aircraft over the target.

Precise figures are not available, but the strategic bombing campaign against Japan, directed by LeMay between March 1945 and the Japanese surrender in August 1945, may have killed more than 500,000 Japanese civilians and left five million homeless. Official estimates from the United States Strategic Bombing Survey put the figures at 220,000 people killed. Some 40% of the built-up areas of 66 cities were destroyed, including much of Japan&#x27;s war industry.

LeMay was aware of the implication of his orders. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported at the time, &quot;Maj. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, commander of the B-29s of the entire Marianas area, declared that if the war is shortened by a single day, the attack will have served its purpose&quot;. The argument was that it was his duty to carry out the attacks in order to end the war as quickly as possible, sparing further loss of life. He also remarked regarding the morality of the air effort against Japan, &quot;I suppose if I had lost the war, I would have been tried as a war criminal.&quot; This opinion was also reported by Robert McNamara in the 2003 documentary &quot;The Fog of War&quot;, although after the war the Allies did not prosecute any German or Japanese military personnel for bombing civilian targets.

Presidents Roosevelt and Truman supported LeMay&#x27;s strategy, referring to an estimate of one million Allied casualties if Japan had to be invaded. Japan had intentionally decentralized 90% of its war-related production into small subcontractor workshops in civilian districts, making remaining Japanese war industry largely immune to conventional precision bombing with high explosives. As the firebombing campaign took effect, Japanese war planners were forced to expend significant resources to relocate vital war industries to remote caves and mountain bunkers, reducing production of war material.

LeMay also oversaw Operation Starvation, an aerial mining operation against Japanese waterways and ports that disrupted Japanese shipping and logistics. Although his superiors were unsupportive of this naval objective, LeMay gave it a high priority by assigning the entire 313th Bombardment Wing (four groups, about 160 airplanes) to the task. Aerial mining supplemented a tight Allied submarine blockade of the home islands, drastically reducing Japan&#x27;s ability to supply its overseas forces to the point that postwar analysis concluded that it could have defeated Japan on its own had it begun earlier.

==Japan–Washington flight==
LeMay piloted one of three specially modified B-29s flying from Japan to the U.S. in September 1945, in the process breaking several aviation records, including the greatest USAAF takeoff weight, the longest USAAF non-stop flight, and the first ever non-stop Japan–Chicago flight. One of the pilots was of higher rank: Lieutenant General Barney M. Giles. The other two aircraft used up more fuel than LeMay&#x27;s in fighting headwinds, and they could not fly to Washington, D.C., the original goal. Their pilots landed in Chicago to refuel. LeMay&#x27;s aircraft had sufficient fuel to reach Washington, but he was directed by the War Department to join the others by refueling at Chicago.

==Cold War==

===Berlin Airlift===
After World War II, LeMay was already thinking about deterrence theory and how the next war would be fought. He was briefly transferred to The Pentagon as deputy chief of Air Staff for Research &amp; Development. In 1947, LeMay returned to Europe as commander of USAF Europe, heading operations for the Berlin Airlift in 1948 in the face of a blockade by the Soviet Union and its satellite states that threatened to starve the civilian population of the Western occupation zones of Berlin. Under his direction, Douglas C-54 Skymasters that could each carry 10 tons of cargo began supplying the city on July 1. By late 1948, the airlift was bringing in an average of 5,000 tons of supplies a day with 500 daily flights. The airlift continued for 11 months, with 213,000 flights operated by six countries bringing in 1.7 million tons of food and fuel to Berlin. Faced with the failure of its blockade, the Soviet Union relented and reopened land corridors to the West. Though LeMay is sometimes publicly credited with the success of the Berlin Airlift, it was, in fact, instigated by General Lucius D. Clay when Clay called LeMay about the problem. LeMay initially started flying supplies into Berlin, but then decided that it was a job for a logistics expert and he found that person in Lt. General William H. Tunner, who took over the operational aspects of the Berlin Airlift.

===Strategic Air Command===
In 1948, he returned to the U.S. to head the Strategic Air Command (SAC) at Offutt Air Force Base, replacing Gen George Kenney. When LeMay took over command of SAC, it consisted of little more than a few understaffed B-29 bombardment groups left over from World War II. Less than half of the available aircraft were operational, and the crews were undertrained. Base and aircraft security standards were minimal. Upon inspecting a SAC hangar full of US nuclear strategic bombers, LeMay found a single Air Force sentry on duty, unarmed. After ordering a mock bombing exercise on Dayton, Ohio, LeMay was shocked to learn that most of the strategic bombers assigned to the mission missed their targets by one mile or more. &quot;We didn&#x27;t have one crew, not one crew, in the entire command who could do a professional job&quot;, noted LeMay.

A meeting in November 1948, with Air Force Chief of Staff Hoyt Vandenberg, found the two men agreeing the primary mission of SAC should be the capability of delivering 80% of the nation&#x27;s atomic bombs in one mission. At the Dualism Conference in December 1948, the Air Force leadership rallied behind LeMay&#x27;s position that the service&#x27;s highest priority was to deliver the SAC atomic offensive &quot;in one fell swoop telescoping mass and time&quot;. &quot;To LeMay, demolishing everything was how you win a war.&quot; Towards this aim, LeMay delivered the first SAC Emergency War Plan in March 1949 which called for dropping 133 atomic bombs on 70 cities in the USSR within 30 days. LeMay predicted that World War III would last no longer than 30 days. Air power strategists called this type of pre-emptive strike &quot;killing a nation&quot;. However, the Harmon committee released their unanimous report two months later stating such an attack would not end a war with the Soviets and their industry would quickly recover. This committee had been specifically created by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to study the effects of a massive nuclear strike against the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, within weeks, an ad hoc Joint Chiefs committee recommended tripling America&#x27;s nuclear arsenal, and Air Force Chief of Staff Vandenberg called for enough bombs to attack 220 targets, up from the previous 70.

Upon receiving his fourth star in 1951 at age 44, LeMay became the youngest American four-star general since Ulysses S. Grant. He would also become the longest serving person in that rank in American military history.

In 1954 LeMay remarked to pilot Hal Austin, whose plane had been damaged by a MiG-17 while on a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union, &quot;Well, maybe if we do this overflight right, we can get World War III started&quot;. Hal Austin assumed that LeMay was joking, but years later, after LeMay retired, Austin saw him again and &quot;brought up the subject of the mission we had flown. And he remembered it like it was yesterday. We chatted about it a little bit. His comment again was, &#x27;Well, we&#x27;d have been a hell of a lot better off if we&#x27;d got World War III started in those days&#x27;&quot;.

In 1956 and 1957 LeMay implemented tests of 24-hour bomber and tanker alerts, keeping some bomber forces ready at all times. LeMay headed SAC until 1957, overseeing its transformation into a modern, efficient, all-jet force. LeMay&#x27;s tenure was the longest over an American military command in nearly 100 years.

===The &quot;Airpower Battle&quot;===

====USAF airpower development and LeMay&#x27;s style====
LeMay was instrumental in SAC&#x27;s acquisition of a large fleet of new strategic bombers, establishment of a vast aerial refueling system, the formation of many new units and bases, development of a strategic ballistic missile force, and establishment of a strict command and control system with an unprecedented readiness capability. All of this was protected by a greatly enhanced and modernized security force, the Strategic Air Command Elite Guard. LeMay insisted on rigorous training and very high standards of performance for all SAC personnel, be they officers, enlisted men, aircrews, mechanics, or administrative staff, and reportedly commented, &quot;I have neither the time nor the inclination to differentiate between the incompetent and the merely unfortunate.&quot; 

&quot;Life&quot; magazine reported that LeMay once took the co-pilot&#x27;s seat of a SAC bomber to observe the mission, complete with lit cigar. When asked by the pilot to put out the cigar, LeMay asked why. When the pilot explained that fumes inside the fuselage could explode, LeMay growled, &quot;It wouldn&#x27;t dare&quot;. The incident was used as the basis for a fictional scene in the 1955 film &quot;Strategic Air Command&quot;. In his controversial and factually disputed memoir &quot;War&#x27;s End&quot;, Major General Charles Sweeney related an alleged 1944 incident that may have been the basis for the &quot;It wouldn&#x27;t dare&quot; comment. Sweeney stated that a similar incident occurred in 1944 when a B-29 crew chief reminded General LeMay of his lit cigar while LeMay was undergoing B-29 familiarization with (then-Colonel) Paul Tibbets&#x27; 509th Composite Group.

Despite his uncompromising attitude regarding performance of duty, LeMay was also known for his concern for the physical well-being and comfort of his men. LeMay found ways to encourage morale, individual performance, and the reenlistment rate through a number of means: encouraging off-duty group recreational activities, instituting spot promotions based on performance, and authorizing special uniforms, training, equipment, and allowances for ground personnel as well as flight crews.

On LeMay&#x27;s departure, SAC was composed of 224,000 airmen, close to 2,000 heavy bombers, and nearly 800 tanker aircraft.

LeMay was appointed Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force in July 1957, serving until 1961.

== Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, 1961–1965 ==

Following service as USAF Vice Chief of Staff (1957–1961), LeMay was made the fifth Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force on the retirement of Gen Thomas White. His belief in the efficacy of strategic air campaigns over tactical strikes and ground support operations became Air Force policy during his tenure as chief of staff.

As Chief of Staff, LeMay clashed repeatedly with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Air Force Secretary Eugene Zuckert, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Army General Maxwell Taylor. At the time, budget constraints and successive nuclear war fighting strategies had left the armed forces in a state of flux. Each of the armed forces had gradually jettisoned realistic appraisals of future conflicts in favor of developing its own separate nuclear and nonnuclear capabilities. At the height of this struggle, the U.S. Army had even reorganized its combat divisions to fight land wars on irradiated nuclear battlefields, developing short-range atomic cannon and mortars in order to win appropriations. The United States Navy in turn proposed delivering strategic nuclear weapons from supercarriers intended to sail into range of the Soviet air defense forces. Of all these various schemes, only LeMay&#x27;s command structure of SAC survived complete reorganization in the changing reality of Cold War-era conflicts.

LeMay was not an enthusiast of the ICBM program, considering ballistic missiles to be little more than toys and no substitute for the strategic nuclear bomber force.

Though LeMay lost significant appropriation battles for the Skybolt ALBM and the proposed Boeing B-52 Stratofortress replacement, the North American XB-70 Valkyrie, he was largely successful at expanding Air Force budgets. Despite LeMay&#x27;s disdain for missiles, he did strongly support the use of military space programs to perform satellite reconnaissance and gather electronic intelligence. For comparison, the US Army and Navy frequently suffered budgetary cutbacks and program cancellations by Congress and Secretary McNamara.

=== Cuban Missile Crisis ===
During the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, LeMay clashed again with U.S. President John F. Kennedy and Defense Secretary McNamara, arguing that he should be allowed to bomb nuclear missile sites in Cuba. He opposed the naval blockade and, after the end of the crisis, suggested that Cuba be invaded anyway, even after the Soviets agreed to withdraw their missiles. Kennedy refused LeMay&#x27;s requests, and the naval blockade was successful.

=== Strategic philosophy ===
The memorandum from LeMay, Chief of Staff, USAF, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, January 4, 1964, illustrates LeMay&#x27;s reasons for keeping bomber forces alongside ballistic missiles: &quot;It is important to recognize, however, that ballistic missile forces represent both the U.S. and Soviet potential for strategic nuclear warfare at the highest, most indiscriminate level, and at a level least susceptible to control. The employment of these weapons in lower level conflict would be likely to escalate the situation, uncontrollably, to an intensity which could be vastly disproportionate to the original aggravation. The use of ICBMs and SLBMs is not, therefore, a rational or credible response to provocations which, although serious, are still less than an immediate threat to national survival. For this reason, among others, I consider that the national security will continue to require the flexibility, responsiveness, and discrimination of manned strategic weapon systems throughout the range of cold, limited, and general war&quot;.

=== Vietnam War ===
LeMay&#x27;s dislike for tactical aircraft and training foreshadowed events in the low-intensity conflict of Vietnam, where existing Air Force fighter aircraft and standard attack profiles proved incapable of carrying out sustained tactical bombing campaigns in the face of hostile North Vietnamese antiaircraft defenses. LeMay said, &quot;Flying fighters is fun. Flying bombers is important&quot;. Aircraft losses on tactical attack missions soared, and Air Force commanders soon realized that their large, missile-armed jet fighters were exceedingly vulnerable not only to antiaircraft shells and missiles but also to cannon-armed, maneuverable Soviet fighters.

LeMay advocated a sustained strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnamese cities, harbors, ports, shipping, and other strategic targets. His advice was ignored. Instead, an incremental policy, Operation Rolling Thunder, was implemented that focused on limited interdiction bombing of fluid enemy supply corridors in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. This limited campaign failed to destroy significant quantities of enemy war supplies or diminish enemy ambitions. Bombing limitations were imposed by President Lyndon Johnson for geopolitical reasons, as he surmised that bombing Soviet and Chinese ships in port and killing Soviet advisers would bring the Soviets and Chinese more directly into the war.

In his 1965 autobiography (co-written with MacKinlay Kantor), LeMay is quoted as saying his response to North Vietnam would be to demand that &quot;they&#x27;ve got to draw in their horns and stop their aggression, or we&#x27;re going to bomb them back into the Stone Age. And we would shove them back into the Stone Age with Air power or Naval power—not with ground forces&quot;. 
LeMay subsequently rejected misquotes of the famous &quot;Stone Age&quot; quote. Later, in a &quot;Washington Post&quot; interview LeMay said that &quot;I never said we should bomb them back to the Stone Age. I said we had the capability to do it. I want to save lives on both sides&quot;. Etymologyst Barry Popik cites multiple sources (including interviews with LeMay) for various versions of both quotes from LeMay. Nevertheless, the &quot;should&quot; quote remained part of the LeMay legend, and remains widely attributed to him ever after.

Some military historians have argued that LeMay&#x27;s theories were eventually proven correct. Near the war&#x27;s end in December 1972, President Richard Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, a high-intensity Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps aerial bombing campaign, which included hundreds of B-52 bombers that struck previously untouched North Vietnamese strategic targets, including heavy populated areas in Hanoi and Haiphong. Linebacker II was followed by renewed negotiations that led to the Paris Peace Agreement, appearing to support the claim. However, consideration must be given to significant differences in terms of both military objectives and geopolitical realities between 1968 and 1972, including the impact of Nixon&#x27;s recognition and exploitation of the Sino-Soviet split to gain a &quot;free hand&quot; in Vietnam and the shift of Communist opposition from an organic insurgency (the Viet Cong) to a conventional mechanized offensive that was by its nature more reliant on industrial output and traditional logistics. In effect, Johnson and Nixon were waging two different wars.

==Post-military career==

===Early political life and developments===
Because of his unrelenting opposition to the Johnson administration&#x27;s Vietnam policy and what was widely perceived as his hostility to McNamara, LeMay was essentially forced into retirement in February 1965. Moving to California, he was approached by conservatives to challenge moderate Republican Thomas Kuchel for his seat in the United States Senate in 1968, but he declined.

===Vice presidential candidacy, 1968===
For the 1968 presidential election, LeMay originally supported former Republican Vice President Richard Nixon; he turned down two requests by former Alabama Governor George Wallace to join his newly formed American Independent Party, that year, on the grounds that a third-party candidacy might hurt Nixon&#x27;s chances at the polls. (By coincidence, Wallace had served as a sergeant in a unit commanded by LeMay during World War II before LeMay had Wallace transferred to the 477th Bombardment Group.)

In 1968 LeMay threw his support to Wallace and became his vice-presidential running mate on the American Independent Party ticket. The campaign saw Wallace&#x27;s record on racial segregation heavily scrutinized. 

Wallace&#x27;s staff began to consider LeMay to be &quot;politically tone-deaf&quot; as LeMay made several comments at campaign events speculating about the possibility of nuclear war, including the press conference where Wallace introduced LeMay as his running mate, where LeMay voiced his belief that there were many situations where the use of nuclear weapons would be efficient and that dropping nuclear bombs would result in positive outcomes for the environment. LeMay&#x27;s arguments that the American public had a &quot;phobia&quot; of atomic weapons failed to change the perception that some American voters had of the Wallace-LeMay ticket.

The Wallace-LeMay AIP ticket received 13.5% of the popular vote, higher than most third party candidacies in the US, and carried five states for a total of 46 electoral votes.

===Honors===
LeMay was honored by several countries for his military service. His U.S. military decorations included the Distinguished Service Cross, the Distinguished Service Medal with two oak leaf clusters, the Silver Star, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, and the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters. He was also a recipient of the French Légion d&#x27;honneur and on December 7, 1964 the Japanese government conferred on him the First Order of Merit with the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun. He was elected to the Alfalfa Club in 1957 and served as a general officer for 21 years.

In 1977, LeMay was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.

The Air Force has the General Curtis E. LeMay Award named in his honor. The award recognizes the best large installation-level Force Support Squadron.

==Personal life==
On June 9, 1934, LeMay married Helen Estelle Maitland (died 1992), with whom he had one child, Patricia Jane LeMay Lodge, known as Janie.

Curtis LeMay was also initiated to the York Rite Freemasonry in the Lakewood Lodge No. 601, Lakewood, Ohio.

==Death==
LeMay resided in Newport Beach, California, starting in 1969. In 1989, he moved to Air Force Village West, a retirement community for former Air Force officers near March Air Force Base in Riverside. He died on October 1, 1990, of complications from a heart attack, in the 22nd Strategic Hospital on the grounds of March AFB. He is buried in the United States Air Force Academy Cemetery at Colorado Springs, Colorado.

==Miscellaneous==
===Amateur radio operator===
LeMay was a Heathkit customer and active amateur radio operator and held a succession of call signs; K0GRL, K4FRA, and W6EZV. He held these calls respectively while stationed at Offutt AFB, Washington, D.C., and when he retired in California. K0GRL is still the call sign of the Strategic Air Command Memorial Amateur Radio Club. He was famous for being on the air on amateur bands while flying on board SAC bombers. LeMay became aware that the new single sideband (SSB) technology offered a big advantage over amplitude modulation (AM) for SAC aircraft operating long distances from their bases. In conjunction with Heath engineers and Art Collins (W0CXX) of Collins Radio, he established SSB as the radio standard for SAC bombers in 1957.

===Sports car racing===
LeMay was also a sports car owner and enthusiast who owned an Allard J2. As the &quot;SAC era&quot; began to wind down, LeMay loaned out facilities of SAC bases for use by the Sports Car Club of America, as the era of early street races began to die out. Turner Air Force Base hosted the first SCCA race on a military installation in 1952, while SAC&#x27;s operating base at Offutt welcomed the SCCA National Sports Car Championship the following year. LeMay was not permitted to race himself, so he allowed those like SCCA president Fred Wacker and Roy Scott to drive his Allard when the association raced at Offutt. Revenue from the races were used to improve living quarters at the bases or donated to the Air Force Aid Society and local charities. Racing at SAC installations ended in 1954 after a Congressional investigation over using public funding to organize the events.

He was awarded the Woolf Barnato Award, SCCA&#x27;s highest award, for contributions to the Club, in 1954. LeMay was inducted into the Nebraska Auto Racing Hall of Fame in 2004 and the SCCA Hall of Fame in 2007.

===Air Force Academy exemplar===
On March 13, 2010, LeMay was named the class exemplar for the United States Air Force Academy class of 2013.

===Executive Jet Aviation pioneer===
In 1964, LeMay became one of the founding board members of Executive Jet Aviation (EJA) (now called NetJets), along with fellow USAF generals Paul Tibbets and Olbert Lassiter, Washington lawyer and former military pilot Bruce Sundlun, and entertainers James Stewart (who was also an Air Force general in the reserves) and Arthur Godfrey.

It was the first private business jet charter and aircraft management company in the world.

===Judo===
Judo&#x27;s resurgence after the war was due primarily to two individuals, Kyuzo Mifune and LeMay. The pre-war death of Jigorō Kanō (&quot;the father of judo&quot;), wartime demands on the Japanese, their surrender, postwar occupation, and the martial-arts ban all contributed to a time of uncertainty for judo. As assistant to General Douglas MacArthur during the occupation of Japan, LeMay made practicing judo a routine part of Air Force tours of duty in Japan. Many Americans brought home stories of a &quot;tiny old man&quot; (Mifune) throwing down healthy, young men without any apparent effort. LeMay became a promoter of judo training and provided political support for judo in the early years after the war. For this, he was awarded the license of &quot;Shihan&quot;. In addition, LeMay promoted judo within the armed forces of the United States.

==Rank history==
;Training and cadet ranks
LeMay held the following ranks over the course of his Air Force career. LeMay&#x27;s first contact with military service occurred in September 1924 when he enrolled as a student in the Army ROTC program at Ohio State University. By his senior year, LeMay was listed on the ROTC rolls as a &quot;cadet lieutenant colonel&quot;. On June 14, 1928, the summer before the start of his senior year, LeMay accepted a commission as a second lieutenant in the Field Artillery Reserve of the U.S. Army. In September 1928, LeMay was approached by the Ohio National Guard and asked to accept a state commission, also as a second lieutenant, which LeMay accepted.

On September 29, 1928, LeMay enlisted in the Army Air Corps as an aviation cadet. For the next 13 months, he was on the enlisted rolls of the Regular Army as a cadet and he held commissions in the National Guard and Army Reserve. His status changed on October 2, 1929, when LeMay&#x27;s Guard and Reserve commissions were terminated. These commissions were revoked after an Army personnel officer, realizing that LeMay was holding officer and enlisted status simultaneously, called him to discuss the matter and LeMay verbally resigned these commissioned ranks over the telephone.

All officer commissions were terminated on October 2, 1929, pending completion of flight training and commissioning as an officer in the Army Air Corps.

;Commissioned ranks

On October 12, 1929, LeMay finished his flight training and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Army Air Corps Reserve. This was the third time he had been appointed a second lieutenant in just under two years. He held this reserve commission until June 1930, when he was appointed as a Regular Army officer in the Army Air Corps.

LeMay experienced slow advancement throughout the 1930s, as did most officers of the seniority-driven Regular Army. At the start of 1940 he was promoted to captain after serving nearly eleven years in the lieutenant grades. Beginning in 1941, LeMay began to receive temporary advancements in grade in the expanding Army Air Forces and advanced from captain to brigadier general in less than four years; by 1944, he was a major general in the Army Air Forces. When World War II ended, he was appointed to the permanent rank of brigadier general in the Regular Army and then promoted to permanent major general rank (two star) when the Air Force became its own separate branch of service. LeMay was simultaneously appointed to temporary three star general rank in the Air Force and promoted to the full rank of general, permanent in the Air Force, in 1951. LeMay held this rank until his retirement in 1965.

Curtis LeMay retired from the United States Air Force on February 1, 1965, with the rank of full (four star) general.

Further promotions

According to letters in LeMay&#x27;s service record, while he was in command of SAC during the 1950s several petitions were made by Air Force service members to have LeMay promoted to the rank of General of the Air Force (five stars). The Air Force leadership, however, felt that such a promotion would lessen the prestige of this rank, which was seen as a wartime rank to be held only in times of extreme national emergency.

Per the Chief of the Air Force General Officers Branch, in a letter dated February 28, 1962:

It is clear that a grateful nation, recognizing the tremendous contributions of the key military and naval leaders in World War II, created these supreme grades as an attempt to accord to these leaders the prestige, the clear-cut leadership, and the emolument of office befitting their service to their country in war. It is the conviction of the Department of the Air Force that this recognition was and is appropriate. Moreover, appointments to this grade during periods other than war would carry the unavoidable connotation of downgrading of those officers so honored in World War II.

Thus, no serious effort was ever made to promote LeMay to the rank of General of the Air Force, and the matter was eventually dropped after his retirement from active service in 1965.

==Awards and decorations==
LeMay received recognition for his work from thirteen countries, receiving two badges and thirty-two different medals and decorations.


;United States
*Command pilot
*Distinguished Service Cross
*Distinguished Service Medal plus 2 oak leaf clusters
*Silver Star
*Distinguished Flying Cross plus 2 oak leaf clusters
*Air Medal plus 4 oak leaf clusters
*Presidential Unit Citation plus oak leaf cluster
*American Defense Service Medal
*American Campaign Medal
*European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal plus 3 bronze campaign stars 
*Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal plus 4 bronze campaign stars
*World War II Victory Medal
*Army of Occupation Medal with Berlin Airlift Device
*Medal for Humane Action
*National Defense Service Medal with one service star
*Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal
*Vietnam Service Medal
*Air Force Longevity Service Award, 8 oak leaf clusters

;Other countries
*United Kingdom Distinguished Flying Cross
*Order of the Patriotic War First Class (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
*Legion of Honour (Commandeur) (France)
*French Croix de Guerre with silver Palm
*Belgian Croix de Guerre, with silver Palm
*Ecuador – Order of Aeronautical Merit (Knight Commander)
*Brazilian Order of Aeronautical Merit, Commander
*Moroccan Order of Ouissam Alaouite, Commander
*Argentina – Order of May of Aeronautical Merit – Grades of Grand Cross and Grand Commander
*Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross, Grand Cross
*Japanese Order of the Rising Sun, Grand Cordon
*Swedish Commander Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the Sword
*Chile – Order of Merit &quot;(degree unknown)&quot;
*Chile – Medalla Militar de Primera Clase
*Uruguay – Aviador Militar Honoris Causa (Piloto Comandante)
In 1972, LeMay was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio.

===Distinguished Service Cross citation===

:LeMay, Curtis E.
:Brigadier General (then Colonel), U.S. Army Air Forces
:4th Bomb Wing, Eighth Air Force
:Date of Action: August 17, 1943

:Citation:

The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress July 9, 1918, takes pleasure in presenting the Distinguished Service Cross to Brigadier General [then Colonel (Air Corps)] Curtis Emerson LeMay, United States Army Air Forces, for extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against an armed enemy while serving as Pilot of a B-17 Heavy Bomber and Commander of the 4th Bomb Wing, Eighth Air Force, while participating in a bombing mission on 17 August 1943, against enemy ground targets in the European Theater of Operations. General LeMay, fully realizing the extent of the hazards involved, although not required to participate through obligation or reason of duty, undertook the responsibility of directing this mission. In spite of heavy enemy fighter attack and antiaircraft fire, General LeMay led the formation to target, accomplished his mission, and led the return to a friendly base. His courage, coolness, and skill on this occasion were an inspiration to his men and reflect great credit upon himself, the 8th Air Force, and the United States Army Air Forces.

==Works==

===Books===
* .

===Film and television appearances===
*&quot;The Last Bomb&quot; (documentary, 1945)
*&quot;In the Year of the Pig&quot; (documentary, 1968)
*&quot;The World at War&quot; (documentary TV series, 1974)
*&quot;Reaching for the Skies&quot; (documentary TV series, 1988)
*&quot;Race for the Superbomb&quot; (documentary, 1999)
*&quot;JFK&quot; (film, 1991; featured in archival footage)
*&quot;Roots of the Cuban Missile Crisis&quot; (documentary, 2001)
*&quot;The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara&quot; (documentary, 2003)
*&quot;DC3:ans Sista Resa&quot; (Swedish documentary, 2004)

==Cultural legacy==
According to Michael S. Sherry, &quot;Few American military officers of this century have been more feared, reviled, and ridiculed than Curtis E. LeMay.&quot; According to Fred Kaplan:&quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s 1964 film about nuclear-war plans run amok, is widely heralded as one of the greatest satires in American political or movie history. ... It was no secret—it would have been obvious to many viewers in 1964—that General Ripper looked a lot like Curtis LeMay, the cigar-chomping, gruff-talking general.&quot; 

University of Notre Dame Professor Dan Lindley points out parallels between LeMay and the characters of Buck Turgidson and Jack Ripper in Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, including close paraphrasing of statements by LeMay.

==Public buildings==
* The headquarters building of U.S. Strategic Command at Offutt AFB in Nebraska is named for the general. It was erected in the late 1950s and was the headquarters of the Strategic Air Command until its disbandment in 1992.
* LeMay Elementary School opened in 1968 in the Capehart housing area of Offutt AFB and is operated by the Bellevue Public Schools.

==See also==
*List of commanders of USAFE
*Commanders-in-Chief of The Strategic Air Command

==References==
===Notes===
==Further reading==
* Albertson, Trevor, &quot;A Strategy for Victory: Curtis LeMay and His Public Relations Machine&quot;, &quot;New England Journal of History&quot; 72 (Spring 2016), 33–61.
* Atkins, Albert &quot;Air Marshall Sir Arthur Harris and General Curtis E. Lemay: A Comparative Analytical Biography&quot;. AuthorHouse, 2001. .
* Craig, William &quot;The Fall of Japan&quot;. The Dial Press, 1967.
* Coffey, Thomas M. &quot;Iron Eagle: The Turbulent Life of General Curtis LeMay&quot;. Random House, 1986. .
* Kozak, Warren &quot;LeMay: The Life and Wars of Curtis LeMay&quot;. Regnery, 2009. plus Author Interview at the Pritzker Military Library on June 4, 2009
* Moscow, Warren &quot;City&#x27;s Heart Gone&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;. March 11, 1945: 1, 13.
* Narvez, Alfonso A. &quot;Gen. Curtis LeMay, an Architect of Strategic Air Power, Dies at 83&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;. October 2, 1990.
* Allison, Graham. &quot;Essence of Decision&quot;: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis (1971 – updated 2nd edition, 1999). Longman. .
* Rhodes, Richard &quot;Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster, 1995. 
* Tillman, Barrett. &quot;LeMay&quot;. Palgrave&#x27;s Great Generals Series, 2007. 

===LeMay in popular culture===
* Albertson, Trevor. &quot;A Strategy for Victory: Curtis LeMay and His Public Relations Machine.&quot; &quot;New England Journal of History&quot; 72.2 (2016): 33–61.
* Maloney, Sean M. &quot;Deconstructing Dr. Strangelove: The Secret History of Nuclear War Films&quot; (U of Nebraska Press, 2020) at https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv10sm8sx.9
* Kaplan, Fred. &quot;Truth Stranger Than &#x27;Strangelove&#x27; &quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; Oct. 10, 2004
* Schlosser, Eric. &quot;Almost Everything in &#x27;Dr. Strangelove&#x27; Was True,&quot; &quot;The New Yorker&quot; (January 17, 2014) online

===Primary sources===
* LeMay, Curtis E. &quot;Mission with LeMay: My Story&quot;. Doubleday, 1965
* LeMay, Curtis E., Yenne, Bill &quot;Superfortress: The Boeing B-29 and American Airpower in World War II&quot;. Westholme Publishing 2006, originally published by Berkley, 1988
* McNamara, Robert S. &quot;In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam&quot;. Vintage Press, 1995. .

===Historiography===
* Crane, Conrad C. &quot;LeMay, Curtis&quot; in Charles Messenger, ed. &quot;Reader&#x27;s Guide to Military History&quot; (Routledge, 2001), pp 324–5 online
* USAF National Museum, &quot;Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, Awards and Decorations&quot;
* USAF Service Record of Curtis LeMay, Military Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, MO.

==External links==
* .
* .
* .
* . A view of working with LeMay, by his lead navigator in Europe.
* Morely, Jefferson (editor). &quot;Where was Gen. Curtis LeMay on Nov. 22, 1963?&quot;. JFK Facts.



|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15866" start="0" end="20" title="Curtis LeMay" label="Curtis Emerson LeMay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="65" end="77" title="United States Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="78" end="85" title="General (United States)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="133" end="150" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="167" end="182" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Pacific theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="186" end="198" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072417" start="219" end="264" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force" label="Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="303" end="331" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="United States Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="402" end="419" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="423" end="444" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="474" end="479" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="508" end="530" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634420" start="619" end="642" title="305th Operations Group" label="305th Bombardment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636583" start="691" end="707" title="3rd Air Division" label="3rd Air Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="715" end="747" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="798" end="823" title="China Burma India Theater" label="China Burma India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q590545" start="927" end="956" title="Air raids on Japan" label="massive fire bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q704627" start="986" end="1006" title="Operation Starvation" label="Operation Starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q520693" start="1119" end="1130" title="United States Air Forces in Europe - Air Forces Africa" label="USAF Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="1151" end="1165" title="Berlin Airlift" label="Berlin Airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="1197" end="1218" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="1292" end="1304" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1357" end="1372" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="1490" end="1510" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="1559" end="1572" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1584" end="1595" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1670" end="1681" title="Racial segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="1699" end="1713" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q465099" start="1751" end="1777" title="American Independent Party" label="American Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="1792" end="1832" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579199" start="1931" end="1942" title="third party (United States)" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545837" start="1961" end="1977" title="George Wallace presidential campaign, 1968" label="Wallace campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="2118" end="2143" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="2210" end="2224" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="2261" end="2268" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="2281" end="2287" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2288" end="2296" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="2464" end="2467" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="2637" end="2644" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2649" end="2659" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="2814" end="2831" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="2835" end="2856" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2911" end="2933" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170176" start="2999" end="3034" title="Pershing Rifles" label="National Society of Pershing Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523945" start="3079" end="3088" title="Theta Tau" label="Theta Tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="3227" end="3255" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="United States Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016360" start="3331" end="3343" title="Norton Field" label="Norton Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="3429" end="3436" title="fighter aircraft" label="pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268242" start="3474" end="3489" title="Selfridge Field" label="Selfridge Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632606" start="3499" end="3520" title="27th Pursuit Squadron" label="27th Pursuit Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="3653" end="3659" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019320" start="3822" end="3837" title="Caleb V. Haynes" label="Caleb V. Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="3843" end="3870" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633451" start="4118" end="4139" title="2nd Operations Group" label="2nd Bombardment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279027" start="4251" end="4264" title="Mackay Trophy" label="Mackay Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045658" start="4356" end="4365" title="Interception of the Rex" label="intercept"/>
<link wikidata="Q177035" start="4517" end="4529" title="Boeing XB-15" label="Boeing XB-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636887" start="4640" end="4665" title="Westover Air Reserve Base" label="Westover Air Reserve Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635454" start="4700" end="4722" title="34th Training Wing" label="34th Bombardment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5429" end="5441" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="5478" end="5500" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="5527" end="5556" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634420" start="5679" end="5695" title="305th Operations Group" label="305th Bomb Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5718" end="5725" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="5757" end="5773" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150698" start="5843" end="5853" title="combat box" label="combat box"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636583" start="5934" end="5950" title="3rd Air Division" label="3rd Air Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q575755" start="6038" end="6068" title="Schweinfurt–Regensburg mission" label="Schweinfurt–Regensburg mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="6126" end="6136" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6138" end="6145" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961428" start="6167" end="6185" title="Escort fighter" label="escorting fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="6232" end="6244" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="6256" end="6263" title="bombers" label="bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="6497" end="6513" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="6521" end="6533" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="6727" end="6742" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="6870" end="6895" title="China Burma India Theater of World War II" label="China-Burma-India theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042652" start="6919" end="6936" title="XX Bomber Command" label="XX Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042593" start="6959" end="6977" title="XXI Bomber Command" label="XXI Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="7233" end="7258" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687462" start="7584" end="7602" title="Haywood S. Hansell" label="Haywood S. Hansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="7649" end="7657" title="Marianas" label="Marianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239540" start="7699" end="7716" title="precision bombing" label="precision bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q202325" start="7922" end="7932" title="jet stream" label="jet stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788547" start="8593" end="8605" title="area bombing" label="area bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="8754" end="8795" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q51881408" start="8815" end="8835" title="Bombing of Tokyo (10 March 1945)" label="firebombing of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713818" start="9121" end="9131" title="M47 bomb" label="Model M-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="9132" end="9142" title="incendiary bombs" label="incendiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="9143" end="9151" title="Cluster munition" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="9153" end="9162" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q457515" start="9170" end="9186" title="white phosphorus" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="9198" end="9204" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="9979" end="9997" title="Japanese surrender" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q929571" start="10127" end="10165" title="United States Strategic Bombing Survey" label="United States Strategic Bombing Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10370" end="10388" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="10886" end="10898" title="war crimes" label="war criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466846" start="10986" end="11000" title="The Fog of War" label="The Fog of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="11144" end="11153" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="11158" end="11164" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="11259" end="11282" title="Operation Downfall" label="Japan had to be invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="11308" end="11321" title="Decentralization" label="decentralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144423" start="11367" end="11380" title="subcontractor" label="subcontractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="11507" end="11522" title="high explosives" label="high explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q704627" start="11759" end="11779" title="Operation Starvation" label="Operation Starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="11791" end="11797" title="naval mine" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="11882" end="11891" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15297636" start="12013" end="12035" title="313th Air Division" label="313th Bombardment Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565546" start="12431" end="12478" title="1945 Japan–Washington flight" label="flying from Japan to the U.S. in September 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861749" start="12717" end="12732" title="Barney M. Giles" label="Barney M. Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="13159" end="13176" title="deterrence theory" label="deterrence theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="13245" end="13257" title="The Pentagon" label="The Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q520693" start="13369" end="13380" title="United States Air Forces in Europe – Air Forces Africa" label="USAF Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="13409" end="13423" title="Berlin Airlift" label="Berlin Airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252107" start="13617" end="13639" title="Douglas C-54 Skymaster" label="Douglas C-54 Skymaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="14196" end="14210" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Lucius D. Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q322891" start="14404" end="14421" title="William H. Tunner" label="William H. Tunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="14558" end="14579" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q626985" start="14589" end="14610" title="Offutt Air Force Base" label="Offutt Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267262" start="14626" end="14639" title="George Kenney" label="George Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="15091" end="15103" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q712468" start="15416" end="15431" title="Hoyt Vandenberg" label="Hoyt Vandenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="16078" end="16091" title="World War III" label="World War III"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="16451" end="16472" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="16794" end="16805" title="General (United States)" label="fourth star"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="16884" end="16900" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152976" start="17072" end="17078" title="MiG-17" label="MiG-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434089" start="17090" end="17134" title="United States aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union" label="reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="18102" end="18118" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="18145" end="18161" title="aerial refueling" label="aerial refueling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="18240" end="18257" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="18295" end="18314" title="command and control" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621763" start="18449" end="18482" title="Strategic Air Command Elite Guard" label="Strategic Air Command Elite Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="18819" end="18823" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660756" start="19223" end="19244" title="Strategic Air Command (film)" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q241128" start="19345" end="19360" title="Charles Sweeney" label="Charles Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q294555" start="19661" end="19673" title="Paul Tibbets" label="Paul Tibbets"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044227" start="19680" end="19701" title="509th Composite Group" label="509th Composite Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072417" start="20574" end="20619" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force" label="Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q524922" start="20645" end="20657" title="Thomas D. White" label="Thomas White"/>
<link wikidata="Q261746" start="20914" end="20933" title="Secretary of the Air Force" label="Air Force Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373143" start="20934" end="20948" title="Eugene Zuckert" label="Eugene Zuckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="21002" end="21009" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="21010" end="21024" title="Maxwell Taylor" label="Maxwell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="21073" end="21084" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q538616" start="21485" end="21498" title="atomic cannon" label="atomic cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="21503" end="21510" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q212468" start="21527" end="21541" title="Appropriation (law)" label="appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="21547" end="21565" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="21604" end="21618" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="21625" end="21637" title="supercarrier" label="supercarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="21834" end="21842" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q292496" start="22086" end="22098" title="Skybolt ALBM" label="Skybolt ALBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="22116" end="22142" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q729056" start="22160" end="22189" title="North American XB-70 Valkyrie" label="North American XB-70 Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="22602" end="22622" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="22672" end="22687" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="22787" end="22791" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="22814" end="22822" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="23695" end="23699" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="23705" end="23709" title="SLBM" label="SLBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="24238" end="24245" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422289" start="24361" end="24377" title="tactical bombing" label="tactical bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="24411" end="24424" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="24993" end="25018" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="Operation Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="25305" end="25319" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226282" start="25543" end="25559" title="MacKinlay Kantor" label="MacKinlay Kantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="25762" end="25771" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="26172" end="26181" title="Etymology" label="Etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="26577" end="26590" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q486866" start="26599" end="26622" title="Operation Linebacker II" label="Operation Linebacker II"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="26931" end="26952" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="27210" end="27227" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="27341" end="27350" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="27899" end="27909" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q344538" start="27910" end="27923" title="Thomas Kuchel" label="Thomas Kuchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="27944" end="27964" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="28040" end="28066" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="28198" end="28212" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q465099" start="28238" end="28264" title="American Independent Party" label="American Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="28408" end="28416" title="Sergeant (United States)" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="28710" end="28728" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="29563" end="29578" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="29702" end="29729" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="29735" end="29762" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="29795" end="29806" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="29812" end="29838" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q980090" start="29875" end="29884" title="Air Medal" label="Air Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="29953" end="29974" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="30074" end="30117" title="Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun" label="Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721865" start="30141" end="30153" title="Alfalfa Club" label="Alfalfa Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614528" start="30246" end="30288" title="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame" label="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308955" start="30296" end="30328" title="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="30679" end="30688" title="York Rite" label="York Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q570990" start="30732" end="30746" title="Lakewood, Ohio" label="Lakewood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="30776" end="30801" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031829" start="30924" end="30944" title="March Air Force Base" label="March Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q49243" start="30948" end="30957" title="Riverside, California" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="31011" end="31023" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8509264" start="31105" end="31145" title="United States Air Force Academy Cemetery" label="United States Air Force Academy Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="31149" end="31175" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q453115" start="31237" end="31245" title="Heathkit" label="Heathkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="31266" end="31279" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="31415" end="31431" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q560348" start="31690" end="31695" title="single-sideband modulation" label="(SSB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="31757" end="31761" title="Amplitude Modulation" label="(AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211869" start="31862" end="31873" title="Arthur A. Collins" label="Art Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q461210" start="31885" end="31898" title="Collins Radio" label="Collins Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q746273" start="32053" end="32062" title="Allard Motor Company" label="Allard J2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="32167" end="32193" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q926439" start="32215" end="32227" title="street circuit" label="street races"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855880" start="32246" end="32267" title="Turner Air Force Base" label="Turner Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389089" start="32386" end="32423" title="SCCA National Sports Car Championship" label="SCCA National Sports Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871748" start="32700" end="32721" title="Air Force Aid Society" label="Air Force Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q723703" start="32891" end="32904" title="Woolf Barnato" label="Woolf Barnato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889203" start="33157" end="33171" title="USAFA Class exemplar" label="class exemplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="33180" end="33211" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504132" start="33324" end="33346" title="Executive Jet Aviation" label="Executive Jet Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q889320" start="33485" end="33498" title="Bruce Sundlun" label="Bruce Sundlun"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="33517" end="33530" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q709509" start="33587" end="33601" title="Arthur Godfrey" label="Arthur Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="33708" end="33712" title="Judo" label="Judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453372" start="33783" end="33795" title="Kyuzo Mifune" label="Kyuzo Mifune"/>
<link wikidata="Q190141" start="33828" end="33839" title="Kanō Jigorō" label="Jigorō Kanō"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="34044" end="34061" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="34073" end="34092" title="occupation of Japan" label="occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504372" start="34471" end="34477" title="Shihan" label="Shihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080856" start="35148" end="35167" title="Ohio National Guard" label="Ohio National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992216" start="35402" end="35414" title="Regular Army (United States)" label="Regular Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426568" start="37599" end="37623" title="General of the Air Force (United States)" label="General of the Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q131647" start="38837" end="38842" title="medal" label="medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q743201" start="38848" end="38859" title="List of military decorations" label="decorations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38879" end="38892" title="USAF aeronautical rating#Pilot ratings" label="Command pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="38894" end="38921" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="38923" end="38950" title="Army Distinguished Service Medal" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q571544" start="38958" end="38974" title="oak leaf cluster" label="oak leaf cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="38977" end="38988" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="38990" end="39016" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q980090" start="39043" end="39052" title="Air Medal" label="Air Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="39079" end="39105" title="Presidential Unit Citation (United States)" label="Presidential Unit Citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842905" start="39129" end="39159" title="American Defense Service Medal" label="American Defense Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338107" start="39161" end="39184" title="American Campaign Medal" label="American Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376304" start="39186" end="39232" title="European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal" label="European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338071" start="39264" end="39294" title="Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal" label="Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079534" start="39325" end="39351" title="World War II Victory Medal" label="World War II Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794320" start="39353" end="39377" title="Army of Occupation Medal" label="Army of Occupation Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892389" start="39383" end="39404" title="Berlin Airlift Device" label="Berlin Airlift Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805028" start="39406" end="39429" title="Medal for Humane Action" label="Medal for Humane Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611552" start="39431" end="39461" title="National Defense Service Medal" label="National Defense Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792992" start="39485" end="39517" title="Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal" label="Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445351" start="39519" end="39540" title="Vietnam Service Medal" label="Vietnam Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697919" start="39542" end="39575" title="Air Force Longevity Service Award" label="Air Force Longevity Service Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229534" start="39616" end="39657" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)" label="United Kingdom Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q312496" start="39659" end="39697" title="Order of the Patriotic War" label="Order of the Patriotic War First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="39737" end="39766" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour (Commandeur)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547676" start="39777" end="39799" title="Croix de guerre 1939-1945 (France)" label="French Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="39818" end="39825" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48915" start="39826" end="39841" title="War Cross (Belgium)" label="Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="39861" end="39868" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39871" end="39898" title="Order of Aeronautical Merit" label="Order of Aeronautical Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="39919" end="39925" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448945" start="39929" end="39956" title="Order of Aeronautical Merit (Brazil)" label="Order of Aeronautical Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="39969" end="39977" title="Morocco" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q369412" start="39978" end="40003" title="Order of Ouissam Alaouite" label="Order of Ouissam Alaouite"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="40016" end="40025" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q430479" start="40028" end="40062" title="Order of May" label="Order of May of Aeronautical Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="40108" end="40114" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q93713" start="40118" end="40145" title="Order of the Southern Cross" label="Order of the Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="40160" end="40165" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="40169" end="40192" title="Order of the Rising Sun" label="Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="40208" end="40215" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476049" start="40245" end="40269" title="Order of the Sword" label="Royal Order of the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="40271" end="40276" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q93988" start="40279" end="40293" title="Order of the Merit of Chile" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="40324" end="40329" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40332" end="40364" title="Medalla Militar de Primera Clase" label="Medalla Militar de Primera Clase"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="40366" end="40373" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40376" end="40405" title="Aviador Militar Honoris Causa" label="Aviador Militar Honoris Causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="40463" end="40493" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745598" start="41898" end="41911" title="The Last Bomb" label="The Last Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q639864" start="41945" end="41967" title="In the Year of the Pig" label="In the Year of the Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q12766" start="42001" end="42017" title="The World at War" label="The World at War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443857" start="42061" end="42083" title="Reaching for the Skies" label="Reaching for the Skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="42183" end="42186" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366662" start="42243" end="42276" title="Roots of the Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Roots of the Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466846" start="42310" end="42376" title="The Fog of War" label="The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834084" start="42497" end="42514" title="Michael S. Sherry" label="Michael S. Sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495632" start="42656" end="42667" title="Fred Kaplan (journalist)" label="Fred Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="42674" end="42689" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="43029" end="43053" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753390" start="43325" end="43347" title="United States Strategic Command" label="U.S. Strategic Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q626985" start="43351" end="43361" title="Offutt Air Force Base" label="Offutt AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="43365" end="43373" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="43465" end="43486" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883958" start="43625" end="43648" title="Bellevue Public Schools" label="Bellevue Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279462" start="43665" end="43692" title="List of commanders of USAFE" label="List of commanders of USAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611956" start="43694" end="43742" title="List of commanders-in-chief of the Strategic Air Command" label="Commanders-in-Chief of The Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825911" start="44088" end="44099" title="AuthorHouse" label="AuthorHouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q588030" start="44403" end="44428" title="Pritzker Military Library" label="Pritzker Military Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663882" start="44705" end="44720" title="Graham Allison" label="Allison, Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q604873" start="44728" end="44747" title="Essence of Decision" label="Essence of Decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863445" start="44942" end="44958" title="Barrett Tillman" label="Tillman, Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495632" start="45399" end="45412" title="Fred Kaplan (journalist)" label="Kaplan, Fred."/>
<link wikidata="Q6852118" start="46345" end="46378" title="Military Personnel Records Center" label="Military Personnel Records Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66228" wikidata="Q107135" url="?curid=66228" title="Fredrikstad">
<text>Fredrikstad (; previously &quot;Frederiksstad&quot;; literally &quot;Fredrik&#x27;s Town&quot;) is a city and municipality in Østfold county, Norway. The administrative centre of the municipality is the city of Fredrikstad.

The city of Fredrikstad was founded in 1567 by King Frederick II, and established as a municipality on 1 January 1838 (see &quot;formannskapsdistrikt&quot;). The rural municipality of Glemmen was merged with Fredrikstad on 1 January 1964. The rural municipalities of Borge, Onsøy, Kråkerøy, and Rolvsøy were merged with Fredrikstad on 1 January 1994.

The city straddles the river Glomma where it meets the Skagerrak, about from the Sweden border. Along with neighboring Sarpsborg, Fredrikstad forms the fifth largest city in Norway: Fredrikstad/Sarpsborg. As of 30 September 2021, according to Statistics Norway, these two municipalities have a total population of 141,708 with 83,761 in Fredrikstad and 57,947 in Sarpsborg.

Fredrikstad was built at the mouth of Glomma as a replacement after Sarpsborg ( upstream) was burnt down by the Swedish Army in the 1500s. Some of the citizens stayed behind and rebuilt their old town at its original site and got their city status back in 1839.

The city centre is on the west bank of the Glomma, while the old town on the east bank is Northern Europe&#x27;s best preserved fortified town.

Fredrikstad used to have a large sawmill industry and was an important harbour for timber export, then later on shipbuilding, until the main yard was closed in 1988. The main industries are currently various chemical plants and other light industry.

In 2005, Fredrikstad was the final host port for the Tall Ships&#x27; Race, attracting thousands to the city. In 2019, it was the first host port.

In 2017, Fredrikstad won the national award for most attractive city. The award is given yearly by the Norwegian government on the basis of social, economic and environmental factors.

==General information==

===Name===
The city was named after the Danish king Frederick II in 1569. The last element &quot;stad&quot; means &quot;city&quot;.

Prior to 1877, the name was spelled &quot;Frederiksstad&quot;, then from 1877 to 1888 it was written as &quot;Fredriksstad&quot;, and finally since 1889 it has been spelled in its current form: &quot;Fredrikstad&quot;.

===Coat-of-arms===
The coat-of-arms is from modern times. They were granted on 21 April 1967. The old arms are based on the oldest known seal of the city, which dates from 1610. They showed a fortress being guarded by a bear. Strangely, Fredrikstad had no fortifications in 1610 (it received some at the end of the 17th century). Fredrikstad was founded by citizens of Sarpsborg and both the fortress and the bear are taken from the old arms of Sarpsborg. The composition of the seal was also used as arms since the beginning of the 19th century. The new arms were granted at the 400th anniversary of the city in 1967 and show a more modern variation on the fortress and bear.

==History==
After Sarpsborg was burned to the ground during the Northern Seven Years&#x27; War, the ruling king, Frederik II, decided by royal decree to rebuild the city south of the original location. This new site&#x27;s proximity to the sea and the accessible open land surrounding it made it a better location than the old one. The name Fredrikstad was first used in a letter from the King dated 6 February 1569. The temporary fortification built during the Hannibal War (1644–1645) between Sweden and Denmark-Norway, became permanent in the 1660s.

The work on the fortifications was first led by Willem Coucheron and later Johan Caspar von Cicignon. During the next 60 years, several fortifications at the Fredrikstad Fortress were built, including Isegran, Kongsten, and Cicignon. In 1735, a suburb on the western side of Glomma, &quot;Vestsiden&quot;, was founded. This part later grew faster than
the old city, and became the dominant city centre. Most of the buildings in the old city burned down during a fire in 1764.

In the 1840s, timber exporting from Fredrikstad started to gain momentum. In the 1860s, several steam powered saws were built along the river, and in 1879 the railway reached Fredrikstad, leading to further growth. With the decline of the timber exports as a result of the modernization of wood-processing industries in the early 1900s, Fredrikstad&#x27;s production changed to other types of products. It later became one of Norway&#x27;s most important industrial centres, famous for its large shipyard, Fredrikstad Mekaniske Verksted.

== Education ==
Fredrikstad has three high schools. Frederik II Upper Secondary School offers general studies and financial / administrative studies. It is a merger of the former and Christianslund Handelsgymnasium. offers professional training and study. offers sports, science, languages, social sciences and economics. In addition, there is a Steiner school, a private educational alternative.

Østfold University College offers higher education (master&#x27;s and bachelor&#x27;s studies) at the Academy of Performing Arts, Faculty of Health and Social Care and the Faculty of Engineering at Kråkerøy. offers short professional craft or technical courses. The Department of Journalism offers primarily continuing education for journalists and editors.

==Fredrikstad Museum==
Fredrikstad Museum is located in Old Fredrikstad. The museum shows the history of the city and the surrounding region. The museum also manages Elingaard Manor in Onsøy and Torgauten Fort. Fredrikstad Museum was founded in 1903. Since 2003, the museum&#x27;s management has been located in Tøihuset in Old Town.

==Sport==
Fredrikstad is home to nine-time Norway football winners Fredrikstad FK who play at the Fredrikstad Stadion. Egil Olsen, manager for the Norwegian national football team, is from Fredrikstad. There is also an American football team, the Fredrikstad Eagles.

Fredrikstad has a top-division handball team, Fredrikstad BK, and a top-division ice hockey team, Stjernen Hockey.

The city also has a number of floorball teams, including Slevik IBK, Fredrikstad IBK and St. Croix Pirates.

==Notable residents==
=== Public service ===
* Albert Andriessen Bradt (ca.1607 in Fredrikstad – 1686) a Norwegian settler in New Netherland
* Henrik Bjelke (1615 on Onsøy – 1683) a Norwegian-Danish Admiral of the Realm 1662 to 1679
* Jørgen Bjelke (1621 on Onsøy – 1696) an officer and nobleman from Elingaard Manor 
* Johan Caspar von Cicignon (ca.1625-1696) general and engineer, lived in Fredrikstad
* Hans Jacob Stabel (1769 in Onsøy – 1836) priest and rep. at Norwegian Constituent Assembly
* Hans Nielsen Hauge (1771 in Rolvsøy – 1824) revivalist preacher for the Hauge Synod
* Johannes Wilhelm Christian Dietrichson (1815 in Fredrikstad – 1883) a Lutheran Minister
* Ole Jacob Broch (1818 in Fredrikstad – 1889) physicist, economist and Govt. minister
* Ole Peter Petersen (1822 in Fredrikstad – 1901) founder of Methodism in Norway and co-founder of Norwegian and Danish Methodism in the United States
* Katti Anker Møller (1868–1945) feminist and advocate for reproductive rights
* Hieronymus Heyerdahl (1867 in Fredrikstad – 1959) lawyer and Mayor of Oslo, 1911 to 1914
* Waldemar Ager (1869 in Fredrikstad – 1941) newspaperman in Eau Claire, Wisconsin
* Johan Oscar Smith (1871 in Fredrikstad – 1943) founder of the Brunstad Christian Church
* Roald Amundsen (1872 in Borge – 1928) a Norwegian explorer of polar regions
* Charles Anderson (1875 in Fredrikstad – 1949) Mayor of Murray, Utah 1920–1923
* Nils F. Ambursen (1876 in Fredrikstad – 1953) civil engineer and inventor, designed dams
* Peder Kolstad (1878 in Borge – 1932) Prime Minister of Norway, 1931 to 1932
* Johannes Brun (1891 in Fredrikstad – 1977) military officer and bridge champion
* Tove Mohr (1891 in Thorsø – 1981) a physician, socialist and proponent for women&#x27;s rights
* Jens Gram Jr. (1897 in Fredrikstad – 1982) barrister and politician
* Ragnvald Marensius Gundersen (1907 in Glemmen – 1985) Mayor of Fredrikstad 1945–1965
* Rolf Jørgen Fuglesang (1909 in Fredrikstad – 1988) Govt. minister in WWII for Vidkun Quisling
* Bernt Karsten Øksendal (born 1945 in Fredrikstad) a Norwegian mathematician
* Svein Aaser (born 1946 in Fredrikstad) former CEO of &quot;DnB NOR&quot;, the large financial group
* Tore Eriksen (born 1947 in Fredrikstad) economist, diplomat and civil servant; &quot;Norway&#x27;s most powerful bureaucrat&quot;
* Louise Kathrine Dedichen (born 1964 in Fredrikstad) Vice-admiral, rep. on the NATO Military Committee

=== Arts ===

* Eyvind Alnæs (1872 in Fredrikstad – 1932) composer, pianist, organist and choir director
* Harald Heide (1876 in Fredrikstad – 1956) violinist, conductor and composer
* Hans Jacob Nilsen (1897 in Fredrikstad – 1957) actor, theatre director and film director
* Tore Segelcke (1901 in Fredrikstad – 1979) actress
* Herbert Herding, stage name Herberth (1904 in Fredrikstad – 1958) revue writer, revue artist, and theater director
* Georg Løkkeberg (1909 in Fredrikstad – 1986) actor and theatre director
* Herman Hebler (1911-2007) a printmaker and graphic artist, lived in Fredrikstad
* Karsten Andersen (1920 in Fredrikstad – 1997) conductor
* Arne Dørumsgaard (1921 in Fredrikstad – 2006) composer, poet and music collector
* Bjørn Johansen (1940 in Fredrikstad – 2002) an influential Norwegian jazz musician
* Gerd Brantenberg (born 1941) author, teacher and feminist writer, grew up in Fredrikstad
* Jon Mostad (born 1942 in Fredrikstad) composer

* Terje Formoe (born 1949 in Fredrikstad) singer/songwriter, actor, playwright and author
* Jørn Christensen (born 1959) artist, actor and record producer
* Dennis Storhøi (born 1960 in Fredrikstad) actor
* Petronella Barker (born 1965) British-born Norwegian actress, grew up in Fredrikstad
* Harald Zwart (born 1965) Dutch-Norwegian film director, grew up in Fredrikstad
* Andy LaPlegua (born 1975 in Fredrikstad) singer / songwriter, founded Combichrist, Icon of Coil and Panzer AG

=== Sport ===

* Charles Hoff (1902 in Fredrikstad – 1985) athlete, coach, and sports journalist
* Arne Pedersen (1931 in Fredrikstad – 2013) footballer with Fredrikstad FK, with 231 club caps and 40 for Norway
* Roar Johansen (1935 in Fredrikstad – 2015) footballer and manager with Fredrikstad FK, with 190 club caps and 61 for Norway
* Egil &quot;Drillo&quot; Olsen (born 1942 in Fredrikstad) manager of Norway national football team
* Per Egil Ahlsen (born 1958 in Fredrikstad) footballer with 350 club caps and 54 for Norway
* Harald Huysman (born 1959 in Frederikstad), racing driver
* Jørn Andersen (born 1963 in Fredrikstad) football manager with 454 club caps, 27 for Norway
* Erik Lund (born 1979 in Fredrikstad) former rugby union footballer
* Kari Mette Johansen (born 1979 in Fredrikstad) team handballer, twice Olympic team champion
* Stian Paulsen (born 1987 in Frederikstad), racing driver
* Isabell Herlovsen (born 1988) footballer with 133 caps with Norway women; lives in Fredrikstad
* Tarik Elyounoussi (born 1988) footballer, played for Fredrikstad FK, 60 caps with Norway
* Vegard Stake Laengen (born 1989) professional cyclist for UAE Team Emirates, lives in Fredrikstad
* Oliver Solberg (born 2001 in Frederikstad) Swedish-Norwegian rally driver

==International relations==
===Twin towns – sister cities===
The following cities are twinned with Fredrikstad:

==See also==
*Norsk Teknisk Porselen

==References==

===Footnotes===
===Sources===

* &quot;Aschehougs Konversasjonsleksikon&quot;, Volume 7. Oslo: H. Aschehoug &amp; Co, 1969. .
==External links==
* Bratt Family from Fredrikstad</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q107135" start="0" end="11" title="Fredrikstad" label="Fredrikstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188640" start="101" end="105" title="List of cities in Norway" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="110" end="122" title="Municipalities of Norway" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q50614" start="126" end="133" title="Østfold" label="Østfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q192299" start="134" end="140" title="Counties of Norway" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q154041" start="272" end="289" title="Frederick II of Denmark" label="King Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q899491" start="354" end="374" title="formannskapsdistrikt" label="formannskapsdistrikt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567538" start="409" end="416" title="Glemmen" label="Glemmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q966777" start="492" end="497" title="Borge, Østfold" label="Borge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516428" start="499" end="504" title="Onsøy" label="Onsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440457" start="506" end="514" title="Kråkerøy" label="Kråkerøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516671" start="520" end="527" title="Rolvsøy" label="Rolvsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214535" start="606" end="612" title="Glomma" label="Glomma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695" start="632" end="641" title="Skagerrak" label="Skagerrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="658" end="664" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q108025" start="696" end="705" title="Sarpsborg" label="Sarpsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355000" start="759" end="780" title="Fredrikstad/Sarpsborg" label="Fredrikstad/Sarpsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367019" start="820" end="837" title="Statistics Norway" label="Statistics Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="1064" end="1076" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499573" start="1343" end="1357" title="Fredrikstad Fortress" label="fortified town"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="1431" end="1438" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="1472" end="1484" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="1535" end="1545" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="1568" end="1576" title="chemistry" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469607" start="1664" end="1685" title="Cutty Sark Tall Ships&amp;#x27; Race" label="Tall Ships&amp;#x27; Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2009" end="2015" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2345" end="2357" title="Coat of arms" label="coat-of-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="2514" end="2522" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q108025" start="3018" end="3027" title="Sarpsborg" label="Sarpsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q158677" start="3064" end="3094" title="Northern Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Northern Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154041" start="3113" end="3124" title="Frederik II of Denmark" label="Frederik II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="3137" end="3149" title="royal decree" label="royal decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419229" start="3462" end="3474" title="Hannibal War" label="Hannibal War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3495" end="3501" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="3506" end="3520" title="Denmark-Norway" label="Denmark-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572689" start="3602" end="3618" title="Willem Coucheron" label="Willem Coucheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585876" start="3629" end="3654" title="Johan Caspar von Cicignon" label="Johan Caspar von Cicignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499573" start="3712" end="3732" title="Fredrikstad Fortress" label="Fredrikstad Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="4527" end="4535" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4537" end="4567" title="Fredrikstad Mekaniske Verksted" label="Fredrikstad Mekaniske Verksted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11970027" start="4622" end="4656" title="Frederik II Upper Secondary School" label="Frederik II Upper Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q216690" start="4916" end="4923" title="Waldorf education" label="Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="4934" end="4941" title="Private school" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q616752" start="4968" end="4994" title="Østfold University College" label="Østfold University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q216131" start="5729" end="5743" title="Fredrikstad FK" label="Fredrikstad FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116314" start="5760" end="5779" title="Fredrikstad Stadion" label="Fredrikstad Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q524229" start="5781" end="5791" title="Egil Olsen" label="Egil Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q849046" start="5948" end="5960" title="REMA 1000-ligaen (women&amp;#x27;s handball)" label="top-division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11970120" start="5976" end="5990" title="Fredrikstad BK" label="Fredrikstad BK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421206" start="5998" end="6010" title="Eliteserien (ice hockey)" label="top-division"/>
<link wikidata="Q541970" start="6028" end="6043" title="Stjernen Hockey" label="Stjernen Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q206763" start="6076" end="6085" title="floorball" label="floorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q19389292" start="6103" end="6113" title="Slevik IBK" label="Slevik IBK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709638" start="6202" end="6225" title="Albert Andriessen Bradt" label="Albert Andriessen Bradt"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="6281" end="6295" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856397" start="6298" end="6311" title="Henrik Bjelke" label="Henrik Bjelke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570246" start="6390" end="6403" title="Jørgen Bjelke" label="Jørgen Bjelke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361129" start="6456" end="6471" title="Elingaard" label="Elingaard Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585876" start="6475" end="6500" title="Johan Caspar von Cicignon" label="Johan Caspar von Cicignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774757" start="6561" end="6578" title="Hans Jacob Stabel" label="Hans Jacob Stabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305249" start="6621" end="6651" title="Norwegian Constituent Assembly" label="Norwegian Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q525984" start="6654" end="6672" title="Hans Nielsen Hauge" label="Hans Nielsen Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682394" start="6726" end="6737" title="Hauge Synod" label="Hauge Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217069" start="6740" end="6778" title="Johannes Wilhelm Christian Dietrichson" label="Johannes Wilhelm Christian Dietrichson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367532" start="6830" end="6845" title="Ole Jacob Broch" label="Ole Jacob Broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085923" start="6917" end="6935" title="Ole Peter Petersen" label="Ole Peter Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="6976" end="6985" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q522292" start="7068" end="7086" title="Katti Anker Møller" label="Katti Anker Møller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975314" start="7147" end="7167" title="Hieronymus Heyerdahl (1867–1959)" label="Hieronymus Heyerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15520887" start="7238" end="7251" title="Waldemar Ager" label="Waldemar Ager"/>
<link wikidata="Q122563" start="7297" end="7318" title="Eau Claire, Wisconsin" label="Eau Claire, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357636" start="7321" end="7338" title="Johan Oscar Smith" label="Johan Oscar Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q820257" start="7383" end="7408" title="Brunstad Christian Church" label="Brunstad Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="7411" end="7425" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075121" start="7489" end="7505" title="Charles Anderson (mayor)" label="Charles Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q482822" start="7544" end="7556" title="Murray, Utah" label="Murray, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037264" start="7569" end="7585" title="Nils F. Ambursen" label="Nils F. Ambursen"/>
<link wikidata="Q457244" start="7660" end="7673" title="Peder Kolstad" label="Peder Kolstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="7697" end="7721" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008154" start="7738" end="7751" title="Johannes Brun (officer)" label="Johannes Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973346" start="7820" end="7829" title="Tove Mohr" label="Tove Mohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179673" start="7917" end="7930" title="Jens Gram Jr." label="Jens Gram Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7283206" start="7987" end="8015" title="Ragnvald Marensius Gundersen" label="Ragnvald Marensius Gundersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360747" start="8074" end="8095" title="Rolf Jørgen Fuglesang" label="Rolf Jørgen Fuglesang"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="8152" end="8167" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375780" start="8170" end="8192" title="Bernt Karsten Øksendal" label="Bernt Karsten Øksendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575120" start="8248" end="8259" title="Svein Aaser" label="Svein Aaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q80788" start="8307" end="8314" title="DnB NOR" label="DnB NOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825625" start="8350" end="8362" title="Tore Eriksen" label="Tore Eriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738547" start="8482" end="8506" title="Louise Kathrine Dedichen" label="Louise Kathrine Dedichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959817" start="8560" end="8583" title="NATO Military Committee" label="NATO Military Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q786954" start="8601" end="8613" title="Eyvind Alnæs" label="Eyvind Alnæs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436525" start="8692" end="8704" title="Harald Heide" label="Harald Heide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588033" start="8770" end="8787" title="Hans Jacob Nilsen" label="Hans Jacob Nilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583370" start="8861" end="8874" title="Tore Segelcke" label="Tore Segelcke"/>
<link wikidata="Q63302076" start="8914" end="8929" title="Herbert Herding" label="Herbert Herding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585965" start="9031" end="9046" title="Georg Løkkeberg" label="Georg Løkkeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610274" start="9105" end="9118" title="Herman Hebler" label="Herman Hebler"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="9133" end="9143" title="Printmaking" label="printmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356983" start="9187" end="9203" title="Karsten Andersen" label="Karsten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623562" start="9245" end="9261" title="Arne Dørumsgaard" label="Arne Dørumsgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q879818" start="9328" end="9342" title="Bjørn Johansen (musician)" label="Bjørn Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q448150" start="9413" end="9429" title="Gerd Brantenberg" label="Gerd Brantenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271272" start="9504" end="9514" title="Jon Mostad" label="Jon Mostad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702464" start="9554" end="9566" title="Terje Formoe" label="Terje Formoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023092" start="9644" end="9660" title="Jørn Christensen" label="Jørn Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189544" start="9709" end="9723" title="Dennis Storhøi" label="Dennis Storhøi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510373" start="9759" end="9776" title="Petronella Barker (actress, born 1965)" label="Petronella Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q962552" start="9846" end="9858" title="Harald Zwart" label="Harald Zwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q526484" start="9927" end="9940" title="Andy LaPlegua" label="Andy LaPlegua"/>
<link wikidata="Q266782" start="9997" end="10008" title="Combichrist" label="Combichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656463" start="10010" end="10022" title="Icon of Coil" label="Icon of Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q375123" start="10027" end="10036" title="Panzer AG" label="Panzer AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q513641" start="10055" end="10067" title="Charles Hoff" label="Charles Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623573" start="10137" end="10150" title="Arne Pedersen" label="Arne Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216131" start="10196" end="10210" title="Fredrikstad FK" label="Fredrikstad FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="10242" end="10248" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481506" start="10251" end="10264" title="Roar Johansen (footballer)" label="Roar Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216131" start="10322" end="10336" title="Fredrikstad FK" label="Fredrikstad FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="10368" end="10374" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q524229" start="10377" end="10406" title="Egil Olsen" label="Egil &amp;quot;Drillo&amp;quot; Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="10445" end="10474" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q959333" start="10477" end="10492" title="Per Egil Ahlsen" label="Per Egil Ahlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="10561" end="10567" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432074" start="10570" end="10584" title="Harald Huysman" label="Harald Huysman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572946" start="10630" end="10643" title="Jørn Andersen" label="Jørn Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="10715" end="10721" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619055" start="10724" end="10733" title="Erik Lund (rugby union)" label="Erik Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q270473" start="10793" end="10812" title="Kari Mette Johansen" label="Kari Mette Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003153" start="10887" end="10900" title="Stian Paulsen" label="Stian Paulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26054" start="10946" end="10963" title="Isabell Herlovsen" label="Isabell Herlovsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q751994" start="11006" end="11018" title="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Norway women"/>
<link wikidata="Q609141" start="11043" end="11060" title="Tarik Elyounoussi" label="Tarik Elyounoussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q216131" start="11096" end="11110" title="Fredrikstad FK" label="Fredrikstad FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="11125" end="11131" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q174528" start="11134" end="11154" title="Vegard Stake Laengen" label="Vegard Stake Laengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q135837" start="11192" end="11209" title="UAE Team Emirates" label="UAE Team Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325770" start="11234" end="11248" title="Oliver Solberg" label="Oliver Solberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="11395" end="11402" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q11992402" start="11436" end="11458" title="Norsk Teknisk Porselen" label="Norsk Teknisk Porselen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66230" wikidata="Q1113311" url="?curid=66230" title="Peshawar">
<text>Peshawar (; ; ; ; ) is the capital and largest city of the Pakistani province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. It is the sixth most populous city of Pakistan, with a district population of over 4.7 million in the 2023 census. It is situated in the north-west of the country, lying in the Valley of Peshawar. Peshawar is primarily populated by Pashtuns, who comprise the second-largest ethnic group in the country.

Situated in the Valley of Peshawar, a broad area situated east of the historic Khyber Pass, Peshawar&#x27;s recorded history dates back to at least 539 BCE, making it one of the oldest cities in South Asia. The area encompassing modern-day Peshawar is mentioned in the Vedic scriptures; it was one of the principal cities of the ancient Gāndhāra. Peshawar served as the capital of the Kushan Empire during the rule of Kanishka and was home to the Kanishka Stupa, which was among the tallest buildings in the ancient world.

Peshawar was then ruled by the Hephthalites, followed by the Hindu Shahis, before the arrival of a variety of Muslim empires. The city was an important trading Centre of the Mughal Empire before becoming part of the Durrani Empire in 1747, after which it served as the Durrani winter capital from 1776 until the capture of the city by the Sikh Empire in 1823. In 1849, the city was captured by the East India Company and subsequently became part of British Raj, under whose rule it remained until the Partition of British India and subsequent independence of Pakistan in 1947.

== Etymology ==

The modern name of the city &quot;Peshawar&quot; is possibly derived from the [reconstructed] Sanskrit word &quot;Purushapura&quot; ( &quot;Puruṣapura&quot;, meaning &quot;City of Men&quot; or &quot;City of Purusha&quot;). It was named so by Mughal Emperor Akbar from its old name &quot;Parashawar&quot;, the meaning of which Akbar did not understand. The ruler of the city during its founding may have been a Hindu raja named Purush; the word &quot;pur&quot; means &quot;city&quot; in Sanskrit. Sanskrit, written in the Kharosthi script, was the literary language (along with Gandhari Prakrit) employed by the Buddhist kingdoms which ruled over the area during its earliest recorded period. The city&#x27;s name may also be derived from the Sanskrit name for &quot;City of Flowers,&quot; &quot;Poshapura,&quot; a name found in an ancient Kharosthi inscription that may refer to Peshawar&quot;.&quot;

Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang&#x27;s seventh-century account of a city in Gandhara called the city &quot;Po-la-sha-pu-lo&quot; (Chinese: 布路沙布邏, &quot;bùlùshābùló&quot;)&quot;,&quot; and an earlier fifth-century account by Fa-Hien records the city&#x27;s name as &quot;Fou-lou-sha&quot; (Chinese: 弗樓沙, &quot;fùlóshā&quot;)&quot;,&quot; the Chinese equivalent of the Sanskrit name of the city, Purushapura. An ancient inscription from the Shapur era identifies a city in the Gandhara valley by the name &quot;pskbvr,&quot; which may be a reference to Peshawar.

The Arab historian and geographer al-Masudi noted that by the mid-tenth century, the city was known as &quot;Parashāwar&quot;. The name was noted to be &quot;Purshawar&quot; and &quot;Purushavar&quot; by al-Biruni.

The city began to be known as &quot;Peshāwar&quot; by the era of Emperor Akbar. The current name is said by some to have been based upon the Persian word for &quot;frontier town&quot; or, more literally, &quot;forward city&quot;, though transcription errors and linguistic shifts may account for the city&#x27;s new name. One theory suggests that the city&#x27;s name is derived from the Persian name &quot;Pesh Awardan&quot;, meaning &quot;place of first arrival&quot; or &quot;frontier city&quot;, as Peshawar was the first city in the Indian subcontinent after crossing the Khyber Pass. Akbar&#x27;s bibliographer, Abu&#x27;l-Fazl ibn Mubarak, lists the city&#x27;s name as both &quot;Parashāwar&quot;, transcribed in Persian as , and &quot;Peshāwar&quot; ().

== History ==

=== Ancient history ===
Peshawar alongside the modern day Gandhara region were found in the Vedic Scripture as Pushkalavati.

==== Foundation ====
Peshawar was founded as the city of &quot;Puruṣapura&quot;, on the Gandhara Plains in the broad Valley of Peshawar in 100 CE. It may have been named after a Hindu raja who ruled the city who was known as Purush. The city likely first existed as a small village in the fifth century BCE, within the cultural sphere of ancient India. Puruṣapura was founded near the ancient Gandharan capital city of Pushkalavati, near present-day Charsadda.

==== Greek rule ====
In the winter of 327–26 BCE, Alexander the Great subdued the Valley of Peshawar during his invasion of the Indus Valley, as well as the nearby Swat and Buner valleys. Following Alexander&#x27;s conquest, the Valley of Peshawar came under the suzerainty of Seleucus I Nicator, founder of the Seleucid Empire. A locally-made vase fragment that was found in Peshawar depicts a scene from Sophocles&#x27; play &quot;Antigone&quot;.

==== Mauryan empire ====

Following the Seleucid–Mauryan war, the region was ceded to the Mauryan Empire in 303 BCE. Around 300 BCE, the Greek diplomat and historian Megasthenes noted that Purushapura was the western terminus of a Mauryan road that connected the city to the empire&#x27;s capital at &quot;Pataliputra&quot;, near the city of Patna in the modern-day Indian state of Bihar.

As Mauryan power declined, the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom based in modern Afghanistan declared its independence from the Seleucid Empire, and quickly seized ancient Peshawar around 190 BCE. The city was then captured by Gondophares, founder of the Indo-Parthian Kingdom. Gondophares established the nearby &quot;Takht-i-Bahi&quot; monastery in 46 CE.

==== Kushan empire ====
In the first century of the Common Era, Purushapura came under control of Kujula Kadphises, founder of the Kushan Empire. The city was made the empire&#x27;s winter capital. The Kushan&#x27;s summer capital at &quot;Kapisi&quot; (modern Bagram, Afghanistan) was seen as the secondary capital of the empire, while Puruṣapura was considered to be the empire&#x27;s primary capital. Ancient Peshawar&#x27;s population was estimated to be 120,000, which would make it the seventh-most populous city in the world at the time. As a devout Buddhist, the emperor built the grand &quot;Kanishka Mahavihara&quot; monastery. After his death, the magnificent Kanishka stupa was built in Peshawar to house Buddhist relics. The golden age of Kushan empire in Peshawar ended in 232 CE with the death of the last great Kushan king, Vasudeva I.

Around 260 CE, the armies of the Sasanid Emperor Shapur I launched an attack against Peshawar, and severely damaged Buddhist monuments and monasteries throughout the Valley of Peshawar. Shapur&#x27;s campaign also resulted in damage to the city&#x27;s monumental stupa and monastery. The Kushans were made subordinate to the Sasanids and their power rapidly dwindled, as the Sasanids blocked lucrative trade routes westward out of the city.

Kushan Emperor Kanishka III was able to temporarily reestablish control over the entire Valley of Peshawar after Shapur&#x27;s invasion, but the city was then captured by the Central Asian Kidarite kingdom in the early 400s CE.

==== White Huns ====
The White Huns devastated ancient Peshawar in the 460s CE, and ravaged the entire region of Gandhara, destroying its numerous monasteries. The Kanishka stupa was rebuilt during the White Hun era with the construction of a tall wooden superstructure, built atop a stone base, and crowned with a 13-layer copper-gilded &quot;chatra&quot;. In the 400s CE, the Chinese Buddhist pilgrim &quot;Faxian&quot; visited the structure and described it as &quot;the highest of all the towers&quot; in the &quot;terrestrial world&quot;, which ancient travelers claimed was up to tall, though modern estimates suggest a height of .

In 520 CE the Chinese monk Song Yun visited Gandhara and ancient Peshawar during the White Hun era, and noted that it was in conflict with nearby &quot;Kapisa&quot;. The Chinese monk and traveler Xuanzang visited ancient Peshawar around 630 CE, after &quot;Kapisa&quot; victory, and expressed lament that the city and its great Buddhist monuments had decayed to ruin—although some monks studying Theravada Buddhism continued to study at the monastery&#x27;s ruins. Xuanzang estimated that only about 1,000 families continued in a small quarter among the ruins of the former grand capital.

=== Medieval history ===

Until the mid seventh century, the residents of ancient Peshawar had a ruling elite of Central Asian Scythian descent, who were then displaced by the Hindu Shahis of Kabul.

Islam is believed to have been first introduced to the Buddhist, Hindu and other indigenous inhabitants of Puruṣapura in the later seventh century.

As the first Pashtun tribe to settle the region, the Dilazak Pashtuns began settling in the Valley of Peshawar, and are believed to have settled regions up to the Indus River by the 11th century. The Arab historian and geographer al-Masudi noted that by the mid tenth century, the city had become known as &quot;Parashāwar&quot;.

==== Ghaznavid empire ====

In 986–87 CE, Peshawar&#x27;s first encounter with Muslim armies occurred when Sabuktigin invaded the area and fought the Hindu Shahis under their king, Anandpal.

On 28 November 1001, Sabuktigin&#x27;s son Mahmud Ghazni decisively defeated the army of Raja Jayapala, son of Anandpal, at the Battle of Peshawar, and established rule of the Ghaznavid Empire in the Peshawar region.

During the Ghaznavid era, Peshawar served as an important stop between the Afghan plateau, and the Ghaznavid garrison city of Lahore. During the tenth–12th century, Peshawar served as a headquarters for Hindu Nath Panthi Yogis, who in turn are believed to have extensively interacted with Muslim Sufi mystics.

==== Delhi sultanate ====
In 1179–80, Muhammad Ghori captured Peshawar, though the city was then destroyed in the early 1200s at the hands of the Mongols. Peshawar was an important regional centre under the Lodi dynasty of Delhi Sultanate.

Several Pashtun tribe began settling rural regions around Peshawar in the late 15th and 16th centuries. The Ghoryakhel and Khashi &quot;Khel&quot; tribe pushed the Dilazak Pashtun tribes east of the Indus River following a battle in 1515 near the city of Mardan.

=== Early modern history ===

==== Mughal empire ====
Peshawar remained an important centre on trade routes between India and Central Asia. The Peshawar region was a cosmopolitan region in which goods, peoples, and ideas would pass along trade routes. Its importance as a trade centre is highlighted by the destruction of over one thousand camel-loads of merchandise following an accidental fire at Bala Hissar fort in 1586. Mughal rule in the area was tenuous, as Mughal suzerainty was only firmly exercised in the Peshawar valley, while the neighbouring valley of Swat was under Mughal rule only during the reign of Akbar.

In July 1526, Emperor Babur captured Peshawar. During Babur&#x27;s rule, the city was known as &quot;Begram&quot;, and he rebuilt the city&#x27;s fort. Babur used the city as a base for expeditions to other nearby towns.

Under the reign of Babur&#x27;s son, Humayun, direct Mughal rule over the city was briefly challenged with the rise of the Pashtun king, Sher Shah Suri, who began construction of the famous Grand Trunk Road in the 16th century. Peshawar was an important trading centre on the Grand Trunk Road. During Akbar&#x27;s rule, the name of the city changed from &quot;Begram&quot; to &quot;Peshawar&quot;. In 1586, Pashtuns rose against Mughal rule during the Roshani Revolt under the leadership of Bayazid Pir Roshan, founder of the egalitarian Roshani movement, who assembled Pashtun armies in an attempted rebellion against the Mughals. The Roshani followers laid siege to the city until 1587.

Peshawar was bestowed with its own set of &quot;Shalimar Gardens&quot; during the reign of Shah Jahan, which no longer exist.
Emperor Aurangzeb&#x27;s governor of Kabul, Mohabbat Khan bin Ali Mardan Khan used Peshawar as his winter capital during the 17th century, and bestowed the city with its famous Mohabbat Khan Mosque in 1630.

Yusufzai tribes rose against Mughal rule during the Yusufzai Revolt of 1667, and engaged in pitched-battles with Mughal battalions nearby Attock. Afridi tribes resisted Mughal rule during the Afridi Revolt of the 1670s. The Afridis massacred a Mughal battalion in the nearby Khyber Pass in 1672 and shut the pass to lucrative trade routes. Mughal armies led by Emperor Aurangzeb himself regained control of the entire area in 1674.

Following Aurangzeb&#x27;s death in 1707, his son Bahadur Shah I, former governor of Peshawar and Kabul, was selected to be the Mughal Emperor. As Mughal power declined following the death of Emperor Aurangzeb, the empire&#x27;s defenses were weakened.

On 18 November 1738, Peshawar was captured from the Mughal governor Nawab Nasir Khan by the Afsharid armies during the Persian invasion of the Mughal Empire under Nader Shah.

==== Durrani Empire ====

In 1747, Peshawar was taken by Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Durrani Empire. Under the reign of his son Timur Shah, the Mughal practice of using Kabul as a summer capital and Peshawar as a winter capital was reintroduced, with the practice maintained until the Sikh invasion. Peshawar&#x27;s Bala Hissar Fort served as the residence of Afghan kings during their winter stay in Peshawar, and it was noted to be the main centre of trade between Bukhara and India by British explorer William Moorcroft during the late 1700s. Peshawar was at the centre of a productive agricultural region that provided much of north India&#x27;s dried fruit.

Timur Shah&#x27;s grandson, Mahmud Shah Durrani, became king, and quickly seized Peshawar from his half-brother, Shah Shujah Durrani. Shah Shujah was then himself proclaimed king in 1803, and recaptured Peshawar while Mahmud Shah was imprisoned at Bala Hissar fort until his eventual escape. In 1809, the British sent an emissary to the court of Shah Shujah in Peshawar, marking the first diplomatic meeting between the British and Afghans. His half-brother Mahmud Shah then allied himself with the &quot;Barakzai&quot; Pashtuns, and captured Peshawar once again and reigned until the Battle of Nowshera in March 1823.

==== Maratha Empire ====
The Capture of Peshawar took place in spring of 1758 when Maratha Confederacy in alliance with the Sikhs, defeated the Durrani Empire. Before that, the fort of Peshawar was being guarded by Durrani troops under Timur Shah Durrani and Jahan Khan. When Raghunathrao, Malhar Rao Holkar and Sikh alliance of Charat Singh and Jassa Singh Ahluwalia left Peshawar, Tukoji Rao Holkar was appointed as the representative in this area of the sub-continent.

==== Sikh Empire ====
Ranjit Singh invaded Peshawar in 1818, but handed its rule to Peshawar Sardars as vassals. Following the Sikh victory against Azim Khan at the Battle of Nowshera in March 1823, Ranjit Singh captured Peshawar again and reinstated Yar Mohammed as the governor. By 1830, Peshawar&#x27;s economy was noted by Scottish explorer Alexander Burnes to have sharply declined, with Ranjit Singh&#x27;s forces having destroyed the city&#x27;s palace and agricultural fields.

Much of Peshawar&#x27;s caravan trade from Kabul ceased on account of skirmishes between Afghan and Sikh forces, as well as a punitive tax levied on merchants by Ranjit Singh&#x27;s forces. Singh&#x27;s government also required Peshawar to forfeit much of its leftover agricultural output to the Sikhs as tribute, while agriculture was further decimated by a collapse of the dried fruit market in north India. Singh appointed Neapolitan mercenary Paolo Avitabile as administrator of Peshawar, who is remembered for having unleashed a reign of terror. His time in Peshawar is known as a time of &quot;gallows and gibbets&quot;. The city&#x27;s famous Mahabat Khan, built in 1630 in the Jeweler&#x27;s Bazaar, was badly damaged and desecrated by the Sikh conquerors.

The Sikh Empire formally annexed Peshawar in 1834 following advances from the armies of Hari Singh Nalwa—bringing the city under direct control of the Sikh Empire&#x27;s &quot;Lahore Durbar&quot;. An 1835 attempt by Dost Muhammad Khan to re-occupy the city was unsuccessful after being unable to breach the Peshawar fort&#x27;s defenses. Sikh settlers from Punjab were settled in the city during Sikh rule. The city&#x27;s only remaining Gurdwaras were built by Hari Singh Nalwa to accommodate the newly settled Sikhs. The Sikhs also rebuilt the Bala Hissar fort during their occupation of the city.

==== British Raj ====
Following the defeat of the Sikhs in the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1845–46 and the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849, some of their territories were captured by the British East India Company. The British re-established stability in the wake of ruinous Sikh rule. During the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the 4,000 members of the native garrison were disarmed without bloodshed; the absence of conflict during the rebellion meant that Peshawar was not affected by the widespread devastation that was experienced throughout the rest of British India and local chieftains sided with the British after the incident.

The British laid out the vast Peshawar Cantonment to the west of the city in 1868, and made the city its frontier headquarters. Additionally, several projects were initiated in Peshawar, including linkage of the city by railway to the rest of British India and renovation of the Mohabbat Khan mosque that had been desecrated by the Sikhs. British suzerainty over regions west of Peshawar was cemented in 1893 by Sir Mortimer Durand, foreign secretary of the British Indian government, who collaboratively demarcated the border between British controlled territories in India and Afghanistan.

The British built Cunningham clock tower in celebration of the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria, and in 1906 built the Victoria Hall (now home of the Peshawar Museum) in memory of Queen Victoria. The British introduced Western-style education into Peshawar with the establishment of Edwardes College and Islamia College in 1901 and 1913, along with several schools run by the Anglican Church. For better administration of the region, Peshawar and the adjoining districts were separated from the Punjab Province in 1901, The North-West Frontier Province was separated from Punjab Province in 1901, after which Peshawar became capital of the new province.

Communal riots broke out in the old city of Peshawar during the spring of 1910, when the annual Hindu festival of Holi coincided with Barawafat, the annual Muslim day of mourning, resulting in a considerable loss of life along with hundreds of looted businesses and injuries. A month prior, in February 1910, prominent community religious leaders met with officials and agreed that Holi would be solely celebrated in predominantly Hindu neighbourhoods of the city, notably in Andar Shehr and Karim Pura. On 21 March 1910, however, rumors of musicians from Amritsar and a dancing boy from Haripur being brought into the city for Holi celebrations, led to a group of individuals who were marking Barawafat into forming a mob with the intention of stopping the procession. Despite Muslim and Hindu community leaders calling for calm, both parties ultimately clashed at the Asamai Gate, when the Holi procession was &quot;en route&quot; to Dargah Pir Ratan Nath Jee, with a Hindu procession member stabbing a Muslim individual in the mob. Riots ensued for the following three days, involved individuals from outlying tribal regions who had entered the city, with a mob at Bara Bazar allegedly chanting &quot;Maro Hindu Ko&quot; (Kill the Hindus). Estimates detail the riots resulted in a total of 451 damaged shops and homes, primarily belonging to members of the Hindu community, while at least 4 Muslims and 6 Hindus were killed, alongside hundreds of injuries.
Peshawar emerged as a centre for both Hindkowan and Pashtun intellectuals during the British era. Hindko speakers, also referred to as &quot;xāryān&quot; (&quot;city dwellers&quot; in Pashto), were responsible for the dominant culture for most of the time that Peshawar was under British rule. Peshawar was also home to a non-violent resistance movement led by Ghaffar Khan, a disciple of Mahatma Gandhi. In April 1930, Khan, leading a large group of his followers, protested in Qissa Khwani Bazaar against discriminatory laws that had been enacted by the colonial government; hundreds were killed when a detachment of the British Indian Army opened fire on the demonstrators.

=== Modern era ===
In 1947, Peshawar became part of the newly created state of Pakistan, and emerged as a cultural centre in the country&#x27;s northwest. The partition of India saw the departure of many Hindko-speaking Hindus and Sikhs who held key positions in the economy of Peshawar. The University of Peshawar was established in the city in 1950, and augmented by the amalgamation of nearby British-era institutions into the university. Until the mid-1950s, Peshawar was enclosed within a city wall and sixteen gates. In the 1960s, Peshawar was a base for a CIA operation to spy on the Soviet Union, with the 1960 U-2 incident resulting in an aircraft shot down by the Soviets that flew from Peshawar. From the 1960s until the late 1970s, Peshawar was a major stop on the famous Hippie trail.

During the Soviet–Afghan War in the 1980s, Peshawar served as a political centre for the CIA and the Inter-Services Intelligence-trained mujahideen groups based in the camps of Afghan refugees. It also served as the primary destination for large numbers of Afghan refugees. By 1980, 100,000 refugees a month were entering the province, with 25% of all refugees living in Peshawar district in 1981. The arrival of large numbers of Afghan refugees strained Peshawar&#x27;s infrastructure, and drastically altered the city&#x27;s demography.

Like much of northwest Pakistan, Peshawar has been severely affected by violence from the attacks by the terrorist group, Tehrik-i-Taliban. Local poets&#x27; shrines have been targeted by the Pakistani Taliban, a suicide bomb attack targeted the historic All Saints Church in 2013, and most notably the 2014 Peshawar school massacre in which Taliban militants killed 132 school children. Peshawar suffered 111 acts of terror in 2010, which had declined to 18 in 2014, before the launch of Operation Zarb-e-Azb, which further reduced acts of violence throughout Pakistan. A large attack on a Shiite mosque in the city killed dozens and injured 200 people on 4 March 2022. In January 2023, another terrorist attack occurred at Peshawar in which 100 people were killed.

== Geography ==
=== Topography ===

Peshawar is located in the broad Valley of Peshawar, which is surrounded by mountain ranges on three sides, with the fourth opening to the Punjab plains. The city is located in the generally level base of the valley, known as the Gandhara Plains.

=== Climate ===

With an influence from the local steppe climate, Peshawar features a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen &quot;BSh&quot;), with very hot, prolonged summers and brief, mild to cool winters. Winter in Peshawar starts in November and ends in late March, though it sometimes extends into mid-April, while the summer months are from mid-May to mid-September. The mean maximum summer temperature surpasses during the hottest month, and the mean minimum temperature is . The mean minimum temperature during the coolest month is , while the maximum is .

Peshawar is not a monsoon region, unlike other parts of Pakistan; however, rainfall occurs in both winter and summer. Due to western disturbances, the winter rainfall shows a higher record between the months of February and April. The highest amount of winter rainfall, measuring , was recorded in February 2007, while the highest summer rainfall of was recorded in July 2010; during this month, a record-breaking rainfall level of fell within a 24-hour period on 29 July 2010—the previous record was of rain, recorded in April 2009. The average winter rainfall levels are higher than those of summer. Based on a 30-year record, the average annual precipitation level was recorded as and the highest annual rainfall level of was recorded in 2003. Wind speeds vary during the year, from in December to in June. The relative humidity varies from 46% in June to 76% in August. The highest temperature of was recorded on 18 June 1995, while the lowest occurred on 7 January 1970.

=== Cityscape ===
Peshawar&#x27;s urban typology is similar to other ancient cities in South Asia, such as Lahore, Multan and Delhi – all of which were founded near a major river, and included an old walled city, as well as a royal citadel.

Historically, the old city of Peshawar was a heavily guarded citadel that consisted of high walls. In the 21st century, only remnants of the walls remain, but the houses and havelis continue to be structures of significance. Most of the houses are constructed of unbaked bricks, with the incorporation of wooden structures for protection against earthquakes, with many composed of wooden doors and latticed wooden balconies. Numerous examples of the city&#x27;s old architecture can still be seen in areas such as Sethi Mohallah. In the old city, located in inner-Peshawar, many historic monuments and bazaars exist in the 21st century, including the Mohabbat Khan Mosque, Kotla Mohsin Khan, Chowk Yadgar and the Qissa Khawani Bazaar. Due to the damage caused by rapid growth and development, the old walled city has been identified as an area that urgently requires restoration and protection.

The walled city was surrounded by several main gates that served as the main entry points into the city — in January 2012, an announcement was made that the government plans to address the damage that has left the gates largely non-existent over time, with all of the gates targeted for restoration.

== Demographics ==

=== Population ===
The population of Peshawar district in 1998 was 2,026,851. The city&#x27;s annual growth rate is estimated at 3.29% per year, and the 2016 population of Peshawar district is estimated to be 3,405,414. With a population of 1,970,042 according to the 2017 census, Peshawar is the sixth-largest city of Pakistan. and the largest city in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, with a population five times higher than the second-largest city in the province.

==== Afghan refugees ====
Peshawar has hosted Afghan refugees since the start of the Afghan civil war in 1978, though the rate of migration drastically increased following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. By 1980, 100,000 refugees a month were entering the province, with 25% of all refugees living in Peshawar district in 1981. The arrival of large numbers of Afghan refugees strained Peshawar&#x27;s infrastructure, and drastically altered the city&#x27;s demography. During the 1988 national elections, an estimated 100,000 Afghans refugees were illegally registered to vote in Peshawar.

With the influx of Afghan refugees into Peshawar, the city became a hub for Afghan musicians and artists, as well as a major centre of Pashto literature. Some Afghan refugees have established successful businesses in Peshawar, and play an important role in the city&#x27;s economy.

In recent years, Peshawar district hosts up to 20% of all Afghan refugees in Pakistan. In 2005, Peshawar district was home to 611,501 Afghan refugees — who constituted 19.7% of the district&#x27;s total population. Peshawar&#x27;s immediate environs were home to large Afghan refugee camps, with Jalozai camp hosting up to 300,000 refugees in 2001 – making it the largest refugee camp in Asia at the time. In 2012, it was estimated that Afghans constituted 28% of the city&#x27;s total population, and that the numbers could be higher.

Afghan refugees began to be frequently accused of involvement with terrorist attacks that occurred during Pakistan&#x27;s war against radical Islamists. By 2015 the Pakistani government adopted a policy to repatriate Afghan refugees, including many who had spent their entire life in Pakistan. The policy of repatriation was also encouraged by the government of Afghanistan, though many refugees had not registered themselves in Pakistan. Unregistered refugees returning to Afghanistan without their old Afghan identification documents now have no official status in Afghanistan either.

=== Language ===
The primary native language spoken in Peshawar is Pashto, while Hindko is native minority language, though English is used in the city&#x27;s educational institutions, while Urdu is understood throughout the city – as the national language of the country.

The district of Peshawar is overwhelmingly Pashto-speaking, though the Hindko-speaking minority is concentrated in Peshawar&#x27;s old city, Hindko speakers in Peshawar increasingly assimilate elements of Pashto and Urdu into their speech.

=== Religion ===
Peshawar is overwhelmingly Muslim, with Muslims making up 98.5% of the city&#x27;s population in the 1998 census. Christians make up the second largest religious group with around 20,000 adherents, while over 7,000 members of the Ahmadiyya Community live in Peshawar. Hindus and Sikhs are also found in the city − though most of the city&#x27;s Hindu and Sikh community migrated &quot;en masse&quot; to India following the Partition of British India in 1947.

Though the city&#x27;s Sikh population drastically declined after Partition, the Sikh community has been bolstered in Peshawar by the arrival of approximately 4,000 Sikh refugees from conflict in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas; In 2008, the largest Sikh population in Pakistan was located in Peshawar. Sikhs in Peshawar self-identify as Pashtuns and speak Pashto as their mother tongue. There was a small, but, thriving Jewish community until the late 1940s. After the partition and the emergence of the State of Israel, Jews left for Israel.

== Economy ==

Peshawar&#x27;s economic importance has historically been linked to its privileged position at the entrance to the Khyber Pass – the ancient travel route by which most trade between Central Asia and the Indian subcontinent passed. Peshawar&#x27;s economy also benefited from tourism in the mid-20th century, as the city formed a crucial part of the Hippie trail.

Peshawar&#x27;s estimated monthly per capita income was ₨55,246 in 2015, compared to ₨117,924 in Islamabad, and ₨66,359 in Karachi. Peshawar&#x27;s surrounding region is also relatively poor − Khyber Pakhtunkhwa&#x27;s cities on average have an urban per capita income that is 20% less than Pakistan&#x27;s national average for urban residents.

Peshawar was noted by the World Bank in 2014 to be at the helm of a nationwide movement to create an ecosystem for entrepreneurship, freelance jobs, and technology. The city has been host to the World Bank assisted Digital Youth Summit — an annual event to connect the city and province&#x27;s youths to opportunities in the digital economy. The 2017 event hosted 100 speakers including several international speakers, and approximately 3,000 delegates in attendance.

=== Industry ===
Peshawar&#x27;s Industrial Estate on Jamrud Road is an industrial zone established in the 1960s on 868 acres. The industrial estate hosts furniture, marble industries, and food processing industries, though many of its plots remain underutilized. The Hayatabad Industrial Estate hosts 646 industrial units in Peshawar&#x27;s western suburbs, though several of the units are no longer in use. As part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor, 4 special economic zones are to be established in the province, with roads, electricity, gas, water, and security to be provided by the government. The nearby Hattar SEZ is envisioned to provide employment to 30,000 people, and is being developed at a cost of approximately $200 million with completion expected in 2017.

=== Employment ===
As a result of large numbers of displaced persons in the city, only 12% of Peshawar&#x27;s residents were employed in the formalized economy in 2012. Approximately 41% of residents in 2012 were employed in personal services, while 55% of Afghan refugees in the city in 2012 were daily wage earners. By 2016, Pakistan adopted a policy to repatriate Afghan refugees.

Wages for unskilled workers in Peshawar grew on average 9.1% per year between 2002 and 2008. Following the outbreak of widespread Islamist violence in 2007, wages rose only 1.5% between 2008 and 2014. Real wages dropped for some skilled craftsmen during the period between 2008 and 2014.

=== Constraints ===
Peshawar&#x27;s economy has been negatively impacted by political instability since 1979 resulting from the War in Afghanistan and subsequent strain on Peshawar&#x27;s infrastructure from the influx of refugees. The poor security environment resulting from Islamist violence also impacted the city&#x27;s economy. With the launch of Operation Zarb-e-Azb in 2014, the country&#x27;s security environment has drastically improved.

The metropolitan economy suffers from poor infrastructure. The city&#x27;s economy has also been adversely impacted by shortages of electricity and natural gas. The $54 billion China Pakistan Economic Corridor will generate over 10,000 MW by 2018 – greater than the current electricity deficit of approximately 4,500 MW. Peshawar will also be linked to ports in Karachi by uninterrupted motorway access, while passenger and freight railway tracks will be upgraded between Peshawar and Karachi.

Poor transportation is estimated to cause a loss of 4–6% of the Pakistani GDP. Peshawar for decades has suffered from chaotic, mismanaged, and inadequate public transportation and the poor public transportation also has been detrimental to the city&#x27;s economy. Therefore, the government has since a new rapid bus service called BRT Peshawar covering the entire Peshawar. BRT Peshawar is now believed to be one the most advanced BRT of Pakistan

== Transportation ==
=== Road ===
Peshawar&#x27;s east–west growth axis is centred on the historic Grand Trunk Road that connects Peshawar to Islamabad and Lahore. The road is roughly paralleled by the M-1 Motorway between Peshawar and Islamabad, while the M-2 Motorway provides an alternate route to Lahore from Islamabad. The Grand Trunk Road also provides access to the Afghan border via the Khyber Pass, with onwards connections to Kabul and Central Asia via the Salang Pass.

Peshawar is to be completely encircled by the Peshawar Ring Road in order to divert traffic away from the city&#x27;s congested centre. The road is currently under construction, with some portions open to traffic.

The Karakoram Highway provides access between the Peshawar region and western China, and an alternate route to Central Asia via Kashgar in the Chinese region of Xinjiang.

The Indus Highway provides access to points south of Peshawar, with a terminus in the southern port city of Karachi via Dera Ismail Khan and northern Sindh. The Kohat Tunnel south of Peshawar provides access to the city of Kohat along the Indus Highway.

==== Motorways ====

Peshawar is connected to Islamabad and Rawalpindi by the 155 kilometre long M-1 Motorway. The motorway also links Peshawar to major cities in the province, such as Charsadda and Mardan. The M-1 motorway continues onwards to Lahore as part of the M-2 motorway.

Pakistan&#x27;s motorway network links Peshawar to Faisalabad by the M-4 Motorway, while a new motorway network to Karachi is being built as part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor.

The Hazara Motorway is being constructed as part of CPEC, and is providing control-access motorway travel all the way to Mansehra and Thakot via the M-1 and Hazara Motorways.

=== Rail ===
Peshawar Cantonment railway station serves as the terminus for Pakistan&#x27;s -long Main Line-1 railway that connects the city to the port city of Karachi and passes through the Peshawar City railway station. The Peshawar to Karachi route is served by the &quot;Awam Express&quot;, &quot;Khushhal Khan Khattak Express&quot;, and the &quot;Khyber Mail&quot; services.

The entire Main Line-1 railway track between Karachi and Peshawar is to be overhauled at a cost of $3.65 billion for the first phase of the project, with completion by 2021. Upgrading the railway line will permit train travel at speeds of 160 kilometres per hour, versus the average speed currently possible on existing tracks.

Peshawar was also once the terminus of the &quot;Khyber train safari&quot;, a tourist-oriented train that provided rail access to Landi Kotal. The service was discontinued as the security situation west of Peshawar deteriorated with the beginning of the region&#x27;s Taliban insurgency.

=== Air ===

Peshawar is served by the Bacha Khan International Airport, located in the Peshawar Cantonment. The airport served 1,255,303 passengers between 2014 and 2015, the vast majority of whom were international travelers. The airport offers direct flights throughout Pakistan, as well as to Bahrain, Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.

=== Public transit ===
BRT Peshawar is a modern &amp; third generation rapid bus service of Peshawar, which has started its service on 13 August 2020. It has 30 stations and 244 buses, which covers area from Chamkani to Karkhano Market. BRT Peshawar has replaced Peshawar&#x27;s old, chaotic, dilapidated, and inadequate transportation system. The system has 30 stations and is mostly at grade, with four kilometres of elevated sections. The system also contains 3.5 kilometres of underpasses. BRT Peshawar is also complemented by a feeder system, with an additional 100 stations along those feeder lines.
=== Intercity bus ===
Peshawar is well-served by private buses (locally referred to as &quot;flying coaches&quot;) and vans that offer frequent connections to throughout Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, as well as all major cities of Pakistan. The city&#x27;s Daewoo Express bus terminal is located along the G.T. Road adjacent to the departure points for several other transportation companies.

== Administration ==
=== Civic government ===
=== Politics ===
Peshawar has historically served as the political centre of the region, and is currently the capital city of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. The city and province have been historically regarded to be strongholds of the Awami National Party – a secular left-wing and moderate-nationalist party. The Pakistan Peoples Party had also enjoyed considerable support in the province due to its socialist agenda.

Despite being a centre for leftist politics in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar is still generally known throughout Pakistan for its social conservatism. Sunni Muslims in the city are regarded to be socially conservative, while the city&#x27;s Shia population is considered to be more socially liberal.

A plurality of voters in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, of which Peshawar is the capital, elected one of Pakistan&#x27;s only religiously based provincial governments during the period of military dictatorship of Pervez Musharraf. A ground-swell of anti-American sentiment after the 2001 United States invasion of Afghanistan contributed to the Islamist coalition&#x27;s victory.

The Islamists introduced a range of social restrictions following the election of the Islamist Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal coalition in 2002, though Islamic Shariah law was never fully enacted. Restrictions on public musical performances were introduced, as well as a ban prohibiting music to be played in any public places, including on public transportation – which lead to the creation of a thriving underground music scene in Peshawar. In 2005, the coalition successfully passed the &quot;Prohibition of Use of Women in Photograph Bill, 2005,&quot; leading to the removal of all public advertisements in Peshawar that featured women.

The religious coalition was swept out of power by the secular and leftist Awami National Party in elections after the fall of Musharraf in 2008, leading to the removal of the MMA&#x27;s socially conservative laws. 62% of eligible voters voted in the election. The Awami National Party was targeted by Taliban militants, with hundreds of its members having been assassinated by the Pakistani Taliban.

In 2013, the centrist Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf was elected to power in the province on an anti-corruption platform. Peshawar city recorded a voter turnout of 80% for the 2013 elections.

=== Municipal services ===
86% of Peshawar&#x27;s households have access to municipal piped water as of 2015, though 39% of Peshawar&#x27;s households purchase water from private companies in 2015.

42% of Peshawar households are connected to municipal sewerage as of 2015.

== Culture ==
=== Music ===
After the 2002 Islamist government implemented restrictions on public musical performances, a thriving underground music scene took root in Peshawar. After the start of Pakistani&#x27;s Taliban insurgency in 2007–2008, militants began targeting members of Peshawar&#x27;s cultural establishment. By 2007, Taliban militants began a widespread campaign of bombings against music and video shops across the Peshawar region, leading to the closure of many others. In 2009, Pashto musical artist Ayman Udas was assassinated by Taliban militants on the city&#x27;s outskirts. In June 2012, a Pashto singer, Ghazala Javed, and her father were killed in Peshawar, after they had fled rural Khyber Pakhtunkhwa for the relative security of Peshawar.

Musicians began to return to the city by 2016, with a security environment greatly improved following the Operation Zarb-e-Azb in 2014 to eradicate militancy in the country. In 2016, the provincial government announced a monthly income of $300 to 500 musicians in order to help support their work, as well as a $5 million fund to &quot;revive the rich cultural heritage of the province&quot;.
=== Museums ===

The Peshawar Museum was founded in 1907 in memory of Queen Victoria. The building features an amalgamation of British, South Asian, Hindu, Buddhist and Mughal Islamic architectural styles. The museum&#x27;s collection has almost 14,000 items, and is well known for its collection of Greco-Buddhist art. The museum&#x27;s ancient collection features pieces from the Gandharan, Kushan, Parthian, and Indo-Scythian periods.

== Notable people ==
== Education ==

Numerous educational institutes — schools, colleges and universities — are located in Peshawar. 21.6% of children between the ages of 5 and 9 were not enrolled in any school in 2013, while 16.6% of children in the 10 to 14 age range were out of school.

Currently, Peshawar has universities for all major disciplines ranging from Humanities, General Sciences, Sciences, Engineering, Medical, Agriculture and Management Sciences. The first public sector university, University of Peshawar (UOP) was established in October 1950 by the first Prime Minister of Pakistan. University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar was established in 1980 while Agriculture University Peshawar started working in 1981. The first private sector university CECOS University of IT and Emerging Sciences was established in 1986. Institute of Management Sciences started functioning in 1995, which become degree awarding institution in 2005.

There are currently 9 Medical colleges in Peshawar, 2 in public sector while 7 in private sector. The first Medical College, Khyber Medical College, was established in 1954 as part of University of Peshawar. The first Medical University, Khyber Medical University while a women only Medical college, Khyber Girls Medical College was established in 2007.

At the start of the 21st century, a host of new private sector universities started working in Peshawar. Qurtuba University, Sarhad University of Science and IT, Fast University, Peshawar Campus and City University of Science and IT were established in 2001 while Gandhara University was inaugurated in 2002 and Abasyn University in 2007.

Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University, the first women university of Peshawar, started working in 2009 while private sector IQRA National University was established in 2012.

Apart from good range of universities, Peshawar has host of high quality further education (Post School) educational institutes. The most renowned are, Edwardes College founded in 1900 by Herbert Edwardes, is the oldest college in the province and Islamia College Peshawar, which was established in 1913. Islamia College became university and named as Islamia College University in 2008.

The following is a list of some of the public and private universities and colleges in Peshawar:

*Abasyn University (Abasyn University, Peshawar)
*Agricultural University (Peshawar)
*CECOS University of IT and Emerging Sciences
*City University of Science and Information Technology, Peshawar
*Edwardes College
*Forward Degree College
*Frontier Women University
*Gandhara University
*Government College Hayatabad Peshawar
*Government College Peshawar
*Government Girls Degree College, Peshawar
*Government Superior Science College Peshawar
*IMSciences (Institute of Management Sciences)
*Iqra National University, Peshawar (formerly Peshawar Campus of Iqra University Karachi)
*Islamia College University
*Jinnah College for Women
*Jinnah Medical College
*Khyber Girls Medical College
*Khyber Medical College
*Khyber Medical University
*National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, Peshawar Campus (NU-FAST)
*Pakistan Forest Institute, Peshawar
*Peshawar Medical College
*Kabir Medical College
*Sardar Begum Dental College
*Preston University
*Qurtuba University (Qurtuba University of Science &amp; Information Technology)
*Rehman Medical College
*Sarhad University of Science and Information Technology
*Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University
*University of Agriculture, Peshawar
*University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar
*University of Peshawar

The Pakistani military operates Army Public School Peshawar. It was the site of the 2014 Peshawar school massacre.

== Landmarks ==
The following is a list of other significant landmarks in the city that still exist in the 21st century:
*General
**Governor&#x27;s House
**Peshawar Garrison Club – situated on Sir Syed Road near the Mall
**Kotla Mohsin Khan – the residence of Mazullah Khan, 17th-century Pashtu poet
**Qissa Khwani Bazaar
**Kapoor Haveli Former residence of Prithviraj Kapoor – famous actor
*Forts
**Bala Hisar Fort
*Colonial monuments
**Chowk Yadgar (formerly the &quot;Hastings Memorial&quot;)
**Cunningham clock tower – built in 1900 and called &quot;Ghanta Ghar&quot;
*Buddhist
**Gorkhatri – an ancient site of Buddha&#x27;s alms or begging bowl, and the headquarters of Syed Ahmad Shaheed, Governor Avitabile
**Pashto Academy – the site of an ancient Buddhist university
**Shahji ki Dheri – the site of the famous Kanishka stupa
*Hindu
**Panch Tirath – an ancient Hindu site with five sacred ponds
**Gorkhatri – sacred site for Hindu yogis
**Guru Gorkhnath temple
**Aasamai temple – near Lady Reading Hospital (LRH)
*Sikh
**Sikh Gurudwara at Jogan Shah
*Parks
**Army Stadium
**Wazir Bagh – laid in 1802, by Fatteh Khan, Prime Minister of Shah Mahmud Khan
**Ali Mardan Khan Gardens (also known as Khalid bin Waleed Park) – formerly named &quot;Company Bagh&quot;
**Shahi Bagh – a small portion constitutes the site of Arbab Niaz Stadium
**Jinnah Park – A park on GT Road opposite Balahisar fort
**Tatara Park – A Park located in Hayatabad
**Bagh e Naran – A large park in Hayatabad. A portion of the park also has a Zoo.
*Mosques
**Mohabbat Khan Mosque
**Qasim Ali Khan Mosque
*Museums
**Peshawar Museum
*Zoo
**Peshawar Zoo

== Sports ==

There are hosts of sporting facilities in Peshawar. The most renowned are Arbab Niaz Stadium, and Hayatabad Cricket Stadium, which are the International cricket grounds of Peshawar and Qayyum Stadium, which is the multi sports facilities located in Peshawar Cantonment.

Cricket is the most popular sport in Peshawar with Arbab Niaz Stadium as the main ground coupled with Cricket Academy. There is also small cricket ground, Peshawar Gymkhana Ground, which is located adjacent to Arbab Niaz Stadium, a popular club cricket ground. The oldest international cricket ground in Peshawar however is Peshawar Club Ground, which hosted the first ever test match between Pakistan and India in 1955. The Peshawar Zalmi represents the city in the Pakistan Super League.

In 1975, the first sports complex, Qayyum Stadium was built in Peshawar while Hayatabad Sports Complex was built in the early 1990s. Both Qayyum Stadium and Hayatabad Sports Complexes are multiple sports complexes with facilities for all major indoor and outdoor sports such as football, Field Hockey ground, Squash, Swimming, Gymnasium, Board Games section, Wrestling, Boxing and Badminton. In 1991, Qayyum Stadium hosted Barcelona Olympics Qualifier Football match between Pakistan and Qatar plus it also hosted National Games in 2010. Hockey and squash are also popular in Peshawar.

;Professional sports teams from Peshawar
== Twin towns and sister cities ==
Peshawar is twinned with:
* Makassar, Indonesia

== See also ==

*Peshawari chappal
*Peshawari turban
*Karkhano
*Kushan Empire
*Kanishka
*Bacha Khan
*Khudai Khidmatgar
*2014 Peshawar school attack
*2020 Peshawar school bombing
*Chapli Kabab

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
*Ahmad, Aisha and Boase, Roger. 2003. &quot;Pashtun Tales from the Pakistan-Afghan Frontier: From the Pakistan-Afghan Frontier.&quot; Saqi Books (1 March 2003). .
*Beal, Samuel. 1884. &quot;Si-Yu-Ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, by Hiuen Tsiang.&quot; 2 vols. Trans. by Samuel Beal. London. Reprint: Delhi. Oriental Books Reprint Corporation. 1969.
*Beal, Samuel. 1911. &quot;The Life of Hiuen-Tsiang by the Shaman Hwui Li, with an Introduction containing an account of the Works of I-Tsing&quot;. Trans. by Samuel Beal. London. 1911. Reprint: Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi. 1973.
*Dani, Ahmad Hasan. 1985. &quot;Peshawar : Historic city of the Frontier&quot; Sang-e-Meel Publications (1995). .
*Dobbins, K. Walton. 1971. &quot;The Stūpa and Vihāra of Kanishka I&quot;. The Asiatic Society of Bengal Monograph Series, Vol. XVIII. Calcutta.
*Elphinstone, Mountstuart. 1815. &quot;An account of the Kingdom of Caubul and its dependencies in Persia, Tartary, and India; comprising a view of the Afghaun nation.&quot; Akadem. Druck- u. Verlagsanst (1969).
*Foucher, M. A. 1901. &quot;Notes sur la geographie ancienne du Gandhâra (commentaire à un chaptaire de Hiuen-Tsang).&quot; &quot;BEFEO&quot; No. 4, Oct. 1901, pp. 322–369.
*Hargreaves, H. (1910–11): &quot;Excavations at Shāh-jī-kī Dhērī&quot;; &quot;Archaeological Survey of India, 1910–11&quot;, pp. 25–32.
*Hill, John E. 2003. &quot;Annotated Translation of the Chapter on the Western Regions according to the &quot;Hou Hanshu&quot; .&quot; 2nd Draft Edition.
*Hill, John E. 2004. &quot;The Peoples of the West from the Weilue &quot; 魏略 &quot;by Yu Huan&quot; 魚豢&quot;: A Third Century Chinese Account Composed between 239 and 265 CE.&quot; Draft annotated English translation.
*Hopkirk, Peter. 1984. &quot;The Great Game: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia&quot; Kodansha Globe; Reprint edition. .
*Moorcroft, William and Trebeck, George. 1841. &quot;Travels in the Himalayan Provinces of Hindustan and the Panjab; in Ladakh and Kashmir, in Peshawar, Kabul, Kunduz, and Bokhara... from 1819 to 1825&quot;, Vol. II. Reprint: New Delhi, Sagar Publications, 1971.
*Reeves, Richard. 1985. &quot;Passage to Peshawar: Pakistan: Between the Hindu Kush and the Arabian Sea.&quot; Holiday House September 1985. .
*Imran, Imran Rashid. 2006. &quot;Baghaat-i-Peshawar.&quot; Sarhad Conservation Network. July 2006.
*Imran, Imran Rashid. 2012. &quot;Peshawar – Faseel-e-Shehr aur Darwazay.&quot; Sarhad Conservation Network. March 2012.
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="0" end="8" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356639" start="39" end="46" title="List of cities in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa by population" label="largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q270496" start="59" end="77" title="Administrative units of Pakistan" label="Pakistani province"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="81" end="99" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="139" end="147" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595864" start="278" end="296" title="Valley of Peshawar" label="Valley of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="333" end="341" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="484" end="495" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="734" end="750" title="Gandhara" label="ancient Gāndhāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="790" end="803" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312544" start="823" end="831" title="Kanishka" label="Kanishka"/>
<link wikidata="Q842918" start="852" end="866" title="Kanishka Stupa" label="Kanishka Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="960" end="972" title="Hephthalites" label="Hephthalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="990" end="1002" title="Hindu Shahis" label="Hindu Shahis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633124" start="1039" end="1053" title="Islamic rulers in the Indian subcontinent" label="Muslim empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="1103" end="1116" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="1145" end="1159" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="1268" end="1279" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1327" end="1345" title="British East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1378" end="1389" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="1430" end="1456" title="Partition of British India" label="Partition of British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="1766" end="1786" title="Akbar" label="Mughal Emperor Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="1940" end="1944" title="raja" label="raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q106797077" start="1974" end="1977" title="pur (Vedic)" label="pur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161266" start="2045" end="2054" title="Kharosthi" label="Kharosthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124623" start="2101" end="2117" title="Gandhari Prakrit" label="Gandhari Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2135" end="2143" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="2448" end="2456" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="2555" end="2562" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q312978" start="2649" end="2656" title="Faxian" label="Fa-Hien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="2714" end="2721" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="3021" end="3030" title="al-Masudi" label="al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="3191" end="3200" title="al-Biruni" label="al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="3276" end="3281" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3344" end="3351" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="3780" end="3791" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q334752" start="3821" end="3848" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fazl ibn Mubarak" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fazl ibn Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="4040" end="4048" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595864" start="4225" end="4243" title="Valley of Peshawar" label="Valley of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="4446" end="4459" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q625407" start="4527" end="4539" title="Pushkalavati" label="Pushkalavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642808" start="4558" end="4567" title="Charsadda" label="Charsadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4620" end="4639" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200795" start="4682" end="4710" title="Indian campaign of Alexander the Great" label="invasion of the Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q389161" start="4734" end="4738" title="Swat (Pakistan)" label="Swat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039096" start="4743" end="4748" title="Buner Valley" label="Buner"/>
<link wikidata="Q184176" start="4847" end="4865" title="Seleucus I Nicator" label="Seleucus I Nicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="4882" end="4897" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="4976" end="4985" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="5003" end="5011" title="Antigone (Sophocles play)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447941" start="5060" end="5080" title="Seleucid–Mauryan war" label="Seleucid–Mauryan war"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="5110" end="5124" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="5186" end="5197" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="5326" end="5337" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="5362" end="5367" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="5402" end="5407" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="5441" end="5463" title="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom" label="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397542" start="5626" end="5637" title="Gondophares" label="Gondophares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255614" start="5654" end="5675" title="Indo-Parthian Kingdom" label="Indo-Parthian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117623" start="5718" end="5730" title="Takht-i-Bahi" label="Takht-i-Bahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="5810" end="5820" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q560157" start="5856" end="5872" title="Kujula Kadphises" label="Kujula Kadphises"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="5889" end="5902" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q814388" start="6019" end="6025" title="Bagram" label="Bagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="6027" end="6038" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323827" start="6368" end="6378" title="Mahavihara" label="Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q842918" start="6429" end="6443" title="Kanishka stupa" label="Kanishka stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282366" start="6598" end="6608" title="Vasudeva I" label="Vasudeva I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="6644" end="6651" title="Sasanid Empire" label="Sasanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q191455" start="6660" end="6668" title="Shapur I" label="Shapur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723774" start="7068" end="7080" title="Kanishka III" label="Kanishka III"/>
<link wikidata="Q26996" start="7242" end="7258" title="Kidarites" label="Kidarite kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="7307" end="7317" title="Hephthalite Empire" label="White Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="7613" end="7619" title="gilding" label="gilded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945507" start="7626" end="7632" title="Chatra (umbrella)" label="chatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7660" end="7667" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="7677" end="7684" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q312978" start="7691" end="7697" title="Faxian" label="Faxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586228" start="7791" end="7824" title="Jambudvipa" label="the &amp;quot;terrestrial world&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q354548" start="7948" end="7956" title="Song Yun" label="Song Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="8117" end="8125" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="8317" end="8335" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="8638" end="8646" title="Scythian" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="8687" end="8698" title="Hindu Shahi" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8766" end="8774" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="8776" end="8781" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276697" start="8913" end="8920" title="Dilazak" label="Dilazak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="9023" end="9034" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="9090" end="9099" title="al-Masudi" label="al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="9298" end="9308" title="Sabuktigin" label="Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="9426" end="9439" title="Mahmud Ghazni" label="Mahmud Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568049" start="9472" end="9485" title="Jayapala" label="Raja Jayapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872019" start="9511" end="9529" title="Battle of Peshawar (1001)" label="Battle of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="9559" end="9575" title="Ghaznavid Empire" label="Ghaznavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="9727" end="9733" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q117421" start="9810" end="9814" title="Nath" label="Nath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="9950" end="9964" title="Muhammad Ghori" label="Muhammad Ghori"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="10058" end="10065" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709" start="10119" end="10131" title="Lodi dynasty" label="Lodi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="10135" end="10150" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276697" start="10317" end="10324" title="Dilazak" label="Dilazak"/>
<link wikidata="Q993859" start="10408" end="10414" title="Mardan" label="Mardan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="11035" end="11040" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="11065" end="11070" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q486188" start="11302" end="11309" title="Humayun" label="Humayun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83680" start="11402" end="11416" title="Sher Shah Suri" label="Sher Shah Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q300701" start="11455" end="11471" title="Grand Trunk Road" label="Grand Trunk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658917" start="11756" end="11774" title="Pir Roshan" label="Bayazid Pir Roshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033521" start="11803" end="11819" title="Roshani movement" label="Roshani movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="12046" end="12056" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485547" start="12089" end="12098" title="Aurangzeb" label="Aurangzeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724996" start="12125" end="12158" title="Ali Mardan Khan" label="Mohabbat Khan bin Ali Mardan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420356" start="12258" end="12278" title="Mohabbat Khan Mosque" label="Mohabbat Khan Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822975" start="12289" end="12297" title="Yusufzai" label="Yusufzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973073" start="12427" end="12433" title="Attock" label="Attock"/>
<link wikidata="Q384643" start="12435" end="12441" title="Afridi" label="Afridi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="12564" end="12575" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q544228" start="12772" end="12786" title="Bahadur Shah I" label="Bahadur Shah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q388739" start="13068" end="13076" title="Afsharid dynasty" label="Afsharid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957844" start="13095" end="13132" title="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion of the Mughal Empire" label="Persian invasion of the Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="13139" end="13149" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q46798" start="13209" end="13227" title="Ahmad Shah Durrani" label="Ahmad Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="13251" end="13265" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="13294" end="13304" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="13451" end="13455" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696263" start="13482" end="13498" title="Bala Hissar, Peshawar" label="Bala Hissar Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="13633" end="13640" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9096057" start="13671" end="13688" title="William Moorcroft (explorer)" label="William Moorcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q732840" start="13858" end="13877" title="Mahmud Shah Durrani" label="Mahmud Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q457944" start="13943" end="13962" title="Shah Shujah Durrani" label="Shah Shujah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871920" start="14415" end="14433" title="Battle of Nowshera" label="Battle of Nowshera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="14533" end="14552" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="14574" end="14579" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="14594" end="14608" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q167283" start="14686" end="14704" title="Timur Shah Durrani" label="Timur Shah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283047" start="14726" end="14738" title="Raghunathrao" label="Raghunathrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827791" start="14740" end="14757" title="Malhar Rao Holkar" label="Malhar Rao Holkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073949" start="14779" end="14791" title="Charat Singh" label="Charat Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639665" start="14796" end="14817" title="Jassa Singh Ahluwalia" label="Jassa Singh Ahluwalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11953364" start="14833" end="14850" title="Tukoji Rao Holkar" label="Tukoji Rao Holkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332620" start="14945" end="14957" title="Ranjit Singh" label="Ranjit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832589" start="15071" end="15080" title="Azim Khan" label="Azim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871920" start="15088" end="15106" title="Battle of Nowshera" label="Battle of Nowshera"/>
<link wikidata="Q375933" start="15268" end="15284" title="Alexander Burnes" label="Alexander Burnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="15452" end="15457" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q794013" start="15856" end="15871" title="Paolo Avitabile" label="Paolo Avitabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872021" start="16200" end="16224" title="Capture of Peshawar (1834)" label="annexed Peshawar in 1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631373" start="16263" end="16279" title="Hari Singh Nalwa" label="Hari Singh Nalwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32027" start="16391" end="16409" title="Dost Mohammad Khan" label="Dost Muhammad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="16613" end="16621" title="Gurdwara" label="Gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631373" start="16637" end="16653" title="Hari Singh Nalwa" label="Hari Singh Nalwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q582584" start="16839" end="16859" title="First Anglo-Sikh War" label="First Anglo-Sikh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q243590" start="16879" end="16900" title="Second Anglo-Sikh War" label="Second Anglo-Sikh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="16965" end="16983" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="17067" end="17090" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Sepoy Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171368" start="17431" end="17450" title="Peshawar Cantonment" label="Peshawar Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q255988" start="17817" end="17832" title="Mortimer Durand" label="Mortimer Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q288292" start="17906" end="17927" title="Durand Line" label="demarcated the border"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674037" start="18012" end="18034" title="Cunningham clock tower" label="Cunningham clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579597" start="18057" end="18089" title="Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria" label="Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416493" start="18144" end="18159" title="Peshawar Museum" label="Peshawar Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="18174" end="18188" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346065" start="18277" end="18293" title="Edwardes College" label="Edwardes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695156" start="18298" end="18313" title="Islamia College University" label="Islamia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="18370" end="18385" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412467" start="18518" end="18546" title="North-West Frontier Province (1901–55)" label="North-West Frontier Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540524" start="18649" end="18663" title="Communal riots" label="Communal riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="18745" end="18750" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="18763" end="18767" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193027" start="18783" end="18792" title="Barawafat" label="Barawafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="18805" end="18811" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="18893" end="18899" title="looted" label="looted"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="19190" end="19198" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="19205" end="19213" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q520821" start="19237" end="19244" title="Haripur, Pakistan" label="Haripur"/>
<link wikidata="Q115665045" start="19407" end="19417" title="procession" label="procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500610" start="19444" end="19460" title="community leader" label="community leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952161" start="19585" end="19610" title="Dargah Pir Ratan Nath Jee" label="Dargah Pir Ratan Nath Jee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="19684" end="19688" title="Riot" label="Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q208270" start="19762" end="19776" title="Federally Administered Tribal Areas" label="tribal regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766070" start="20147" end="20156" title="Hindkowans" label="Hindkowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="20161" end="20168" title="Pashtun people" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q312966" start="20470" end="20482" title="Ghaffar Khan" label="Ghaffar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="20498" end="20512" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="20732" end="20751" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267930" start="20752" end="20784" title="Qissa Khwani Bazaar massacre" label="opened fire on the demonstrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="20946" end="20964" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918532" start="21079" end="21101" title="University of Peshawar" label="University of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="21350" end="21353" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21378" end="21390" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748379" start="21401" end="21418" title="1960 U-2 incident" label="1960 U-2 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619981" start="21571" end="21583" title="Hippie trail" label="Hippie trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="21597" end="21614" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="21675" end="21678" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="21687" end="21714" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="21723" end="21733" title="Afghan Mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="21763" end="21778" title="Afghan refugees" label="Afghan refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459585" start="22248" end="22264" title="Tehrik-i-Taliban" label="Tehrik-i-Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="22284" end="22290" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459585" start="22318" end="22335" title="Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan" label="Pakistani Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="22339" end="22351" title="suicide bomb" label="suicide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14941833" start="22352" end="22358" title="Peshawar church bombing" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729512" start="22381" end="22398" title="All Saints Church, Peshawar" label="All Saints Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641076" start="22429" end="22458" title="2014 Peshawar school massacre" label="2014 Peshawar school massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703943" start="22544" end="22550" title="terrorism in Pakistan" label="terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q17195717" start="22615" end="22635" title="Operation Zarb-e-Azb" label="Operation Zarb-e-Azb"/>
<link wikidata="Q111088408" start="22717" end="22742" title="2022 Peshawar mosque attack" label="Shiite mosque in the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q116485898" start="22822" end="22838" title="2023 Peshawar mosque bombing" label="terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="23264" end="23285" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="23287" end="23293" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="23754" end="23761" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="24820" end="24826" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="24839" end="24844" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882520" start="25129" end="25136" title="havelis" label="havelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456648" start="25469" end="25483" title="Sethi Mohallah" label="Sethi Mohallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434092" start="25628" end="25645" title="Kotla Mohsin Khan" label="Kotla Mohsin Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105561" start="25647" end="25659" title="Chowk Yadgar" label="Chowk Yadgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065080" start="25668" end="25688" title="Qissa Khawani Bazaar" label="Qissa Khawani Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356639" start="26509" end="26543" title="List of cities in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa by population" label="largest city in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="26713" end="26729" title="War in Afghanistan (1978–present)" label="Afghan civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="26804" end="26834" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q253928" start="27366" end="27383" title="Pashto literature" label="Pashto literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679782" start="27810" end="27817" title="Jalozai" label="Jalozai"/>
<link wikidata="Q179275" start="28173" end="28202" title="War in North-West Pakistan" label="war against radical Islamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="28706" end="28712" title="Pashto" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q382273" start="28720" end="28726" title="Hindko language" label="Hindko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766070" start="28984" end="29008" title="Hindkowans" label="Hindko-speaking minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="29401" end="29420" title="Ahmadiyya Community" label="Ahmadiyya Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="29439" end="29444" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="29450" end="29454" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="29594" end="29620" title="Partition of British India" label="Partition of British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q208270" start="29831" end="29866" title="Federally Administered Tribal Areas" label="Federally Administered Tribal Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="29996" end="30002" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="30060" end="30066" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="30144" end="30159" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="30314" end="30325" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619981" start="30548" end="30560" title="Hippie trail" label="Hippie trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="30660" end="30669" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="30686" end="30693" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="30935" end="30945" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q138461" start="31234" end="31249" title="digital economy" label="digital economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957751" start="31802" end="31834" title="China Pakistan Economic Corridor" label="China Pakistan Economic Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="31838" end="31859" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q345707" start="32960" end="32978" title="War in Afghanistan" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17195717" start="33185" end="33205" title="Operation Zarb-e-Azb" label="Operation Zarb-e-Azb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957751" start="33459" end="33491" title="China Pakistan Economic Corridor" label="China Pakistan Economic Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="33851" end="33854" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595538" start="34109" end="34121" title="TransPeshawar" label="BRT Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q300701" start="34325" end="34341" title="Grand Trunk Road" label="Grand Trunk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="34368" end="34377" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="34382" end="34388" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q82227" start="34428" end="34440" title="M1 motorway (Pakistan)" label="M-1 Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q250697" start="34483" end="34495" title="M-2 motorway (Pakistan)" label="M-2 Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="34621" end="34632" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="34662" end="34667" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="34672" end="34684" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194223" start="34693" end="34704" title="Salang Pass" label="Salang Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619690" start="34753" end="34771" title="Peshawar Ring Road" label="Peshawar Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q217099" start="34926" end="34943" title="Karakoram Highway" label="Karakoram Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="35050" end="35057" title="Kashgar" label="Kashgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="35083" end="35091" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027406" start="35098" end="35111" title="Indus Highway" label="Indus Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="35202" end="35209" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249888" start="35214" end="35230" title="Dera Ismail Khan" label="Dera Ismail Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="35244" end="35249" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425928" start="35255" end="35267" title="Kohat Tunnel" label="Kohat Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195983" start="35317" end="35322" title="Kohat" label="Kohat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="35395" end="35404" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q93230" start="35409" end="35419" title="Rawalpindi" label="Rawalpindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82227" start="35446" end="35458" title="M1 motorway (Pakistan)" label="M-1 Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642808" start="35534" end="35543" title="Charsadda" label="Charsadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q993859" start="35548" end="35554" title="Mardan" label="Mardan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="35594" end="35600" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q250697" start="35616" end="35628" title="M-2 motorway (Pakistan)" label="M-2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84035" start="35700" end="35712" title="M4 motorway (Pakistan)" label="M-4 Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="35746" end="35753" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957751" start="35784" end="35816" title="China Pakistan Economic Corridor" label="China Pakistan Economic Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619492" start="35823" end="35838" title="E35 expressway (Pakistan)" label="Hazara Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662991" start="35940" end="35948" title="Mansehra" label="Mansehra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709388" start="35953" end="35959" title="Thakot" label="Thakot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171369" start="36008" end="36043" title="Peshawar Cantonment railway station" label="Peshawar Cantonment railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529873" start="36093" end="36104" title="Karachi–Peshawar Railway Line" label="Main Line-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="36156" end="36163" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983602" start="36187" end="36216" title="Peshawar City railway station" label="Peshawar City railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829767" start="36271" end="36283" title="Awam Express" label="Awam Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621842" start="36297" end="36326" title="Khushhal Khan Khattak Express" label="Khushhal Khan Khattak Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403480" start="36348" end="36359" title="Khyber Mail (passenger train)" label="Khyber Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058892" start="36755" end="36774" title="Khyber train safari" label="Khyber train safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803018" start="36836" end="36847" title="Landi Kotal" label="Landi Kotal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516769" start="37034" end="37066" title="Bacha Khan International Airport" label="Bacha Khan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171368" start="37083" end="37102" title="Peshawar Cantonment" label="Peshawar Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="37292" end="37299" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="37301" end="37309" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="37311" end="37316" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="37318" end="37330" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="37340" end="37360" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595538" start="37386" end="37398" title="TransPeshawar" label="BRT Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069812" start="37571" end="37579" title="Chamkani, Peshawar" label="Chamkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371314" start="37583" end="37598" title="Karkhano Market" label="Karkhano Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036971" start="38216" end="38230" title="Daewoo Express" label="Daewoo Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q300701" start="38265" end="38274" title="Grand Trunk Road" label="G.T. Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q659854" start="38633" end="38653" title="Awami National Party" label="Awami National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551494" start="38666" end="38675" title="Socialism in Pakistan" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186591" start="38712" end="38734" title="Pakistan Peoples Party" label="Pakistan Peoples Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551494" start="38800" end="38816" title="Socialism in Pakistan" label="socialist agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="39144" end="39162" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="39330" end="39346" title="Pervez Musharraf" label="Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="39405" end="39442" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="United States invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410662" start="39593" end="39616" title="Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal" label="Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="39651" end="39658" title="Shariah" label="Shariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q659854" start="40207" end="40227" title="Awami National Party" label="Awami National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459585" start="40514" end="40531" title="Pakistani Taliban" label="Pakistani Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q284454" start="40556" end="40580" title="Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf" label="Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459585" start="41193" end="41217" title="Pakistani Taliban" label="Pakistani&amp;#x27;s Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831470" start="41515" end="41525" title="Ayman Udas" label="Ayman Udas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394376" start="41625" end="41638" title="Ghazala Javed" label="Ghazala Javed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17195717" start="41871" end="41891" title="Operation Zarb-e-Azb" label="Operation Zarb-e-Azb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416493" start="42179" end="42194" title="Peshawar Museum" label="Peshawar Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="42228" end="42242" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="42327" end="42333" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="42458" end="42476" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="42540" end="42548" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="42551" end="42557" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="42559" end="42567" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="42965" end="42975" title="Humanities" label="Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="42977" end="42993" title="General science" label="General Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="42995" end="43002" title="Science" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="43005" end="43016" title="Engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="43018" end="43025" title="Medicine" label="Medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="43027" end="43038" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414942" start="43043" end="43062" title="Management science" label="Management Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918532" start="43100" end="43122" title="University of Peshawar" label="University of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q735575" start="43174" end="43200" title="Prime Minister of Pakistan" label="Prime Minister of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895378" start="43202" end="43252" title="University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar" label="University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693940" start="43283" end="43314" title="University of Agriculture, Peshawar" label="Agriculture University Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010211" start="43376" end="43420" title="CECOS University of Information Technology and Emerging Sciences" label="CECOS University of IT and Emerging Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983147" start="43446" end="43478" title="Institute of Management Sciences (Peshawar)" label="Institute of Management Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403483" start="43684" end="43706" title="Khyber Medical College" label="Khyber Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918532" start="43743" end="43765" title="University of Peshawar" label="University of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403485" start="43797" end="43822" title="Khyber Medical University" label="Khyber Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388103" start="43859" end="43887" title="Khyber Girls Medical College" label="Khyber Girls Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272968" start="44019" end="44037" title="Qurtuba University" label="Qurtuba University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423994" start="44039" end="44074" title="Sarhad University of Science and Information Technology" label="Sarhad University of Science and IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979241" start="44076" end="44108" title="National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences" label="Fast University, Peshawar Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983181" start="44113" end="44146" title="City University of Science and Information Technology, Peshawar" label="City University of Science and IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520658" start="44178" end="44197" title="Gandhara University" label="Gandhara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663565" start="44226" end="44243" title="Abasyn University" label="Abasyn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461532" start="44254" end="44293" title="Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University" label="Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067883" start="44380" end="44404" title="IQRA National University" label="IQRA National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="44504" end="44521" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346065" start="44583" end="44599" title="Edwardes College" label="Edwardes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695156" start="44679" end="44703" title="Islamia College Peshawar" label="Islamia College Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695156" start="44783" end="44809" title="Islamia College University" label="Islamia College University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663565" start="44919" end="44936" title="Abasyn University" label="Abasyn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693940" start="44968" end="45002" title="Agricultural University (Peshawar)" label="Agricultural University (Peshawar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010211" start="45004" end="45048" title="CECOS University of IT and Emerging Sciences" label="CECOS University of IT and Emerging Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983181" start="45050" end="45113" title="City University of Science and Information Technology, Peshawar" label="City University of Science and Information Technology, Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346065" start="45115" end="45131" title="Edwardes College" label="Edwardes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473183" start="45133" end="45155" title="Forward Degree College" label="Forward Degree College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461532" start="45157" end="45182" title="Frontier Women University" label="Frontier Women University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520658" start="45184" end="45203" title="Gandhara University" label="Gandhara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058195" start="45205" end="45242" title="Government College Hayatabad Peshawar" label="Government College Hayatabad Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058154" start="45244" end="45271" title="Government College Peshawar" label="Government College Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058611" start="45273" end="45314" title="Government Girls Degree College, Peshawar" label="Government Girls Degree College, Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110720" start="45316" end="45360" title="Government Superior Science College Peshawar" label="Government Superior Science College Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983147" start="45362" end="45372" title="IMSciences" label="IMSciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067883" start="45409" end="45443" title="Iqra National University, Peshawar" label="Iqra National University, Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695156" start="45499" end="45525" title="Islamia College University" label="Islamia College University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379227" start="45527" end="45551" title="Jinnah College for Women" label="Jinnah College for Women"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45553" end="45575" title="Jinnah Medical College" label="Jinnah Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388103" start="45577" end="45605" title="Khyber Girls Medical College" label="Khyber Girls Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403483" start="45607" end="45629" title="Khyber Medical College" label="Khyber Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403485" start="45631" end="45656" title="Khyber Medical University" label="Khyber Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979241" start="45658" end="45711" title="National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences" label="National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242006" start="45855" end="45873" title="Preston University (Pakistan)" label="Preston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272968" start="45875" end="45893" title="Qurtuba University" label="Qurtuba University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201107" start="45956" end="45978" title="Rehman Medical College" label="Rehman Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423994" start="45980" end="46035" title="Sarhad University of Science and Information Technology" label="Sarhad University of Science and Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461532" start="46037" end="46076" title="Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University" label="Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693940" start="46078" end="46113" title="University of Agriculture, Peshawar" label="University of Agriculture, Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895378" start="46115" end="46165" title="University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar" label="University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918532" start="46167" end="46189" title="University of Peshawar" label="University of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641076" start="46275" end="46304" title="2014 Peshawar school massacre" label="2014 Peshawar school massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589470" start="46439" end="46460" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s House (Peshawar)" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q196546" start="46500" end="46508" title="Sir Syed Ahmed Khan" label="Sir Syed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434092" start="46530" end="46547" title="Kotla Mohsin Khan" label="Kotla Mohsin Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065080" start="46609" end="46628" title="Qissa Khwani Bazaar" label="Qissa Khwani Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983372" start="46631" end="46644" title="Kapoor Haveli" label="Kapoor Haveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q560197" start="46665" end="46682" title="Prithviraj Kapoor" label="Prithviraj Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696263" start="46707" end="46722" title="Bala Hissar, Peshawar" label="Bala Hisar Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105561" start="46745" end="46757" title="Chowk Yadgar" label="Chowk Yadgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674037" start="46805" end="46827" title="Cunningham clock tower" label="Cunningham clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674037" start="46861" end="46872" title="Cunningham clock tower" label="Ghanta Ghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586577" start="46891" end="46900" title="Gorkhatri" label="Gorkhatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831164" start="47023" end="47037" title="Pashto Academy" label="Pashto Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842918" start="47085" end="47100" title="Kanishka stupa" label="Shahji ki Dheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q842918" start="47126" end="47140" title="Kanishka stupa" label="Kanishka stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586577" start="47212" end="47221" title="Gorkhatri" label="Gorkhatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901587" start="47246" end="47250" title="yogi" label="yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q983584" start="47259" end="47268" title="Gorkhnath" label="Gorkhnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="47336" end="47350" title="Gurdwara" label="Sikh Gurudwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794258" start="47374" end="47386" title="Army Stadium, Peshawar" label="Army Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976931" start="47389" end="47399" title="Wazir Bagh" label="Wazir Bagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q380164" start="47450" end="47466" title="Shah Mahmud Khan" label="Shah Mahmud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724996" start="47469" end="47484" title="Ali Mardan Khan" label="Ali Mardan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461607" start="47576" end="47586" title="Shahi Bagh" label="Shahi Bagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784602" start="47629" end="47647" title="Arbab Niaz Stadium" label="Arbab Niaz Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785003" start="47650" end="47661" title="Jinnah Park, Peshawar" label="Jinnah Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696263" start="47691" end="47705" title="Bala Hissar, Peshawar" label="Balahisar fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799789" start="47708" end="47719" title="Tatara Park" label="Tatara Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686104" start="47740" end="47749" title="Hayatabad" label="Hayatabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686104" start="47783" end="47792" title="Hayatabad" label="Hayatabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420356" start="47843" end="47863" title="Mohabbat Khan Mosque" label="Mohabbat Khan Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949263" start="47866" end="47887" title="Qasim Ali Khan Mosque" label="Qasim Ali Khan Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416493" start="47899" end="47914" title="Peshawar Museum" label="Peshawar Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530840" start="47922" end="47934" title="Peshawar Zoo" label="Peshawar Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784602" start="48024" end="48042" title="Arbab Niaz Stadium" label="Arbab Niaz Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341211" start="48135" end="48149" title="Qayyum Stadium" label="Qayyum Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171368" start="48199" end="48218" title="Peshawar Cantonment" label="Peshawar Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784602" start="48272" end="48290" title="Arbab Niaz Stadium" label="Arbab Niaz Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q48807949" start="48376" end="48400" title="Peshawar Gymkhana Ground" label="Peshawar Gymkhana Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784602" start="48431" end="48449" title="Arbab Niaz Stadium" label="Arbab Niaz Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171370" start="48545" end="48565" title="Peshawar Club Ground" label="Peshawar Club Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="48595" end="48605" title="Test match (cricket)" label="test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q21820715" start="48646" end="48660" title="Peshawar Zalmi" label="Peshawar Zalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267414" start="48688" end="48709" title="Pakistan Super League" label="Pakistan Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341211" start="48747" end="48761" title="Qayyum Stadium" label="Qayyum Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056384" start="48790" end="48814" title="Hayatabad Sports Complex" label="Hayatabad Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="48990" end="48998" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="49000" end="49019" title="Field hockey" label="Field Hockey ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="49021" end="49027" title="Squash (sport)" label="Squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="49029" end="49037" title="Swimming (sport)" label="Swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="49071" end="49080" title="Wrestling" label="Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="49082" end="49088" title="Boxing" label="Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="49093" end="49102" title="Badminton" label="Badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="49250" end="49256" title="Field hockey" label="Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="49261" end="49267" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="49387" end="49394" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="49403" end="49411" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171384" start="49441" end="49458" title="Peshawari chappal" label="Peshawari chappal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051729" start="49460" end="49476" title="Peshawari turban" label="Peshawari turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371314" start="49478" end="49486" title="Karkhano" label="Karkhano"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="49488" end="49501" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312544" start="49503" end="49511" title="Kanishka" label="Kanishka"/>
<link wikidata="Q312966" start="49513" end="49523" title="Bacha Khan" label="Bacha Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502076" start="49525" end="49542" title="Khudai Khidmatgar" label="Khudai Khidmatgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641076" start="49544" end="49571" title="2014 Peshawar school attack" label="2014 Peshawar school attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q108443941" start="49573" end="49601" title="2020 Peshawar school bombing" label="2020 Peshawar school bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169436" start="49603" end="49615" title="Chapli Kabab" label="Chapli Kabab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695333" start="50261" end="50278" title="Ahmad Hasan Dani" label="Dani, Ahmad Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342123" start="51413" end="51427" title="Hopkirk, Peter" label="Hopkirk, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51441" end="51496" title="The Great Game: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia" label="The Great Game: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9096057" start="51539" end="51557" title="William Moorcroft (traveller)" label="Moorcroft, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545304" start="51562" end="51577" title="Trebeck, George" label="Trebeck, George"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66231" wikidata="Q152529" url="?curid=66231" title="Home Army">
<text>The Home Army (, ; abbreviated AK) was the dominant resistance movement in German-occupied Poland during World War II. The Home Army was formed in February 1942 from the earlier Związek Walki Zbrojnej (Armed Resistance) established in the aftermath of the German and Soviet invasions in September 1939. Over the next two years, the Home Army absorbed most of the other Polish partisans and underground forces. Its allegiance was to the Polish government-in-exile in London, and it constituted the armed wing of what came to be known as the Polish Underground State. Estimates of the Home Army&#x27;s 1944 strength range between 200,000 and 600,000. The latter number made the Home Army not only Poland&#x27;s largest underground resistance movement but, along with Soviet and Yugoslav partisans, one of Europe&#x27;s largest World War II underground movements.

The Home Army sabotaged German transports bound for the Eastern Front in the Soviet Union, destroying German supplies and tying down substantial German forces. It also fought pitched battles against the Germans, particularly in 1943 and in Operation Tempest from January 1944. The Home Army&#x27;s most widely known operation was the Warsaw Uprising of August–October 1944. The Home Army also defended Polish civilians against atrocities by Germany&#x27;s Ukrainian and Lithuanian collaborators. Its attitude toward Jews remains a controversial topic.

As Polish–Soviet relations deteriorated, conflict grew between the Home Army and Soviet forces. The Home Army&#x27;s allegiance to the Polish government-in-exile caused the Soviet government to consider the Home Army to be an impediment to the introduction of a communist-friendly government in Poland, which hindered cooperation and in some cases led to outright conflict. On 19 January 1945, after the Red Army had cleared most Polish territory of German forces, the Home Army was disbanded. After the war, particularly in the 1950s and 1960s, communist government propaganda portrayed the Home Army as an oppressive and reactionary force. Thousands of ex-Home Army personnel were deported to gulags and Soviet prisons, while other ex-members, including a number of senior commanders, were executed. After the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe, the portrayal of the Home Army was no longer subject to government censorship and propaganda.

==Origins==

The Home Army originated in the Service for Poland&#x27;s Victory (&quot;Służba Zwycięstwu Polski&quot;), which General Michał Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski set up on 27 September 1939, just as the coordinated German and Soviet invasions of Poland neared completion. Seven weeks later, on 17 November 1939, on orders from General Władysław Sikorski, the Service for Poland&#x27;s Victory was superseded by the Armed Resistance (&quot;Związek Walki Zbrojnej&quot;), which in turn, a little over two years later, on 14 February 1942, became the Home Army. During that time, many other resistance organisations remained active in Poland, although most of them, merged with the Armed Resistance or with its successor, the Home Army, and substantially augmented its numbers between 1939 and 1944.

The Home Army was loyal to the Polish government-in-exile and to its agency in occupied Poland, the Government Delegation for Poland (&quot;Delegatura&quot;). The Polish civilian government envisioned the Home Army as an apolitical, nationwide resistance organisation. The supreme command defined the Home Army&#x27;s chief tasks as partisan warfare against the German occupiers, the re-creation of armed forces underground and, near the end of the German occupation, a general armed rising to be prosecuted until victory. Home Army plans envisioned, at war&#x27;s end, the restoration of the pre-war government following the return of the government-in-exile to Poland.

The Home Army, though in theory subordinate to the civil authorities and to the government-in-exile, often acted somewhat independently, with neither the Home Army&#x27;s commanders in Poland nor the &quot;London government&quot; fully aware of the other&#x27;s situation.

After Germany started its invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, the Soviet Union joined the Allies and signed the Anglo-Soviet Agreement on 12 July 1941. This put the Polish government in a difficult position since it had previously pursued a policy of &quot;two enemies&quot;. Although a Polish–Soviet agreement was signed in August 1941, cooperation continued to be difficult and deteriorated further after 1943 when Nazi Germany publicised the Katyn massacre of 1940.

Until the major rising in 1944, the Home Army concentrated on self-defense (the freeing of prisoners and hostages, defense against German pacification operations) and on attacks against German forces. Home Army units carried out thousands of armed raids and intelligence operations, sabotaged hundreds of railway shipments, and participated in many partisan clashes and battles with German police and Wehrmacht units. The Home Army also assassinated prominent Nazi collaborators and Gestapo officials in retaliation against Nazi terror inflicted on Poland&#x27;s civilian population; prominent individuals assassinated by the Home Army included Igo Sym (1941) and Franz Kutschera (1944).

==Membership==
===Size===
In February 1942, when the Home Army was formed from the Armed Resistance, it numbered around 100,000 members. Less than a year later, at the start of 1943, it had reached a strength of around 200,000. In the summer of 1944, when Operation Tempest began, the Home Army reached its highest membership: estimates of membership in the first half and summer of 1944 range from 200,000, through 300,000, 380,000 and 400,000 to 450,000–500,000, though most estimates average at about 400,000; the strength estimates vary due to the constant integration of other resistance organisations into the Home Army, and that while the number of members was high and that of sympathizers was even higher, the number of armed members participating in operations at any given time was smaller—as little as one per cent in 1943, and as many as five to ten per cent in 1944—due to an insufficient number of weapons.

Home Army numbers in 1944 included a cadre of over 10,000–11,000 officers, 7,500 officers-in-training (singular: &quot;podchorąży&quot;) and 88,000 non-commissioned officers (NCOs). The officer cadre was formed from prewar officers and NCOs, graduates of underground courses, and elite operatives usually parachuted in from the West (the Silent Unseen). The basic organizational unit was the platoon, numbering 35–50 people, with an unmobilized skeleton version of 16–25; in February 1944, the Home Army had 6,287 regular and 2,613 skeleton platoons operational. Such numbers made the Home Army not only the largest Polish resistance movement, but one of the two largest in World War II Europe. Casualties during the war are estimated at 34,000 to 100,000, plus some 20,000–50,000 after the war (casualties and imprisonment).

===Demographics===
The Home Army was intended to be a mass organisation that was founded by a core of prewar officers. Home Army soldiers fell into three groups. The first two consisted of &quot;full-time members&quot;: undercover operatives, living mostly in urban settings under false identities (most senior Home Army officers belonged to this group); and uniformed (to a certain extent) partisans, living in forested regions (&quot;leśni&quot;, or &quot;forest people&quot;), who openly fought the Germans (the forest people are estimated at some 40 groups, numbering 1,200–4,000 persons in early 1943, but their numbers grew substantially during Operation Tempest). The third, largest group were &quot;part-time members&quot;: sympathisers who led &quot;double lives&quot; under their real names in their real homes, received no payment for their services, and stayed in touch with their undercover unit commanders but were seldom mustered for operations, as the Home Army planned to use them only during a planned nationwide rising.

The Home Army was intended to be representative of the Polish nation, and its members were recruited from most parties and social classes. Its growth was largely based on integrating scores of smaller resistance organisations into its ranks; most of the other Polish underground armed organizations were incorporated into the Home Army, though they retained varying degrees of autonomy. The largest organization that merged into the Home Army was the leftist Peasants&#x27; Battalions () around 1943–1944, and parts of the National Armed Forces (&quot;Narodowe Siły Zbrojne&quot;) became subordinate to the Home Army. In turn, individual Home Army units varied substantially in their political outlooks, notably in their attitudes toward ethnic minorities and toward the Soviets. The largest group that completely refused to join the Home Army was the pro-Soviet, communist People&#x27;s Army (&quot;Armia Ludowa&quot;), which numbered 30,000 people at its height in 1944.

===Women===
Home Army ranks included a number of female operatives. Most women worked in the communications branch, where many held leadership roles or served as couriers. Approximately a seventh to a tenth of the Home Army insurgents were female.

Notable women in the Home Army included Elżbieta Zawacka, an underground courier who was sometimes called the only female &quot;Cichociemna&quot;. organised an intelligence network in German-occupied Belarus in 1942–1944. and Emilia Malessa were high-ranking officers described as &quot;holding top posts&quot; within the communication branch of the organisation. headed the distribution branch. Several all-female units existed within the AK structures, including &quot;&quot;, an entirely female sabotage unit led by Wanda Gertz, who carried out assassinations of female Gestapo informants in addition to sabotage. During the Warsaw Uprising, two all-female units were created—a demolition unit and a sewer system unit.

Many women participated in the Warsaw Uprising, particularly as medics or scouts; they were estimated to form about 75% of the insurgent medical personnel. By the end of the uprising, there were about 5,000 female casualties among the insurgents, with over 2,000 female soldiers taken captive; the latter number reported in contemporary press caused a &quot;European sensation&quot;.

==Structure==
Home Army Headquarters was divided into five sections, two bureaus and several other specialized units:
* Section I: Organization – personnel, justice, religion
* Section II: Intelligence and Counterintelligence
* Section III: Operations and Training – coordination, planning, preparation for a nationwide uprising
* Section IV: Logistics
* Section V: Communication – including with the Western Allies; air drops
* Bureau of Information and Propaganda (sometimes called &quot;Section VI&quot;) – information and propaganda
* Bureau of Finances (sometimes called &quot;Section VII&quot;) – finances
* Kedyw (acronym for &quot;Kierownictwo Dywersji&quot;, Polish for &quot;Directorate of Diversion&quot;) – special operations
* Directorate of Underground Resistance

The Home Army&#x27;s commander was subordinate in the military chain of command to the Polish Commander-in-Chief (General Inspector of the Armed Forces) of the Polish government-in-exile and answered in the civilian chain of command to the Government Delegation for Poland.

The Home Army&#x27;s first commander, until his arrest by the Germans in 1943, was Stefan Rowecki (&quot;nom de guerre&quot; &quot;Grot&quot;, &quot;Spearhead&quot;). Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski (Tadeusz Komorowski, &quot;nom de guerre&quot; &quot;Bór&quot;, &quot;Forest&quot;) commanded from July 1943 until his surrender to the Germans when the Warsaw Uprising was suppressed in October 1944. Leopold Okulicki, &quot;nom de guerre&quot; &quot;Niedzwiadek&quot; (&quot;Bear&quot;), led the Home Army in its final days.

===Regions===
The Home Army was divided geographically into regional branches or areas (&quot;obszar&quot;), which were subdivided into subregions or subareas (&quot;podokręg&quot;) or independent areas (&quot;okręgi samodzielne&quot;). There were 89 inspectorates (&quot;inspektorat&quot;) and 280 (as of early 1944) districts (&quot;obwód&quot;) as smaller organisational units. Overall, the Home Army regional structure largely resembled Poland&#x27;s interwar administration division, with an &quot;okręg&quot; being similar to a voivodeship (see Administrative division of Second Polish Republic).

There were three to five areas: Warsaw (&quot;Obszar Warszawski&quot;, with some sources differentiating between left- and right-bank areas – &quot;Obszar Warszawski prawo- i lewobrzeżny&quot;), Western (&quot;Obszar Zachodni&quot;, in the Pomerania and Poznań regions), and Southeastern (&quot;Obszar Południowo-Wschodni&quot;, in the Lwów area); sources vary on whether there was a Northeastern Area (centered in Białystok – &quot;Obszar Białystocki&quot;) or whether Białystok was classified as an independent area (&quot;Okręg samodzielny Białystok&quot;).

In 1943 the Home Army began recreating the organization of the prewar Polish Army, its various units now being designated as platoons, battalions, regiments, brigades, divisions, and operational groups.

==Operations==

=== Intelligence ===
The Home Army supplied valuable intelligence to the Allies; 48 per cent of all reports received by the British secret services from continental Europe between 1939 and 1945 came from Polish sources. The total number of those reports is estimated at 80,000, and 85 per cent of them were deemed to be high quality or better. The Polish intelligence network grew rapidly; near the end of the war, it had over 1,600 registered agents.

The Western Allies had limited intelligence assets in Central and Eastern Europe. The extensive in-place Polish intelligence network proved a major resource; between the French capitulation and other Allied networks that were undeveloped at the time, it was even described as &quot;the only [A]llied intelligence assets on the Continent&quot;. According to , for the Western Allies, the intelligence provided by the Home Army was considered to be the best source of information on the Eastern Front.

Home Army intelligence provided the Allies with information on German concentration camps and the Holocaust in Poland (including the first reports on this subject received by the Allies), German submarine operations, and, most famously, the V-1 flying bomb and V-2 rocket. In one Project Big Ben mission (Operation Wildhorn III; Polish cryptonym, &quot;Most III&quot;, &quot;Bridge III&quot;), a stripped-for-lightness RAF twin-engine Dakota flew from Brindisi, Italy, to an abandoned German airfield in Poland to pick up intelligence prepared by Polish aircraft-designer Antoni Kocjan, including of V-2 rocket wreckage from a Peenemünde launch, a &quot;Special Report 1/R, no. 242&quot;, photographs, eight key V-2 parts, and drawings of the wreckage. Polish agents also provided reports on the German war production, morale, and troop movements. The Polish intelligence network extended beyond Poland and even beyond Europe: for example, the intelligence network organized by Mieczysław Zygfryd Słowikowski in North Africa has been described as &quot;the only [A]llied ... network in North Africa&quot;. The Polish network even had two agents in the German high command itself.

The researchers who produced the first Polish–British in-depth monograph on Home Army intelligence (&quot;Intelligence Co-operation Between Poland and Great Britain During World War II: Report of the Anglo-Polish Historical Committee&quot;, 2005) described contributions of Polish intelligence to the Allied victory as &quot;disproportionally large&quot; and argued that &quot;the work performed by Home Army intelligence undoubtedly supported the Allied armed effort much more effectively than subversive and guerilla activities&quot;.

=== Subversion and propaganda ===
The Home Army also conducted psychological warfare. Its Operation N created the illusion of a German movement opposing Adolf Hitler within Germany itself.

The Home Army published a weekly &quot;Biuletyn Informacyjny&quot; (Information Bulletin), with a top circulation (on 25 November 1943) of 50,000 copies.

===Major operations===
Sabotage was coordinated by the Union of Retaliation and later by &quot;Wachlarz&quot; and &quot;Kedyw&quot; units.

Major Home Army military and sabotage operations included:
* the Zamość Rising of 1942–1943, with the Home Army sabotaging German plans to expel Poles under &quot;Generalplan Ost&quot;
* the protection of the Polish population from the massacres of Poles in Volhynia in 1943–1944
* Operation Garland, in 1942, sabotaging German rail transport
* Operation Belt in 1943, a series of attacks on German border outposts on the frontier between the General Government and the territories annexed by Germany
* Operation Jula, in 1944, another rail-sabotage operation
* most notably Operation Tempest; in 1944, a series of nationwide risings which aimed primarily to seize control of cities and areas where German forces were preparing defenses against the Soviet Red Army, so that Polish underground civil authorities could take power before the arrival of Soviet forces.
The largest and best-known of the Operation Tempest battles, the Warsaw Uprising, constituted an attempt to liberate Poland&#x27;s capital and began on 1 August 1944. Polish forces took control of substantial parts of the city and resisted the German-led forces until 2 October (a total of 63 days). With the Poles receiving no aid from the approaching Red Army, the Germans eventually defeated the insurrectionists and burned the city, quelling the Uprising on 2 October 1944. Other major Home Army city risings included Operation Ostra Brama in Wilno and the Lwów Uprising. The Home Army also prepared for a rising in Kraków but aborted due to various circumstances. While the Home Army managed to liberate a number of places from German control—for example, the Lublin area, where regional structures were able to set up a functioning government—they ultimately failed to secure sufficient territory to enable the government-in-exile to return to Poland due to Soviet hostility.

The Home Army also sabotaged German rail- and road-transports to the Eastern Front in the Soviet Union. Richard J. Crampton estimated that an eighth of all German transports to the Eastern Front were destroyed or substantially delayed due to Home Army operations.

===Assassination of Nazi leaders===
The Polish Resistance carried out dozens of attacks on German commanders in Poland, the largest series being that codenamed &quot;Operation Heads&quot;. Dozens of additional assassinations were carried out, the best-known being:
* Operation Bürkl—Franz Bürkl, &quot;SS-Oberscharführer&quot;, Gestapo officer, and commandant of the Pawiak prison, assassinated 7 September 1943.
* Operation Kutschera—Franz Kutschera, SS-&quot;Brigadeführer&quot; and &quot;Generalmajor&quot; of &quot;Ordnungspolizei&quot;; SS and Police Leader of the Warsaw District, assassinated 1 February 1944.

==Weapons and equipment==
As a clandestine army operating in an enemy-occupied country and separated by over a thousand kilometers from any friendly territory, the Home Army faced unique challenges in acquiring arms and equipment, though it was able to overcome these difficulties to some extent and to field tens of thousands of armed soldiers. Nevertheless, the difficult conditions meant that only infantry forces armed with light weapons could be fielded. Any use of artillery, armor or aircraft was impossible (except for a few instances during the Warsaw Uprising, such as the &quot;Kubuś&quot; armored car). Even these light-infantry units were as a rule armed with a mixture of weapons of various types, usually in quantities sufficient to arm only a fraction of a unit&#x27;s soldiers.

Home Army arms and equipment came mostly from four sources: arms that had been buried by the Polish armies on battlefields after the 1939 invasion of Poland, arms purchased or captured from the Germans and their allies, arms clandestinely manufactured by the Home Army itself, and arms received from Allied air drops. From arms caches hidden in 1939, the Home Army obtained 614 heavy machine guns, 1,193 light machine guns, 33,052 rifles, 6,732 pistols, 28 antitank light field guns, 25 antitank rifles, and 43,154 hand grenades. However, due to their inadequate preservation, which had to be improvised in the chaos of the September Campaign, most of the guns were in poor condition. Of those that had been buried in the ground and had been dug up in 1944 during preparations for Operation Tempest, only 30% were usable.

Arms were sometimes purchased on the black market from German soldiers or their allies, or stolen from German supply depots or transports. Efforts to capture weapons from the Germans also proved highly successful. Raids were conducted on trains carrying equipment to the front, as well as on guardhouses and gendarmerie posts. Sometimes weapons were taken from individual German soldiers accosted in the street. During the Warsaw Uprising, the Home Army even managed to capture several German armored vehicles, most notably a Jagdpanzer 38 Hetzer light tank destroyer renamed and an armored troop transport SdKfz 251 renamed .

Arms were clandestinely manufactured by the Home Army in its own secret workshops, and by Home Army members working in German armaments factories. In this way the Home Army was able to procure submachine guns (copies of British Stens, indigenous &quot;Błyskawicas&quot; and &quot;KIS&quot;), pistols (&quot;Vis&quot;), flamethrowers, explosive devices, road mines, and &quot;Filipinka&quot; and &quot;Sidolówka&quot; hand grenades. Hundreds of people were involved in the manufacturing effort. The Home Army did not produce its own ammunition, but relied on supplies stolen by Polish workers from German-run factories.

The final source of supply was Allied air drops, which was the only way to obtain more exotic, highly useful equipment such as plastic explosives and antitank weapons such as the British PIAT. During the war, 485 air-drop missions from the West (about half of them flown by Polish airmen) delivered some 600 tons of supplies for the Polish resistance. 

Besides equipment, the planes also parachuted in highly qualified instructors (Cichociemni), 316 of whom were inserted into Poland during the war. Allied air drops to the Home Army were infrequent; deliveries from the Western Allies were limited by Joseph Stalin&#x27;s refusal to let their planes land on Soviet territory, the low priority placed by Allied commanders on delivery flights to Poland and the extremely heavy losses sustained by Polish Special Duties Flight personnel. The Western Allies refused to provide significant supplies to the Home Army to avoid antagonizing Stalin. 

In the end, despite all efforts, most Home Army forces had inadequate weaponry. In 1944, when the Home Army was at its peak strength (200,000–600,000, according to various estimates), the Home Army had enough weaponry for only about 32,000 soldiers.&quot; On 1 August 1944, when the Warsaw Uprising began, only a sixth of Home Army fighters in Warsaw were armed.

==Relations with ethnic groups==

===Jews===
Home Army members&#x27; attitudes toward Jews varied widely from unit to unit, and the topic remains controversial. The Home Army answered to the National Council of the Polish government-in-exile, where some Jews served in leadership positions (e.g. Ignacy Schwarzbart and Szmul Zygielbojm), though there were no Jewish representatives in the Government Delegation for Poland. Traditionally, Polish historiography has presented the Home Army interactions with Jews in a positive light, while Jewish historiography has been mostly negative; most Jewish authors attribute the Home Army&#x27;s hostility to endemic antisemitism in Poland. More recent scholarship has presented a mixed, ambivalent view of Home Army–Jewish relations. Both &quot;profoundly disturbing acts of violence as well as extraordinary acts of aid and compassion&quot; have been reported. In an analysis by Joshua D. Zimmerman, postwar testimonies of Holocaust survivors reveal that their experiences with the Home Army were mixed even if predominantly negative. Jews trying to seek refuge from Nazi genocidal policies were often exposed to greater danger by open resistance to German occupation.

Members of the Home Army were named Righteous Among the Nations for risking their lives to save Jews, examples include Jan Karski, Aleksander Kamiński, Stefan Korboński, Henryk Woliński, Jan Żabiński, Władysław Bartoszewski, Mieczysław Fogg, Henryk Iwański, and Jan Dobraczyński. However, Polish historian Ewa Kołomańska noted that many individuals associated with the Home Army, involved in rescuing the Jews, did not receive the Righteous title.

==== Daily operations ====
A Jewish partisan detachment served in the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, and another in . The Home Army provided training and supplies to the Warsaw Ghetto&#x27;s Jewish Combat Organization. It is likely that more Jews fought in the Warsaw Uprising than in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, some fought in both. Thousands of Jews joined, or claimed to join, the Home Army in order to survive in hiding, but Jews serving in the Home Army were the exception rather than the rule. Most Jews in hiding could not pass as ethnic Poles and would have faced deadly consequences if discovered.

In February 1942, the Home Army Operational Command&#x27;s Office of Information and Propaganda set up a Section for Jewish Affairs, directed by Henryk Woliński. This section collected data about the situation of the Jewish population, drafted reports, and sent information to London. It also centralized contacts between Polish and Jewish military organizations. The Home Army also supported the Relief Council for Jews in Poland (&quot;Żegota&quot;) as well as the formation of Jewish resistance organizations.

====Holocaust====
From 1940 onward, the Home Army courier Jan Karski delivered the first eyewitness account of the Holocaust to the Western powers, after having personally visited the Warsaw Ghetto and a Nazi concentration camp. Another crucial role was played by Witold Pilecki, who was the only person to volunteer to be imprisoned at Auschwitz (where he would spend three and a half years) to organize a resistance on the inside and to gather information on the atrocities occurring there to inform the Western Allies about the fate of the Jewish population. Home Army reports from March 1943 described crimes committed by the Germans against the Jewish populace. AK commander General Stefan Rowecki estimated that 640,000 people had been murdered in Auschwitz between 1940 and March 1943, including 66,000 ethnic Poles and 540,000 Jews from various countries (this figure was revised later to 500,000). The Home Army started carrying out death sentences for szmalcowniks in Warsaw in the summer of 1943.

Antony Polonsky observed that &quot;the attitude of the military underground to the genocide is both more complex and more controversial [than its approach towards &quot;szmalcowniks&quot;]. Throughout the period when it was being carried out, the Home Army was preoccupied with preparing for ... [the moment when] Nazi rule in Poland collapsed. It was determined to avoid premature military action and to conserve its strength (and weapons) for the crucial confrontation that, it was assumed, would determine the fate of Poland. ... [However,] to the Home Army, the Jews were not a part of &#x27;our nation&#x27; and ... action to defend them was not to be taken if it endangered [the Home Army&#x27;s] other objectives.&quot; He added that &quot;it is probably unrealistic to have expected the Home Army—which was neither as well armed nor as well organized as its propaganda claimed—to have been able to do much to aid the Jews. The fact remains that its leadership did not want to do so.&quot; Rowecki&#x27;s attitudes shifted in the following months as the brutal reality of the Holocaust became more apparent, and the Polish public support for the Jewish resistance increased. Rowecki was willing to provide Jewish fighters with aid and resources when it contributed to &quot;the greater war effort&quot;, but had concluded that providing large quantities of supplies to the Jewish resistance would be futile. This reasoning was the norm among the Allies, who believed that the Holocaust could only be halted by a significant military action.

====Warsaw Ghetto Uprising====

The Home Army provided the Warsaw Ghetto with firearms, ammunition, and explosives, but only after it was convinced of the eagerness of the Jewish Combat Organization (&quot;Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa&quot;, ŻOB) to fight, and after Władysław Sikorski&#x27;s intervention on the Organization&#x27;s behalf. Zimmerman describes the supplies as &quot;limited but real&quot;. Jewish fighters of the Jewish Military Union (&quot;Żydowski Związek Wojskowy&quot;, ŻZW) received from the Home Army, among other things, 2 heavy machine guns, 4 light machine guns, 21 submachine guns, 30 rifles, 50 pistols, and over 400 grenades. Some supplies were also provided to the ŻOB, but less than to ŻZW with whom the Home Army had closer ties and ideological similarities. Antoni Chruściel, commander of the Home Army in Warsaw, ordered the entire armory of the Wola district transferred to the ghetto. In January 1943 the Home Army delivered a larger shipment of 50 pistols, 50 hand grenades, and several kilograms of explosives, along with a number of smaller shipments that carried a total of 70 pistols, 10 rifles, 2 hand machine guns, 1 light machine gun, ammunition, and over 150 kilograms of explosives. The number of supplies provided to the ghetto resistance has been sometimes described as insufficient, as the Home Army faced a number of dilemmas which forced it to provide no more than limited assistance to the Jewish resistance, such as supply shortages and the inability to arm its own troops, the view (shared by most of the Jewish resistance) that any wide-scale uprising in 1943 would be premature and futile, and the difficulty of coordinating with the internally divided Jewish resistance, coupled with the pro-Soviet attitude of the ŻOB. During the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, Home Army units tried to blow up the Ghetto wall twice, carried out diversionary actions outside the Ghetto walls, and attacked German sentries sporadically near the Ghetto walls. According to Marian Fuks, the Ghetto uprising would not have been possible without supplies from the Polish Home Army.

A year later, during the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, the Zośka Battalion liberated hundreds of Jewish inmates from the Gęsiówka section of the Warsaw concentration camp.

====Attitude to fugitives====

Because it was the largest Polish resistance organization, the Home Army&#x27;s attitude towards Jewish fugitives often determined their fate. According to Antony Polonsky the Home Army saw Jewish fugitives as security risks. At the same time, AK&#x27;s &quot;paper mills&quot; supplied forged identification documents to many Jewish fugitives, enabling them to pass as Poles. Home Army published a leaflet in 1943 stating that &quot;Every Pole is obligated to help those in hiding. Those who refuse them aid will be punished on the basis of...treason to the Polish Nation&quot;. Nevertheless, Jewish historians have asserted that the main cause for the low survival rates of escaping Jews was the antisemitism of the Polish population.

Attitudes towards Jews in the Home Army were mixed. A few AK units actively hunted down Jews, and in particular two district commanders in the northeast of Poland (Władysław Liniarski of Białystok and Janusz Szlaski of Nowogródek) openly and routinely persecuted Jewish partisans and fugitives; however, these were the only two provinces, out of seventeen, where such orders were issued by provincial commanders. The extent of such behaviors in the Home Army overall has been disputed; Tadeusz Piotrowski wrote that the bulk of the Home Army&#x27;s antisemitic behavior can be ascribed to a small minority of members, often affiliated with the far-right National Democracy (ND, or &quot;Endecja&quot;) party, whose National Armed Forces organization was mostly integrated into the Home Army in 1944. Adam Puławski has suggested that some of these incidents are better understood in the context of the Polish–Soviet conflict, as some of the Soviet-affiliated partisan units that AK units attacked or was attacked by had a sizable Jewish presence. In general, AK units in the east were more likely to be hostile towards Jewish partisans, who in turn were more closely associated with the Soviet underground, while AK units in the west were more helpful towards the Jews. The Home Army had a more favorable attitude towards Jewish civilians and was more hesitant or hostile towards independent Jewish partisans, whom it suspected of pro-Soviet sympathies. General Rowecki believed that antisemitic attitudes in eastern Poland were related to Jewish involvement with Soviet partisans. Some AK units were friendly to Jews, and in Hanaczów Home Army officers hid and protected an entire 250-person Jewish community, and supplied a Jewish Home Army platoon. The Home Army leadership punished a number of perpetrators of antisemitic violence in its ranks, in some cases sentencing them to death.

Most of the underground press was sympathetic towards Jews, and the Home Army&#x27;s Bureau of Information and Propaganda was led by operatives who were pro-Jewish and represented the liberal wing of Home Army; however, the bureau&#x27;s anti-communist sub-division, created as a response to communist propaganda, was led by operatives who held strong anti-communist and anti-Jewish views, including the &quot;Żydokomuna&quot; stereotype. The perceived association between Jews and communists was actively reinforced by Operation Antyk, whose initial reports &quot;tended to conflate communists with Jews, dangerously disseminating the notion that Jewish loyalties were to Soviet Russia and communism rather than to Poland&quot;, and which repeated the notion that antisemitism was a &quot;useful tool in the struggle against Soviet Russia&quot;.

===Lithuanians===
Although the Lithuanian and Polish resistance movements had common enemies—Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union—they began working together only in 1944–1945, after the Soviet reoccupation, when both fought the Soviet occupiers. The main obstacle to unity was a long-standing territorial dispute over the Vilnius Region.

The Lithuanian Activist Front (&quot;Lietuvos Aktyvistų Frontas&quot;, or LAF) cooperated with Nazi operations against Poles during the German occupation. In autumn 1943, the Home Army carried retaliatory out operations against the Nazis&#x27; Lithuanian supporters, mainly the Lithuanian &quot;Schutzmannschaft&quot; battalions, the Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, and the Lithuanian Secret Police, killing hundreds of mostly Lithuanian policemen and other collaborators during the first half of 1944. In response, the Lithuanian Sonderkommando, who had already killed hundreds of Polish civilians since 1941 (particularly the Ponary massacre), intensified their operations against the Poles.

In April 1944, the Home Army in the Vilnius Region attempted to open negotiations with Povilas Plechavičius, commander of the Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, and proposed a non-aggression pact and cooperation against Nazi Germany. The Lithuanian side refused and demanded that the Poles either leave the Vilnius region (disputed between Poles and Lithuanians) or subordinate themselves to the Lithuanians&#x27; struggle against the Soviets. In the May 1944 Battle of Murowana Oszmianka, the Home Army dealt a substantial blow to the Nazi-sponsored Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, which resulted in a low-level civil war between anti-Nazi Poles and pro-Nazi Lithuanians that was encouraged by the German authorities; it culminated in the June 1944 massacres of Polish and Lithuanian civilians in the villages of Glitiškės (Glinciszki) and Dubingiai (Dubinki) respectively.

Postwar assessments of the Home Army&#x27;s activities in Lithuania have been controversial. In 1993, the Home Army&#x27;s activities there were investigated by a special Lithuanian government commission. Only in recent years have Polish and Lithuanian historians been able to approach consensus, though still differing in their interpretations of many events.

===Ukrainians===
In the Southeastern part of occupied Polish territories, there have been long-standing tensions between the Polish and Ukrainian populations. Poland&#x27;s plans to restore its prewar borders were opposed by the Ukrainians, and some Ukrainian groups&#x27; collaboration with Nazi Germany had discredited their partisans as potential Polish allies. While the Polish government-in-exile considered tentative plans about providing a limited autonomy for Ukrainians, in 1942 the staff of the Home Army of Lviv recommended deporting 1–1.5 million Ukrainians to the Soviet Union and settling the remainder in other parts of Poland once the war ended. The situation escalated the next year when the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (Українська повстанська армія, &quot;Ukrayins&#x27;ka Povstans&#x27;ka Armiya&quot;, UPA), a Ukrainian nationalist force and the military arm of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (Організація Українських Націоналістів, &quot;Orhanizatsiya Ukrayins&#x27;kykh Natsionalistiv&quot;, OUN), directed most of its attacks against Poles and Jews. Stepan Bandera, one of UPA&#x27;s leaders, and his followers concluded that the war would end in the exhaustion of both Germany and the Soviet Union, leaving only the Poles—who laid claim to East Galicia (viewed by the Ukrainians as western Ukraine, and by the Poles as &quot;Kresy&quot;)—as a significant force, and therefore the Poles had to be weakened before the war&#x27;s end.

The OUN decided to attack Polish civilians, who constituted about a third of the population of the disputed territories. It equated Ukrainian independence with ethnic homogeneity, which meant the Polish presence had to be completely removed. By February 1943 the OUN began a deliberate campaign of killing Polish civilians. In massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia, beginning in the spring of 1943, 100,000 Poles were killed. OUN forces targeted Polish villages, which prompted the formation of Polish self-defense units (e.g., the Przebraże Defence) and fights between the Home Army and the OUN. The Germans encouraged both sides against each other; Erich Koch said: &quot;We have to do everything possible so that a Pole, when meeting a Ukrainian, will be ready to kill him, and conversely, a Ukrainian will be ready to kill the Pole.&quot; A German commissioner from Sarny, when local Poles complained about massacres, answered: &quot;You want Sikorski, the Ukrainians want Bandera. Fight each other.&quot; On 10 July 1943, Zygmunt Rumel was sent to talk with local Ukrainians with the goal of ending the massacres; the mission was unsuccessful, and the Banderites killed the Polish delegation. On 20 July that year the Home Army command decided to establish partisan units in Volhynia. Several formations were created, most notably, in January 1944, the 27th Home Army Infantry Division. Between January and March 1944, the division fought 16 major battles with the UPA, expanding its operational base and securing Polish forces against the main attack. One of the largest battles between the Home Army and the UPA took place in , where local self-defence forces managed to fend off two attacks. In March 1944 the Home Army also carried out reprisal attack against UPA in the village of Sahryń, remembered as &quot;Sahryń massacre&quot;, ended in ethnic cleansing operations in which about 700 Ukrainian civilians were killed.

The Polish government-in-exile in London was taken by surprise; it did not expect Ukrainian anti-Polish actions of such magnitude. There is no evidence that the Polish government-in-exile contemplated a general policy of revenge against the Ukrainians, but local Poles, including Home Army commanders, engaged in retaliatory actions. Polish partisans attacked the OUN, assassinated Ukrainian commanders, and carried out operations against Ukrainian villages. Retaliatory operations aimed at intimidating the Ukrainian population contributed to increased support for the UPA. The Home Army command tried to limit operations against Ukrainian civilians to a minimum. According to Grzegorz Motyka, the Polish operations resulted in 10,000 to 15,000 Ukrainian deaths in 1943–47, including 8,000-10,000 on territory of post-war Poland. From February to April 1945, mainly in &quot;Rzeszowszczyzna&quot; (the Rzeszów area), Polish units (including affiliates of the Home Army) carried out retaliatory attacks in which about 3,000 Ukrainians were killed; one of the most infamous ones is known as the Pawłokoma massacre.

By mid-1944, most of the disputed regions were occupied by the Soviet Red Army. Polish partisans disbanded or went underground, as did most Ukrainian partisans. Both the Poles and the Ukrainians would increasingly concentrate on the Soviets as their primary enemy – and both would ultimately fail.

==Relations with the Soviet Union==
Home Army relations with the Soviet Red Army grew worse as the war progressed. The Soviet Union invaded Poland on 17 September 1939 after the German invasion that began on 1 September 1939; even though the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the Soviets saw Polish partisans loyal to the Polish government-in-exile more as a potential obstacle to Soviet plans to control postwar Poland than as a potential ally. On orders from the Soviet &quot;Stavka&quot; (high command) issued on 22 June 1943, Soviet partisans engaged Polish partisans in combat; it has also been claimed that they attacked the Poles more frequently than the Germans.

In late 1943 the actions of Soviet partisans, who had been ordered to destroy Home Army forces, even resulted in limited uneasy cooperation between some Home Army units and German forces. While the Home Army still treated the Germans as the enemy and conducted operations against them, some Polish units in the Nowogródek and Wilno areas accepted them when the Germans offered arms and supplies to the Home Army to be used against the Soviet partisans. However, such arrangements were purely tactical and indicated no ideological collaboration, as demonstrated by France&#x27;s Vichy regime or Norway&#x27;s Quisling regime. The Poles&#x27; main motive was to acquire intelligence on the Germans and to obtain much-needed equipment. There were no known joint Polish–German operations, and the Germans were unsuccessful in recruiting the Poles to fight exclusively against the Soviet partisans. Furthermore, most cooperative efforts between local Home Army commanders and the Germans were condemned by Home Army headquarters.

With the Eastern Front entering Polish territories in 1944, the Home Army established an uneasy truce with the Soviets. Even so, the main Red Army and NKVD forces conducted operations against Home Army partisans, including during or directly after Poland&#x27;s Operation Tempest, which the Poles had envisioned to be a joint Polish–Soviet operation against the retreating Germans which would also establish Polish claims to those territories. The Home Army helped Soviet units with scouting assistance, uprisings, and assistance in liberating some cities (e.g., Operation Ostra Brama in Vilnius, and the Lwów Uprising), only to find that Home Army troops were arrested, imprisoned, or executed immediately afterwards. 

Long after the war, Soviet forces continued engaging many Home Army soldiers, who received the moniker of &quot;cursed soldiers&quot;.

==Postwar==

The Home Army was officially disbanded on 19 January 1945 to avoid civil war and armed conflict with the Soviets. However, many former Home Army units decided to continue operations. The Soviet Union, and the Polish communist government that it controlled, viewed the underground, still loyal to the Polish government-in-exile, as a force to be extirpated before they could gain complete control of Poland. Future Secretary General of the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party, Władysław Gomułka, is quoted as saying: &quot;Soldiers of the AK are a hostile element which must be removed without mercy.&quot; Another prominent Polish communist, Roman Zambrowski, said that the Home Army had to be &quot;exterminated.&quot;

The first Home Army structure designed primarily to deal with the Soviet threat had been NIE, formed in mid-1943. Its aim was not to engage Soviet forces in combat, but to observe them and to gather intelligence while the Polish Government-in-Exile decided how to deal with the Soviets; at that time, the exiled government still believed in the possibility of constructive negotiations with the Soviets. On 7 May 1945 NIE was disbanded and transformed into the Armed Forces Delegation for Poland (&quot;Delegatura Sił Zbrojnych na Kraj&quot;), but it was disbanded on 8 August 1945 to stop partisan resistance.

The first Polish communist government formed in July 1944—the Polish Committee of National Liberation—declined to accept jurisdiction over Home Army soldiers; as a result, for over a year Soviet agencies such as the NKVD took responsibility for disarming the Home Army. By the end of the war, around 60,000 Home Army soldiers were arrested, 50,000 of whom were deported to Soviet gulags and prisons; most of these soldiers had been taken captive by the Soviets during or after Operation Tempest when many Home Army units tried to work together with the Soviets in a nationwide uprising against the Germans. Other Home Army veterans were arrested when they approached Polish communist government officials after having been promised amnesty. Home Army soldiers stopped trusting the government after a number of broken promises in the first few years of communist control.

The third post-Home Army organization was Freedom and Independence (&quot;Wolność i Niezawisłość&quot;, WiN). Its primary goal was not fighting; rather, it was designed to help Home Army soldiers transition from partisan to civilian life; while secrecy was necessary in light of increasing persecution of Home Army veterans by the communist government. WiN was in great need of funds to pay for false documents and provide resources for the partisans, many of whom had lost their homes and life savings in the war. WiN was far from efficient: it was viewed as an enemy of the state, starved of resources, and a vocal faction advocated armed resistance against the Soviets and their Polish proxies. In the second half of 1945, the Soviet NKVD and the newly created Polish secret police, the Department of Security (&quot;Urząd Bezpieczeństwa&quot;, UB), managed to convince several Home Army and WiN leaders that they wanted to offer amnesty to Home Army members, and gained information about large numbers of Home Army and WiN people and resources in the following months. By the time the (imprisoned) Home Army and WiN leaders realised their mistake, the organizations had been crippled, with thousands of their members arrested. WiN was finally disbanded in 1952. By 1947 a colonel of the communist forces declared that &quot;The terrorist and political underground [had] ceased to be a threatening force, though there [were] still men of the forests&quot; to be dealt with.
The persecution of the Home Army was only part of the Stalinist repressions in Poland. In 1944–56, approximately 2 million people were arrested; over 20,000, including Pilecki, organizer of the resistance in Auschwitz, were executed in communist prisons, and 6 million Polish citizens (every third adult Pole) were classified as &quot;reactionary&quot; or &quot;criminal elements&quot;, and were subjected to spying by state agencies.

Most Home Army soldiers were captured by the NKVD or by Poland&#x27;s UB political police. They were interrogated and imprisoned on various charges such as &quot;fascism&quot;. Many were sent to Gulags, executed, or &quot;disappeared&quot;. For example, all the members of &quot;Batalion Zośka&quot;, which had fought in the Warsaw Uprising, were locked up in communist prisons between 1944 and 1956. In 1956 an amnesty released 35,000 former Home Army soldiers from prisons.

Even then, some partisans remained in the countryside, and were unwilling or unable to rejoin the community; they became known as the cursed soldiers. Stanisław Marchewka &quot;Ryba&quot; was killed in 1957, and the last AK partisan, Józef &quot;Lalek&quot; Franczak, was killed in 1963 – almost two decades after World War II had ended. It was only four years later, in 1967, that Adam Boryczka—a soldier of AK and a member of the elite, Britain-trained Cichociemny (&quot;Silent Unseen&quot;) intelligence and support group—was released from prison. Until the end of the People&#x27;s Republic of Poland, Home Army soldiers remained under investigation by the secret police, and it was only in 1989, after the fall of communism, that the sentences of Home Army soldiers were finally declared null and void by Polish courts.

Many monuments to the Home Army have since been erected in Poland, including the Polish Underground State and Home Army Monument near the Sejm building in Warsaw, unveiled in 1999. The Home Army is also commemorated in the Home Army Museum in Kraków and in the Warsaw Uprising Museum in Warsaw.

==See also==
* Gray Ranks
* Polish contribution to World War II
* Polish resistance movement in World War II
* Western betrayal

==Notes==
==References==
;Notes
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Armia Krajowa Museum in Krakow
* Polish resistance – AK – Site edited by the London Branch of the Polish Home Army Ex-Servicemen Association
* Warsaw Uprising Museum
* Archiwum Pomorskie Armii Krajowej
* The Home Army After July 1944 Polish Underground Soldiers 1944–1963 – The Untold Story</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="4" end="13" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="31" end="33" title="Home Army" label="AK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="52" end="71" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="75" end="97" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="German-occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="105" end="117" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980039" start="178" end="200" title="Związek Walki Zbrojnej" label="Związek Walki Zbrojnej"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="369" end="385" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="436" end="462" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="540" end="564" title="Polish Underground State" label="Polish Underground State"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="765" end="771" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="776" end="784" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="918" end="931" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="1102" end="1119" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="1196" end="1211" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="1289" end="1299" title="Ethnic violence" label="atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="1343" end="1356" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q93637" start="1418" end="1441" title="Polish–Soviet relations" label="Polish–Soviet relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154266" start="1677" end="1686" title="Communism in Poland" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="1819" end="1827" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="2110" end="2115" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="2227" end="2244" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="fall of communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980459" start="2416" end="2449" title="Service for Poland&amp;#x27;s Victory" label="Service for Poland&amp;#x27;s Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983839" start="2504" end="2534" title="Michał Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski" label="Michał Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2588" end="2594" title="German invasion of Poland" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="2599" end="2625" title="Soviet invasion of Poland (1939)" label="Soviet invasions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="2708" end="2726" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Władysław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980039" start="2788" end="2804" title="Union for Armed Struggle" label="Armed Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="3202" end="3228" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376710" start="3271" end="3303" title="Government Delegation for Poland" label="Government Delegation for Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="4123" end="4171" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Germany started its invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4217" end="4223" title="Allies in World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763686" start="4239" end="4261" title="Anglo-Soviet Agreement" label="Anglo-Soviet Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757717" start="4414" end="4437" title="Sikorski–Mayski Agreement" label="Polish–Soviet agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="4572" end="4586" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="4946" end="4954" title="partisan (military)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="4998" end="5007" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="5057" end="5075" title="Collaboration during World War II" label="Nazi collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="5080" end="5087" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84946" start="5242" end="5249" title="Igo Sym" label="Igo Sym"/>
<link wikidata="Q78658" start="5261" end="5276" title="Franz Kutschera" label="Franz Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="5542" end="5559" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q51582369" start="6328" end="6338" title="podchorąży" label="podchorąży"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="6357" end="6381" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="6547" end="6560" title="Silent Unseen" label="Silent Unseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="7687" end="7704" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q569284" start="8628" end="8649" title="Narodowe Siły Zbrojne" label="Narodowe Siły Zbrojne"/>
<link wikidata="Q632757" start="8976" end="8988" title="Armia Ludowa" label="Armia Ludowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q293035" start="9339" end="9355" title="Elżbieta Zawacka" label="Elżbieta Zawacka"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="9427" end="9438" title="Cichociemna" label="Cichociemna"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="9499" end="9506" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371645" start="9525" end="9539" title="Emilia Malessa" label="Emilia Malessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941836" start="9818" end="9829" title="Wanda Gertz" label="Wanda Gertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="9872" end="9879" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="9927" end="9942" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998385" start="10836" end="10872" title="Bureau of Information and Propaganda" label="Bureau of Information and Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814096" start="11021" end="11026" title="Kedyw" label="Kedyw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739047" start="11147" end="11184" title="Directorate of Underground Resistance" label="Directorate of Underground Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="11249" end="11265" title="chain of command" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494073" start="11300" end="11337" title="General Inspector of the Armed Forces" label="General Inspector of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q683515" start="11544" end="11558" title="Stefan Rowecki" label="Stefan Rowecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723346" start="11566" end="11579" title="nom de guerre" label="nom de guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170356" start="11628" end="11650" title="Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski" label="Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q569390" start="11852" end="11868" title="Leopold Okulicki" label="Leopold Okulicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q150093" start="12512" end="12523" title="voivodeships of Poland" label="voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6320836" start="12529" end="12578" title="Administrative division of Second Polish Republic" label="Administrative division of Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="12614" end="12620" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="12822" end="12831" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="12836" end="12842" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="12918" end="12922" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="12997" end="13006" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702639" start="13327" end="13344" title="operational group" label="operational group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="13417" end="13429" title="Intelligence (information gathering)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098380" start="13488" end="13511" title="British secret services" label="British secret services"/>
<link wikidata="Q105184584" start="14381" end="14407" title="German concentration camps" label="German concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587808" start="14412" end="14435" title="the Holocaust in Poland" label="the Holocaust in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18433725" start="14447" end="14464" title="Karski&amp;#x27;s reports" label="the first reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905627" start="14555" end="14589" title="Home Army and V1 and V2" label="the V-1 flying bomb and V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249006" start="14598" end="14613" title="Project Big Ben" label="Project Big Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097306" start="14623" end="14645" title="Operation Most III" label="Operation Wildhorn III"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="14654" end="14663" title="cryptonym" label="cryptonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="14753" end="14759" title="Douglas Dakota" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="14770" end="14778" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="14780" end="14785" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776172" start="14890" end="14903" title="Antoni Kocjan" label="Antoni Kocjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="14918" end="14928" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q490398" start="14945" end="14955" title="Peenemünde" label="Peenemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="16100" end="16121" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097311" start="16127" end="16138" title="Operation N" label="Operation N"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="16190" end="16202" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035142" start="16266" end="16287" title="Biuletyn Informacyjny" label="Biuletyn Informacyjny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886700" start="16437" end="16457" title="Union of Retaliation" label="Union of Retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347209" start="16477" end="16485" title="Wachlarz" label="Wachlarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814096" start="16502" end="16507" title="Kedyw" label="Kedyw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065947" start="16587" end="16600" title="Zamość Uprising" label="Zamość Rising"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16661" end="16672" title="Expulsion of Poles by Germany#Zamość" label="expel Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="16685" end="16700" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="16758" end="16788" title="massacres of Poles in Volhynia" label="massacres of Poles in Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q930856" start="16804" end="16821" title="Operation Wieniec" label="Operation Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096810" start="16867" end="16881" title="Operation Belt" label="Operation Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="16965" end="16983" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="17097" end="17114" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q719515" start="17909" end="17930" title="Operation Ostra Brama" label="Operation Ostra Brama"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="17934" end="17939" title="Wilno" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q718839" start="17948" end="17961" title="Lwów Uprising" label="Lwów Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435966" start="17997" end="18013" title="Kraków Uprising (1944)" label="rising in Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="18152" end="18158" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="18389" end="18397" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="18439" end="18452" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q63258289" start="18474" end="18493" title="Richard J. Crampton" label="Richard J. Crampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808499" start="18767" end="18773" title="serial assassinations" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097128" start="18801" end="18816" title="Operation Heads" label="Operation Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q18420947" start="18902" end="18917" title="Operation Bürkl" label="Operation Bürkl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18420947" start="18918" end="18929" title="Franz Bürkl" label="Franz Bürkl"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="18937" end="18939" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q310732" start="18940" end="18955" title="Oberscharführer" label="Oberscharführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="18963" end="18970" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q116366" start="19002" end="19008" title="Pawiak" label="Pawiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097219" start="19050" end="19069" title="Operation Kutschera" label="Operation Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q78658" start="19070" end="19085" title="Franz Kutschera" label="Franz Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q155435" start="19096" end="19109" title="Brigadeführer" label="Brigadeführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009153" start="19126" end="19138" title="Generalmajor" label="Generalmajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160552" start="19154" end="19169" title="Ordnungspolizei" label="Ordnungspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q655130" start="19177" end="19197" title="SS and Police Leader" label="SS and Police Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190919" start="19842" end="19847" title="Kubuś" label="Kubuś"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="19854" end="19865" title="armored car (military)" label="armored car"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="20187" end="20205" title="Invasion of Poland (1939)" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="20909" end="20921" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="21180" end="21191" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q156662" start="21398" end="21418" title="Jagdpanzer 38 Hetzer" label="Jagdpanzer 38 Hetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157467" start="21479" end="21488" title="SdKfz 251" label="SdKfz 251"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="21693" end="21707" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="21728" end="21732" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022095" start="21752" end="21762" title="Błyskawica submachine gun" label="Błyskawica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354120" start="21780" end="21783" title="KIS (weapon)" label="KIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066686" start="21807" end="21810" title="Vis (weapon)" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448581" start="21875" end="21884" title="Filipinka" label="Filipinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509462" start="21901" end="21910" title="Sidolówka" label="Sidolówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="21917" end="21929" title="hand grenade" label="hand grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040277" start="22158" end="22166" title="air drop" label="air drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="22247" end="22265" title="plastic explosives" label="plastic explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q326166" start="22307" end="22311" title="PIAT" label="PIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="22553" end="22564" title="Cichociemni" label="Cichociemni"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="22723" end="22736" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="23348" end="23363" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="23515" end="23519" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711337" start="23725" end="23743" title="Ignacy Schwarzbart" label="Ignacy Schwarzbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q573928" start="23748" end="23764" title="Szmul Zygielbojm" label="Szmul Zygielbojm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131583545" start="24087" end="24109" title="antisemitism in Poland" label="antisemitism in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867497" start="24351" end="24370" title="Joshua D. Zimmerman" label="Joshua D. Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112197" start="24678" end="24705" title="Righteous Among the Nations" label="Righteous Among the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212523" start="24761" end="24771" title="Jan Karski" label="Jan Karski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274205" start="24773" end="24792" title="Aleksander Kamiński" label="Aleksander Kamiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848163" start="24794" end="24810" title="Stefan Korboński" label="Stefan Korboński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814090" start="24812" end="24827" title="Henryk Woliński" label="Henryk Woliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q286789" start="24829" end="24841" title="Jan Żabiński" label="Jan Żabiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q381185" start="24843" end="24865" title="Władysław Bartoszewski" label="Władysław Bartoszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q652292" start="24867" end="24882" title="Mieczysław Fogg" label="Mieczysław Fogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743159" start="24884" end="24898" title="Henryk Iwański" label="Henryk Iwański"/>
<link wikidata="Q555570" start="24904" end="24920" title="Jan Dobraczyński" label="Jan Dobraczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="25166" end="25181" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="25252" end="25265" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q266706" start="25273" end="25299" title="Jewish Combat Organization" label="Jewish Combat Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814090" start="25835" end="25850" title="Henryk Woliński" label="Henryk Woliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q393064" start="26087" end="26120" title="Żegota" label="Relief Council for Jews in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420127" start="26170" end="26201" title="Jewish resistance under Nazi rule" label="Jewish resistance organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212523" start="26262" end="26272" title="Jan Karski" label="Jan Karski"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="26388" end="26401" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q315691" start="26468" end="26482" title="Witold Pilecki" label="Witold Pilecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="26541" end="26550" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="26731" end="26764" title="The Holocaust" label="the fate of the Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q439044" start="27166" end="27177" title="szmalcownik" label="szmalcownik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777243" start="27213" end="27228" title="Antony Polonsky" label="Antony Polonsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q439044" start="27383" end="27394" title="szmalcownik" label="szmalcownik"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="28667" end="28673" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="28822" end="28835" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q266706" start="28935" end="28961" title="Jewish Combat Organization" label="Jewish Combat Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="29029" end="29047" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Władysław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q707503" start="29192" end="29213" title="Jewish Military Union" label="Jewish Military Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q540399" start="29554" end="29570" title="Antoni Chruściel" label="Antoni Chruściel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020136" start="29643" end="29647" title="Wola (Warsaw)" label="Wola"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769389" start="30773" end="30784" title="Marian Fuks (historian)" label="Marian Fuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q646249" start="30931" end="30946" title="Batalion Zośka" label="Zośka Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q116761" start="30993" end="31001" title="Gęsiówka" label="Gęsiówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q692676" start="31017" end="31042" title="Warsaw concentration camp" label="Warsaw concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656872" start="31363" end="31394" title="Identity document forgery" label="forged identification documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="31774" end="31786" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642112" start="32300" end="32318" title="Tadeusz Piotrowski (sociologist)" label="Tadeusz Piotrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="32468" end="32486" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q569284" start="32529" end="32550" title="National Armed Forces" label="National Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q60832258" start="32614" end="32627" title="Adam Puławski" label="Adam Puławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571784" start="32754" end="32786" title="Soviet partisans in Poland" label="Soviet-affiliated partisan units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086879" start="34113" end="34123" title="Żydokomuna" label="Żydokomuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096761" start="34223" end="34238" title="Operation Antyk" label="Operation Antyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315621" start="34582" end="34592" title="Resistance in Lithuania during World War II" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q561394" start="34892" end="34917" title="Lithuanian Activist Front" label="Lithuanian Activist Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q653339" start="35183" end="35199" title="Schutzmannschaft" label="Schutzmannschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079153" start="35222" end="35258" title="Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force" label="Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370227" start="35268" end="35292" title="Lithuanian Secret Police" label="Lithuanian Secret Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619096" start="35414" end="35439" title="Ypatingasis būrys" label="Lithuanian Sonderkommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005090" start="35522" end="35537" title="Ponary massacre" label="Ponary massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376632" start="35676" end="35696" title="Povilas Plechavičius" label="Povilas Plechavičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079153" start="35715" end="35751" title="Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force" label="Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871829" start="36052" end="36080" title="Battle of Murowana Oszmianka" label="Battle of Murowana Oszmianka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079153" start="36143" end="36179" title="Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force" label="Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406819" start="36412" end="36421" title="Glinciszki massacre" label="Glitiškės"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310753" start="36439" end="36448" title="Dubingiai massacre" label="Dubingiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="37354" end="37358" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="37545" end="37569" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="37719" end="37757" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q157280" start="37918" end="37932" title="Stepan Bandera" label="Stepan Bandera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573883" start="38109" end="38121" title="East Galicia" label="East Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729457" start="38151" end="38166" title="western Ukraine" label="western Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="38194" end="38199" title="Kresy" label="Kresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="38629" end="38659" title="massacres of Poles in Volhynia" label="massacres of Poles in Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065606" start="38847" end="38864" title="Przebraże Defence" label="Przebraże Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q60353" start="38966" end="38976" title="Erich Koch" label="Erich Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q997512" start="39185" end="39190" title="Sarny" label="Sarny"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="39262" end="39270" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075810" start="39342" end="39355" title="Zygmunt Rumel" label="Zygmunt Rumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077250" start="39472" end="39482" title="Banderites" label="Banderites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632612" start="39673" end="39705" title="27th Home Army Infantry Division (Poland)" label="27th Home Army Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105410" start="40106" end="40112" title="Sahryń" label="Sahryń"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392487" start="40134" end="40149" title="Sahryń massacre" label="Sahryń massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612537" start="40925" end="40940" title="Grzegorz Motyka" label="Grzegorz Motyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q598" start="41150" end="41157" title="Rzeszów" label="Rzeszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966827" start="41341" end="41359" title="Pawłokoma massacre" label="Pawłokoma massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="41733" end="41741" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="41780" end="41807" title="Soviet invasion of Poland (1939)" label="Soviet Union invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="41839" end="41854" title="Invasion of Poland (1939)" label="German invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="41903" end="41935" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Germans invaded the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="41966" end="41982" title="Polish Underground State" label="Polish partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q540951" start="42152" end="42158" title="Stavka" label="Stavka"/>
<link wikidata="Q278743" start="42657" end="42667" title="Nowogródek" label="Nowogródek"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="42672" end="42677" title="Wilno" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="42924" end="42936" title="Vichy regime" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616953" start="42954" end="42969" title="Quisling regime" label="Quisling regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="43381" end="43394" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="43510" end="43518" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="43523" end="43527" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="43634" end="43651" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q719515" start="43935" end="43956" title="Operation Ostra Brama" label="Operation Ostra Brama"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="43960" end="43967" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q718839" start="43977" end="43990" title="Lwów Uprising" label="Lwów Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44093" end="44111" title="#Postwar" label="Long after the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320177" start="44205" end="44220" title="cursed soldiers" label="cursed soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q674419" start="44451" end="44478" title="Provisional Government of National Unity" label="Polish communist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501749" start="44656" end="44673" title="Secretary General" label="Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="44681" end="44714" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="44716" end="44733" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362260" start="44882" end="44898" title="Roman Zambrowski" label="Roman Zambrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954298" start="45050" end="45053" title="NIE (resistance)" label="NIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792983" start="45422" end="45456" title="Armed Forces Delegation for Poland" label="Armed Forces Delegation for Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40147" start="45635" end="45674" title="Polish Committee of National Liberation" label="Polish Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="45761" end="45767" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="45789" end="45793" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="45953" end="45958" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="46050" end="46067" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="46305" end="46312" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613305" start="46487" end="46511" title="Freedom and Independence" label="Freedom and Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="47182" end="47186" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432024" start="47235" end="47257" title="Urząd Bezpieczeństwa" label="Department of Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="47378" end="47385" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="47976" end="47985" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="48130" end="48139" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="48403" end="48407" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="48553" end="48558" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="48683" end="48698" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137942" start="49069" end="49101" title="Józef Franczak" label="Józef &amp;quot;Lalek&amp;quot; Franczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q681276" start="49217" end="49230" title="Adam Boryczka" label="Adam Boryczka"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="49290" end="49301" title="Cichociemny" label="Cichociemny"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="49408" end="49440" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="49547" end="49564" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="fall of communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="49800" end="49804" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793410" start="49885" end="49911" title="Armia Krajowa Museum in Kraków" label="Home Army Museum in Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q574328" start="49923" end="49945" title="Warsaw Uprising Museum" label="Warsaw Uprising Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q218893" start="49973" end="49983" title="Gray Ranks" label="Gray Ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667608" start="49986" end="50021" title="Polish contribution to World War II" label="Polish contribution to World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="50024" end="50066" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance movement in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q954443" start="50069" end="50085" title="Western betrayal" label="Western betrayal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66234" wikidata="Q1626012" url="?curid=66234" title="Homer E. Capehart">
<text>Homer Earl Capehart (June 6, 1897 – September 3, 1979) was an American businessman and politician from Indiana. After serving in the United States Army during World War I, he became involved in the manufacture of record players and other products. Capehart later served 18 years in the U.S. Senate as a Republican from Indiana. Initially an isolationist on foreign policy, he took a more internationalist stance in later years; he retired after a narrow defeat for a fourth term in 1962.

==Early life==
Capehart was born in Algiers, Indiana, in Pike County, the son of Susan (Kelso) and Alvin T. Capehart, a tenant farmer. During he enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1917, served in the infantry and supply corps, and was discharged as a sergeant in 1919.

==Business career==
Capehart attained fame as the father of the jukebox industry. He worked for the company Holcomb and Hoke, which made record players and popcorn machines, until 1928. He started his own company in 1928, and was forced out of the company by investors in 1931. The company was taken over as one of the divisions in the Philo Farnsworth&#x27;s Farnsworth Television and Radio Company in 1939. In 1932, Capehart formed a new company called Packard. Packard developed the Simplex mechanism for automatic record changing, and sold the device to Wurlitzer. The entire company was eventually bought by Wurlitzer.

==Political career==
Capehart&#x27;s career in the music industry made him wealthy and provided a path to the national political stage. Being the center-point for a Republican Party revolution in Indiana and the Midwest, mainly by sponsoring a huge &quot;Cornfield-Conference&quot; on one of his farms in 1938. Capehart was first elected to the U.S. Senate in 1944, narrowly defeating Henry Schricker, going on to win subsequent victories in 1950 against Alexander M. Campbell and in 1956 against Claude R. Wickard. When first elected to the Senate at the height of World War II, Capehart supported efforts to compromise with the Japanese on terms of surrender in the summer of 1945 when minority leader Wallace H. White, Jr. stated that the war might end sooner if President Truman would state specifically in the upper chamber just what unconditional surrender meant for the Japanese. After 1945, Capehart was critical of the Truman administration and the military for their postwar policies in Germany, accusing Truman and General Dwight D. Eisenhower of a conspiracy to starve the remains of the German nation.

Throughout the 1950s, Capehart was constantly at odds with his Senate colleague William E. Jenner, a staunch isolationist Republican who consistently opposed President Eisenhower&#x27;s &quot;modern-Republicanism.&quot; Capehart, although an isolationist himself during his first term in the Senate, became increasingly more internationalist during his later years in the Senate and this eventually led to the split with Jenner.

By 1959, Jenner had retired and Democrat Vance Hartke had taken his place. Capehart was extremely critical of President Kennedy and his New Frontier programs, such as Medicare and the Peace Corps. In 1962, Capehart attained his greatest popularity and what would ultimately become his lasting legacy as one of the key figures in the Cuban Missile Crisis by calling for a &quot;crack-down on Cuba&quot; and warning of a missile build-up on the island. Kennedy, before receiving the famous spy-plane photos, thought Capehart was &quot;inventing an issue.&quot; This was not the case and Capehart, although not appreciated at the time, has come to be seen in a more positive light because of his early and aggressive stances on Cuba.

Capehart also backed, with Senator Kenneth Wherry of Nebraska, legislation for building military family housing in the post-World War II era, when there were critical shortages of such housing. His support of public housing for veterans was part of his support of a strong defense, which he considered a legitimate use of public money. However, he opposed social welfare programs to give away houses to the poor at public expense as unconstitutional. In 1955, the U.S. Senate initiated a groundbreaking bill which authorized the construction of 540,000 public housing units over four years. Capehart, believing the bill was socialistic in nature, and lacking enough support to kill it, introduced an amendment which would have reduced the authorization to 35,000 units. Although Capehart thought he had enough votes to pass his amendment (even going so far as to tell majority leader Lyndon Johnson on the morning of the vote, &quot;this time I&#x27;m going to rub your nose in shit&quot;), his amendment was defeated by last-minute maneuvering engineered by Johnson. Capehart voted in favor of the Senate amendment to the Civil Rights Act of 1957 on August 7, 1957, but did not vote on the House amendment to the bill on August 29, 1957. Capehart voted in favor of the Civil Rights Act of 1960, but did not vote on the 24th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

Capehart was also an advocate of clean air legislation, and briefly served on the United States Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management with Kennedy, Barry Goldwater, and Karl Mundt.

==Later life==
In the 1962 election, Capehart was narrowly defeated by 34-year-old Birch Bayh. He retired to his farming and business interests in Indiana, occasionally returning to Washington to provide both foreign policy and domestic-issue advice; jaded by the Watergate scandal, he became increasingly critical of President Richard Nixon.

Capehart died at age 82 at St. Vincent Hospital in Indianapolis in 1979 and is buried at its Crown Hill Cemetery.

He is honored (along with Indiana Senator Sherman Minton) in the Minton-Capehart Federal Building near the Indiana World War Memorial Plaza in downtown Indianapolis. His name is also memorialized in the Capehart Room in the Old Dorm Block of Reed College, which once contained a record player that Capehart had donated to the college.

Both his son Thomas C. Capehart and daughter-in-law were killed aboard Avianca Flight 671 on January 21, 1960.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* US Senate biography
* Jukeboxes made by Sen. Capehart&#x27;s Packard Company
* 
* Indiana History – Homer Capehart papers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1626012" start="0" end="19" title="Homer E. Capehart" label="Homer Earl Capehart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="103" end="110" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="133" end="151" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="159" end="170" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="286" end="297" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="303" end="313" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348030" start="482" end="486" title="United States Senate elections, 1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q16800436" start="525" end="541" title="Algiers, Indiana" label="Algiers, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q512885" start="546" end="557" title="Pike County, Indiana" label="Pike County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="609" end="622" title="Tenant farmer#United States" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="683" end="691" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269323" start="696" end="708" title="Quartermaster Corps (United States Army)" label="supply corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="734" end="742" title="Sergeant#United States" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="817" end="824" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q360098" start="1089" end="1105" title="Philo Farnsworth" label="Philo Farnsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078587" start="1311" end="1320" title="Wurlitzer" label="Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1543" end="1559" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348193" start="1738" end="1742" title="United States Senate elections, 1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q658987" start="1763" end="1778" title="Henry Schricker" label="Henry Schricker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347725" start="1820" end="1824" title="United States Senate elections, 1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919788" start="1833" end="1854" title="Alexander M. Campbell" label="Alexander M. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347730" start="1862" end="1866" title="United States Senate elections, 1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q373253" start="1875" end="1892" title="Claude R. Wickard" label="Claude R. Wickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1944" end="1956" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2008" end="2013" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="2066" end="2081" title="United States Senate Minority Leader" label="minority leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q442200" start="2082" end="2103" title="Wallace H. White, Jr." label="Wallace H. White, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2144" end="2153" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="2154" end="2160" title="Harry Truman" label="Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2375" end="2382" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2412" end="2432" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578579" start="2574" end="2591" title="William E. Jenner" label="William E. Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q958399" start="2965" end="2977" title="Vance Hartke" label="Vance Hartke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3044" end="3051" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439991" start="3060" end="3072" title="New Frontier" label="New Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="3091" end="3099" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="3108" end="3119" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="3257" end="3277" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738904" start="3691" end="3705" title="Kenneth Wherry" label="Kenneth Wherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="3709" end="3717" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4540" end="4554" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678778" start="4779" end="4803" title="Civil Rights Act of 1957" label="Civil Rights Act of 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678779" start="4926" end="4950" title="Civil Rights Act of 1960" label="Civil Rights Act of 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="4976" end="5015" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="24th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="5051" end="5072" title="clean air legislation" label="clean air legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166055" start="5100" end="5184" title="United States Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management" label="United States Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="5199" end="5214" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q327912" start="5220" end="5230" title="Karl Mundt" label="Karl Mundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348030" start="5255" end="5259" title="United States Senate elections, 1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q864992" start="5316" end="5326" title="Birch Bayh" label="Birch Bayh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="5497" end="5514" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="5561" end="5574" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592095" start="5604" end="5624" title="St. Vincent Indianapolis Hospital" label="St. Vincent Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189371" start="5670" end="5689" title="Crown Hill Cemetery" label="Crown Hill Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849894" start="5734" end="5748" title="Sherman Minton" label="Sherman Minton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154473" start="5757" end="5789" title="Minton-Capehart Federal Building" label="Minton-Capehart Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439742" start="5799" end="5831" title="Indiana World War Memorial Plaza" label="Indiana World War Memorial Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="5844" end="5856" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303374" start="5916" end="5930" title="Old Dorm Block" label="Old Dorm Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140775" start="5934" end="5946" title="Reed College" label="Reed College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828570" start="6099" end="6117" title="Avianca Flight 671" label="Avianca Flight 671"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66238" wikidata="Q723926" url="?curid=66238" title="James Eastland">
<text>James Oliver Eastland (November 28, 1904 February 19, 1986) was an American attorney, plantation owner, and politician from Mississippi. A Democrat, he served in the United States Senate in 1941 and again from 1943 until his resignation on December 27, 1978. Eastland was a segregationist who led the Southern resistance against racial integration during the civil rights movement, often speaking of African Americans as &quot;an inferior race&quot;. Eastland has been called the &quot;Voice of the White South&quot; and the &quot;Godfather of Mississippi Politics&quot;.

The son of prominent attorney, politician, and cotton planter Woods Eastland, he attended the local schools of Scott County, Mississippi, and took courses at the University of Mississippi, Vanderbilt University, and the University of Alabama. He completed his legal education by studying in his father&#x27;s office, attaining admission to the bar in 1927. Eastland practiced law in Sunflower County, Mississippi, and took over management of his family&#x27;s cotton plantation. Becoming active in politics as a Democrat, he served in the Mississippi House of Representatives from 1928 to 1932.

When Senator Pat Harrison died in office in 1941, the governor appointed Eastland to fill the vacancy on the condition that Eastland not run in that year&#x27;s special election to complete the term. Eastland served from June to September 1941. The special election was won by Wall Doxey. Eastland went on to defeat Doxey in the 1942 primary for the Democratic nomination for a full term. The Democratic Party was then essentially the only party in Mississippi, assuring Eastland&#x27;s return to the Senate in January 1943. Eastland was reelected five times, serving until resigning in December 1978, days before the end of his final term. Eastland advanced through seniority to the chairmanship of the Senate Judiciary Committee, serving over 20 years, and President pro tempore of the Senate.

==Early life==
Eastland was born in Doddsville, in the Mississippi Delta on November 28, 1904, the son of Woods Caperton Eastland, a lawyer and cotton planter, and Alma Teresa (Austin) Eastland. He was named James after his late uncle, who was allegedly murdered earlier in 1904 by Luther Holbert, who was subsequently lynched. In 1905 he moved with his parents to Forest, the county seat of Scott County, Mississippi. His father was active in Mississippi politics and served as a district attorney. The son attended the local segregated public schools and graduated from Forest High School in 1922.

Eastland attended the University of Mississippi (1922-1924), Vanderbilt University (1925-1926), and the University of Alabama (1926-1927). He studied law in his father&#x27;s office, attained admission to the bar in 1927, and practiced in Sunflower County. Active in politics, he was elected to one term in the Mississippi House of Representatives, and served from 1928 to 1932. After completing his House term, Eastland remained active in politics and government. He was a sought-after campaign speaker, including speeches on behalf of the gubernatorial candidacies of Paul B. Johnson Sr. in 1935 and 1939. In addition, he was a member of the board of trustees of the state hospital for the insane.

In the 1930s, Eastland took over management of his family&#x27;s Sunflower County plantation; he eventually expanded it to nearly . Even after entering politics, he considered himself first and foremost a cotton planter. Cotton plantations were adopting mechanization but he still had many African-American laborers on the plantation, most of whom worked as sharecroppers.

==Senate career==
Eastland was appointed to the U.S. Senate in June 1941 by Governor Paul B. Johnson Sr., following the death of Senator Pat Harrison. Johnson first offered the appointment to Woods Eastland, whom he had known since childhood; Woods Eastland declined and suggested his son. Johnson appointed James Eastland on the condition that he would not run later that year in the special election to complete the term, ensuring that no candidate would have the advantage of incumbency. Eastland kept his word, and served until November; the election was won by 2nd District Congressman Wall Doxey.

In 1942, Eastland was one of three candidates who challenged Doxey for a full term. Doxey had the support of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Mississippi&#x27;s senior U.S. Senator, Theodore G. Bilbo, but Eastland defeated him in the Democratic primary. At the time, Mississippi was effectively a one-party state, dominated by white Democrats since the disfranchisement of African Americans with the passage of the 1890 state constitution, which allowed poll taxes, literacy tests and white primaries to exclude them from the political system. This made winning the Democratic primary tantamount to election, and Eastland returned to the Senate on January 3, 1943. Roosevelt and Eastland developed a working relationship that enabled Eastland to oppose New Deal programs that were unpopular in Mississippi, while he supported the President&#x27;s agenda on other issues. Eastland was effective in developing that type of arrangement with presidents of both parties during his long tenure in the Senate. Also effective because of his seniority, he gained major federal investment in the state, such as infrastructure construction including the Tennessee–Tombigbee Waterway and federal relief after disasters such as Hurricane Camille.

Early 1947 saw a renewed effort by the Truman administration to promote civil rights with activities such as President Truman addressing the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and delivering an address to Congress entirely dedicated to the subject. Eastland, among many other Southerners who saw the civil rights backing of the administration as an attack on their &quot;way of life&quot;, addressed the Senate floor a week after Truman&#x27;s speech on the matter, saying Southerners were expected to &quot;remain docile&quot; in light of their laws and culture being destroyed &quot;under the false guise of another civil-rights bill.&quot; Six weeks before the 1948 United States presidential election, Eastland predicted the defeat of the incumbent President Harry Truman, telling an audience in Memphis, Tennessee that voting for him was a waste. After Truman&#x27;s surprise victory, Eastland &quot;remained publicly undaunted&quot;.

In 1956, Eastland was appointed chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and he served in this position until his retirement from the Senate. He was re-elected five times. He did not face substantive Republican opposition until 1966, as party politics were realigning after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In 1966, freshman Representative Prentiss Walker, the first Republican to represent Mississippi at the federal level since Reconstruction, ran against Eastland. The Walker campaign was an early Republican effort to attract white conservatives to its ranks, because recently passed civil rights legislation had enabled African Americans in the South to begin participating in the political process, and most of them became active as liberals in the Democratic Party.

Former Republican Party state chairman Wirt Yerger had considered running against Eastland but bowed out after Walker announced his candidacy. Walker ran well to Eastland&#x27;s right, accusing him of not having done enough to keep integration-friendly judges from being confirmed by the Senate. As is often the case when a one-term representative runs against a popular incumbent senator or governor, Walker was soundly defeated. Years later, Yerger said that Walker&#x27;s decision to relinquish his House seat after one term for the vagaries of a Senate race against Eastland was &quot;very devastating&quot; to the growth of the Mississippi Republicans.

In February 1960, Senator Kenneth B. Keating made a motion to report an Eisenhower administration-backed civil rights bill out of the Senate Judiciary Committee. Olin D. Johnston objected on the grounds that the committee did not have permission to sit while the full Senate was meeting. Eastland upheld the objection. Keating later stated that Eastland intentionally refused to recognize him earlier, which prevented him from making his motion before the full Senate convened. Eastland disputed Keating&#x27;s claim, stated that he had recognized Keating in an appropriate manner, and advised Keating not to repeat his claim to the full Senate. In September 1960, Eastland and Thomas Dodd said officials in the State Department cleared the way for the regime of Fidel Castro to reign in Cuba and that lower-ranking officials had misinformed Americans about the political climate of Cuba with assistance from the media. Incumbent Secretary of State Christian Herter responded to the claims by saying they were incorrect or misleading.

Eastland announced his support for United States Deputy Attorney General Byron White to replace the retiring Charles Evans Whittaker as Associate Justice on March 30, 1962, Eastland stating that White would be an able justice. White took office the following month. Eastland introduced an amendment that he stated would nullify the Supreme Court prayer decision on June 29, 1962. In September 1963, Eastland, fellow Mississippi Senator John Stennis, and Georgia Senator Richard Russell jointly announced their opposition to the ratification of the nuclear test ban treaty. The opposition was viewed as denting hopes of the Kennedy administration to be met with minimal disagreement during the treaty&#x27;s appearance before the Senate.

In 1972, Eastland was reelected with 58 percent of the vote in his closest contest ever. His Republican opponent, Gil Carmichael, an automobile dealer from Meridian, was likely aided by President Richard Nixon&#x27;s landslide reelection in 49 states, including taking 78 percent of Mississippi&#x27;s popular vote. However, Nixon had worked &quot;under the table&quot; to support Eastland, a long-time personal friend. Nixon and other Republicans provided little support for Carmichael to avoid alienating conservative Southern Democrats, who increasingly supported Republican positions on many national issues. The Republicans worked to elect two House candidates, Trent Lott and Thad Cochran, both of whom later became influential U.S. senators. Recognizing that Nixon would handily carry Mississippi, Eastland did not endorse the Democratic presidential candidate, George McGovern of South Dakota, who was considered a liberal. Four years later, Eastland supported the candidacy of fellow Southern Democrat Jimmy Carter of Georgia, rather than Nixon&#x27;s successor, President Gerald R. Ford. Eastland&#x27;s former press secretary, Larry Speakes, a Mississippi native, served as a press spokesman for Gerald Ford and Ford&#x27;s running mate, US Senator Robert J. Dole.

In January 1970, after G. Harrold Carswell was accused of harboring both sexist and racist beliefs, Eastland told reporters that he believed this was the first instance of a Supreme Court nominee being challenged on his views on the legal rights of women. In April, the Senate Judiciary Committee scheduled a vote for a plan that if enacted would give each state one electoral vote for each congressional district. During a meeting with reporters, Eastland espoused his view that the Senate would not approve any constitutional amendment reforming the presidential election system that year. In November, along with fellow Southerners Strom Thurmond and Sam J. Ervin Jr., Eastland was one of three senators to vote against an occupational safety bill that would establish federal supervision to oversee working conditions. Later that month, after President Nixon vetoed a curb on spending for political broadcasts, Republican leader Hugh Scott announced that he would offer comprehensive campaign reforms the following year and called for senators to join him in sustaining the veto. It was agreed by members of both parties that Eastland was one of eight senators who were essential to supporting Democratic opposition to the veto and thereby make the difference in overriding it.

In April 1971, Eastland introduced a six‐bill package intended to adjust the Internal Security Act of 1950 in addition to plugging loopholes noted by various decisions made by the Supreme Court, Eastland noting that his proposed version of the Internal Security Act would give the Subversive Activities Control Board more efficiency. In October 1971, after President Richard Nixon nominated Lewis F. Powell and William Rehnquist to the Supreme Court, Eastland announced his intent to hasten the hearings of Rehnquist and Powell while admitting his doubts that hearings would begin the following week given the Senate being in recess. In October 1974, Eastland was one of five senators to sponsor legislation authored by Jesse Helms permitting prayer in public schools and taking the issue away from the Supreme Court which had previously ruled in 1963 that school prayer violated the First Amendment to the United States Constitution through the establishment of a religion. In June 1976, Eastland joined a coalition of Democratic politicians who endorsed Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter for the presidency. &quot;The New York Times&quot; assessed Stennis and Eastland as jointly &quot;trying to pull Mississippi out for Mr. Carter&quot; in their first campaign for a national Democrat in decades.

On May 18, 1977, Eastland made a joint appearance with President Jimmy Carter in the Rose Garden in support of proposed foreign intelligence surveillance legislation. Eastland said the legislation was &quot;vitally needed in this country&quot; and that he was satisfied with its bipartisan support. Over the summer of 1977, the Justice Department enlisted the aid of Eastland as part of its effort to thwart &quot;balkanization&quot; of litigation authority, Eastland and Attorney General Griffin Bell moving to block six measures that if enacted would have permitted the independent agencies to go to court under certain circumstances in the event the Justice Department did not act on a case 45 days after it was referred to the department. By August 1977, the Carter administration reached a compromise plan to stem the flow of illegal aliens into the United States, Eastland, Attorney General Bell, and United States Secretary of Labor F. Ray Marshall agreeing to civil penalties up to $1,000 (~$ in ) for offending employers. By September 1977, the seventy-three-year-old Eastland was considering retirement, with discussions of Ted Kennedy assuming his position as Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. In October 1977, Eastland was one of several influential senators invited to meet with President Carter as the latter tried gaining support in the Senate for the Panama Canal treaties.

=== Nixon resignation ===
On February 14, 1974, Special Prosecutor for the U.S. Department of Justice Leon Jaworski wrote to Eastland complaining that President Nixon had refused to give him material that he needed for his Watergate investigation including 27 tapes relating to the Watergate cover‐up in addition to political donations of milk producers and the activities of the plumbers unit of the White House. The contents of the letter to Eastland were disclosed to the public by Jaworski the following month. In May, the House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against President Nixon after the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between him and his aides and the administration. That month, the Senate Judiciary Committee passed a resolution supporting Jaworski observing that he was &quot;acting within the scope of the authority conferred upon him&quot;. Eastland&#x27;s support for the resolution was seen by observers as part of a pattern of Nixon backers turning against him in light of the Watergate scandal. In August, &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine released Eastland&#x27;s name as one of thirty-six senators who the White House believed would support President Nixon remaining in office in the event of impeachment. The article mentioned the White House believing some of the supporters were shaky and that thirty-four of them would need to remain firm to override a potential conviction. Within days of the article&#x27;s release, President Nixon announced his resignation in the face of near-certain impeachment.

===Senate President pro tempore===
During his last Senate term, Eastland was the longest-serving member of the majority party and was elected President pro tempore. Eastland is the most recent President pro tempore to have served during a vacancy in the Vice Presidency. He did so twice during the tumultuous 1970s, first from October to December 1973, following Spiro Agnew&#x27;s resignation until the swearing-in of Gerald Ford as Vice President, and then from August to December 1974, from the time that Ford became President until Nelson Rockefeller was sworn in as Vice President. Then, Eastland was second in the presidential line of succession, behind only Speaker of the House Carl Albert.

== Political positions ==

===Opposition to civil rights===
Eastland opposed integration and the civil rights movement. During World War II, Eastland vocally opposed and denigrated the service of African American soldiers in the war. He incited protests and comparisons to Hitlerism following a vitriolic speech on the floor of the Senate in July 1945, in which he complained that the Negro soldier was physically, morally, and mentally incapable of serving in combat. Eastland claimed that the &quot;boys from the South were fighting to maintain white supremacy&quot;. In 1944 Eastland said:I have no prejudice in my heart, but the white race is the superior race and the Negro race an inferior race and the races must be kept separate by law.The same year, he protested against &quot;Smith v. Allwright&quot;, which banned white primaries:As a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Eastland would alongside fellow southerners Olin D. Johnston of South Carolina and Harley M. Kilgore of West Virginia be one of three senators to report negatively on Earl Warren when President Eisenhower nominated him to the Supreme Court. He later was one of eleven senators to vote against John Marshall Harlan II and one of seventeen to vote against Potter Stewart. When the Supreme Court issued its decision in the landmark case &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, ruling that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional, Eastland, like the majority of Southern Democrats, denounced it. In a speech given in Senatobia, Mississippi on August 12, 1955, he announced:

Eastland would become actively involved with the White Citizens&#x27; Council, an organization which boasted 60,000 members across the South and was called &quot;the new Klan that enforces thought control by economic pressures.&quot; Eastland testified to the Senate ten days after the &quot;Brown&quot; decision:

On July 24, 1957, interviewed by Mike Wallace on the occasion of the passing of the Civil Rights Act of 1957, Eastland said segregation was wanted by both races:As I said, we have more Nigra professional men, more businessmen, we have substantial Nigra cotton planters. In fact, they have made more progress in the South than in the North. The master-servant relationship today is largely a Northern product.In the 1960s, Eastland belonged to the Genetics Committee of the Pioneer Fund. Civil rights workers Mickey Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman went missing in Mississippi on June 21, 1964, during the Freedom Summer efforts to register African American voters. Eastland tried to convince President Lyndon Johnson that the incident was a hoax and there was no Ku Klux Klan in the state. He suggested that the three had gone to Chicago:

Johnson once said:

Eastland, like most of his Southern colleagues, opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibited segregation of public places and facilities. Its passage caused many Mississippi Democrats to support Barry Goldwater&#x27;s presidential bid that year, but Eastland did not publicly oppose the election of Johnson. Four years earlier he had quietly supported John F. Kennedy&#x27;s presidential campaign, but Mississippi voted that year for unpledged electors. Although Republican Senator Goldwater was strongly defeated by incumbent Johnson, he carried Mississippi with 87.14 percent of the popular vote, which constitutes the best-ever Republican showing in any state since the founding of that party. In 1964, almost all blacks in Mississippi remained excluded from voting, thus Goldwater&#x27;s mammoth win essentially constituted the vote of the white population.

Eastland was often at odds with Johnson&#x27;s policy on civil rights, but they retained a close friendship based on long years together in the Senate. Johnson often sought Eastland&#x27;s support and guidance on other issues, such as the nomination of Abe Fortas in 1968 as Chief Justice of the United States. The Solid South opposed him. In the 1950s, Johnson was one of three senators from the South who did not sign the Southern Manifesto of resistance to &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, but Eastland and most Southern senators did, vowing resistance to school integration.

Eastland lobbied for the appointment of his friend Harold Cox to a federal judgeship, promising John F. Kennedy, who planned to appoint Thurgood Marshall to the United States Court of Appeals, that he would permit Marshall&#x27;s confirmation to go forward if Cox was also appointed to the bench. This was in keeping with Kennedy&#x27;s approach to handling Eastland; not wanting to upset the powerful chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Kennedy generally acceded to Eastland&#x27;s requests on judicial appointments in Mississippi, which resulted in white segregationists dominating the state&#x27;s federal courts. Though Eastland agreed to allow Marshall&#x27;s nomination to proceed, he and senators Robert Byrd, John McClellan, Olin D. Johnston, Sam Ervin, and Strom Thurmond, made unsuccessful attempts to block Marshall&#x27;s confirmation to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals and the U.S. Supreme Court.

In early 1969, Eastland went to Rhodesia and came back praising the White minority regime for the &quot;racial harmony&quot; supposedly lacking from America. According to Ken Flower, head of the Rhodesian Central Intelligence Operation, Eastland once complained about the fact an hostel of Salisbury was integrated, stating &quot;You&#x27;ve inserted the thin end of the wedge by allowing stinking niggers into such a fine hotel&quot;. When he considered running for reelection in 1978, Eastland sought black support from Aaron Henry, civil rights leader and president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Henry told Eastland that it would be difficult for him to earn the support of black voters given his &quot;master-servant philosophy with regard to blacks.&quot; Eastland decided not to seek re-election. Partly because of the independent candidacy of Charles Evers siphoning off votes from the Democratic nominee, Maurice Dantin, Republican 4th District Representative Thad Cochran won the race to succeed Eastland. Eastland resigned the day after Christmas, enabling the governor to appoint Cochran to complete the last few days of Eastland&#x27;s term, which gave Cochran a seniority advantage over other senators elected in 1978. After his retirement, Eastland remained friends with Aaron Henry and sent contributions to the NAACP, but he said that he &quot;didn&#x27;t regret a thing&quot; in his public career.

=== Anti-Semitism ===
In 1968, after opposing the nomination of Abe Fortas to Chief Justice, Eastland, as chair of the Judiciary committee, said &quot;After [Thurgood] Marshall, I could not go back to Mississippi if a Jewish chief justice swore in the next president.&quot; In 1977, Eastland &quot;sneer(ed) openly at Senator Jacob Javits, saying, &#x27;I don&#x27;t like you or your kind,&#x27; because Javits was Jewish.&quot;

===Anticommunism===
Eastland served on a subcommittee in the 1950s investigating the Communist Party in the United States. As chairman of the Internal Security Subcommittee, he subpoenaed some employees of &quot;The New York Times&quot; to testify about their activities. The paper was taking a strong position on its editorial page that Mississippi should adhere to the &quot;Brown&quot; decision, and claimed that Eastland was persecuting them on that account. The &quot;Times&quot; said in its January 5, 1956 editorial:
Eastland subsequently allowed the subcommittee to become dormant as communist fears receded.

===Marijuana===
In 1974, Eastland led congressional subcommittee hearings into marijuana, the report on which concluded:

==Relationship with FBI==

Eastland was a staunch supporter of FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, and shared intelligence with the FBI, including leaks from the State Department. An investigation initiated by Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and executed by former FBI agent Walter Sheridan traced some of the unauthorized disclosures to Otto Otepka of the State Department Office of Security. Hoover received intelligence that Eastland was among members of Congress who had received money and favors from Rafael Trujillo, dictator of the Dominican Republic. Eastland had regularly defended him from the Senate floor. Hoover declined to pursue Eastland on corruption charges.

==Later years==
In his last years in the Senate, Eastland was recognized by most senators as one who knew how to wield the legislative powers he had accumulated. Many senators, including liberals who opposed many of his positions, acknowledged the fairness with which he chaired the Judiciary Committee, sharing staff and authority that chairmen of other committees jealously held for themselves. He maintained friendly personal ties with liberal Democrats such as Ted Kennedy, Walter Mondale, Joe Biden and Philip Hart, even though they disagreed on many issues. Following Johnson&#x27;s retirement from the White House, Eastland frequently visited Johnson at his Texas ranch.

In an event recounted by Patrick Leahy in his 2022 memoir, Ted Kennedy once sought to advance in the Judiciary Committee a bill that Eastland opposed. Eastland promised Kennedy that if Kennedy secured enough votes for the measure to pass, Eastland would place it on the committee agenda, though Eastland would vote against it. Kennedy believed he had secured the votes, and true to his word, Eastland included it on the committee agenda. When the question was called, it failed by one vote. According to Leahy, Eastland questioned one senator who had cast a no vote as to whether he had given Kennedy his word to vote in favor. The senator indicated that he had, but that he had then changed his mind. Eastland told the lawmaker in question that when one senator gave his word to another, he was honor-bound to keep it. Eastland then changed his own vote to yes, allowing Kennedy&#x27;s bill to pass. Afterward, the senator Eastland questioned never had one of his bills included on the committee agenda. Eastland&#x27;s closest friend and confidant was Leander Perez.

Eastland died at a hospital in Greenwood, Mississippi, on February 19, 1986, from pneumonia as a complication of other health issues; he was 81.

While at a fundraiser on June 18, 2019, presidential candidate Biden said that one of his greatest strengths was &quot;bringing people together&quot; and pointed to his relationships with Eastland and fellow segregationist senator Herman Talmadge as examples. While imitating a Southern drawl, Biden remarked, &quot;I was in a caucus with James O. Eastland. He never called me &#x27;boy,&#x27; he always called me &#x27;son.&#x27;” New Jersey Senator Cory Booker was one of many Democrats to criticize Biden for the remarks, issuing a statement that said, &quot;You don&#x27;t joke about calling black men &#x27;boys.&#x27; Men like James O. Eastland used words like that, and the racist policies that accompanied them, to perpetuate white supremacy and strip black Americans of our very humanity&quot;.

==Portrayal in popular culture==

Eastland was portrayed by actor Jeff Doucette in the 2016 HBO film &quot;All the Way&quot; and by Nicholas Bell in the 2022 film &quot;Elvis&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Annis, Jr. J. Lee. &quot;Big Jim Eastland: The Godfather of Mississippi&quot; (University Press of Mississippi, 2016)
* Asch, Chris Myers. &quot;Reconstruction Revisited: James O. Eastland, the Fair Employment Practices Committee, and the Reconstruction of Germany, 1945–1946&quot;, &quot;Journal of Mississippi History&quot; (Spring 2005)
* Finley, Keith M. &quot;Delaying the Dream: Southern Senators and the Fight Against Civil Rights, 1938–1965&quot; (Baton Rouge, LSU Press, 2008).
* Robinson, Patricia Webb. &quot;A Rhetorical Analysis of Senator James O. Eastland&#x27;s Speeches, 1954–1959&quot; .
* &quot;Menace of Subversive Activity&quot; by James Oliver Eastland. Publisher: Congressional Record (1966).

* &quot;The South: The Authentic Voice&quot;, &quot;Time&quot; magazine, March 26, 1956; article about James Eastland
* Zwiers, Maarten. &quot; Senator James Eastland: Mississippi&#x27;s Jim Crow Democrat&quot; (Louisiana State University Press, 2015)

==External links==
* Transcript, James O. Eastland Oral History Interview I, February 19, 1971, by Joe B. Frantz, Internet Copy, LBJ Library. Accessed April 3, 2005.
* Finding-Aid for the James O. Eastland Collection (MUM00117) from the University of Mississippi Library. Accessed August 17, 2006.
* The James Oliver Eastland Collection owned by the University of Mississippi
* James Eastland interviewed by Mike Wallace on &quot;The Mike Wallace Interview&quot;
* Oral History Interview with James Eastland, from the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q723926" start="0" end="21" title="James Eastland" label="James Oliver Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="124" end="135" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="139" end="147" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="166" end="186" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="359" end="380" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q485250" start="684" end="709" title="Scott County, Mississippi" label="Scott County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="735" end="760" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="762" end="783" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="793" end="814" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q484659" start="956" end="985" title="Sunflower County, Mississippi" label="Sunflower County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525933" start="1112" end="1148" title="Mississippi House of Representatives" label="Mississippi House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q369437" start="1182" end="1194" title="Pat Harrison" label="Pat Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q369827" start="1446" end="1456" title="Wall Doxey" label="Wall Doxey"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="1873" end="1899" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="1928" end="1963" title="President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="President pro tempore of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425166" start="2002" end="2012" title="Doddsville, Mississippi" label="Doddsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426203" start="2021" end="2038" title="Mississippi Delta" label="Mississippi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q110220848" start="2248" end="2262" title="Luther Holbert" label="Luther Holbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q938229" start="2331" end="2337" title="Forest, Mississippi" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q485250" start="2358" end="2383" title="Scott County, Mississippi" label="Scott County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="2589" end="2614" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="2628" end="2649" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="2671" end="2692" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2709" end="2720" title="Reading law#United States" label="studied law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683819" start="2759" end="2779" title="Admission to the bar in the United States" label="admission to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484659" start="2806" end="2822" title="Sunflower County, Mississippi" label="Sunflower County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525933" start="2878" end="2914" title="Mississippi House of Representatives" label="Mississippi House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q671583" start="3137" end="3156" title="Paul B. Johnson Sr." label="Paul B. Johnson Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17182992" start="3489" end="3507" title="Cotton Plantation Record and Account Book" label="Cotton plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="3626" end="3639" title="sharecroppers" label="sharecroppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q878632" start="3718" end="3726" title="governor of Mississippi" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q671583" start="3727" end="3746" title="Paul B. Johnson Sr." label="Paul B. Johnson Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q369437" start="3779" end="3791" title="Pat Harrison" label="Pat Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879015" start="4208" end="4220" title="Mississippi&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd District"/>
<link wikidata="Q369827" start="4233" end="4243" title="Wall Doxey" label="Wall Doxey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4365" end="4386" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q725728" start="4431" end="4448" title="Theodore G. Bilbo" label="Theodore G. Bilbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="4602" end="4639" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era" label="disfranchisement of African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="4703" end="4713" title="poll tax (United States)" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="4715" end="4729" title="literacy tests" label="literacy tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995674" start="4734" end="4749" title="white primaries" label="white primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="4834" end="4856" title="tantamount to election" label="tantamount to election"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="5002" end="5010" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700266" start="5392" end="5420" title="Tennessee–Tombigbee Waterway" label="Tennessee–Tombigbee Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638557" start="5464" end="5481" title="Hurricane Camille" label="Hurricane Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="5625" end="5683" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q32090" start="5887" end="5898" title="Lifestyle (sociology)" label="way of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="6180" end="6220" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="6279" end="6291" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="6316" end="6334" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="6505" end="6531" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6660" end="6670" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="6749" end="6773" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="6782" end="6807" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q778666" start="6842" end="6857" title="Prentiss Walker" label="Prentiss Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="6932" end="6946" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7315" end="7326" title="Wirt Yerger" label="Wirt Yerger"/>
<link wikidata="Q356342" start="7961" end="7979" title="Kenneth B. Keating" label="Kenneth B. Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q357511" start="8097" end="8113" title="Olin D. Johnston" label="Olin D. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619366" start="8613" end="8624" title="Thomas J. Dodd" label="Thomas Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="8698" end="8710" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="8723" end="8727" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q240274" start="8884" end="8900" title="Christian Herter" label="Christian Herter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364289" start="9006" end="9043" title="United States Deputy Attorney General" label="United States Deputy Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q958904" start="9044" end="9055" title="Byron White" label="Byron White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064300" start="9080" end="9103" title="Charles Evans Whittaker" label="Charles Evans Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699509" start="9407" end="9419" title="John C. Stennis" label="John Stennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q718415" start="9441" end="9456" title="Richard Russell Jr." label="Richard Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769712" start="9823" end="9837" title="Gil Carmichael" label="Gil Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q118152" start="9865" end="9873" title="Meridian, Mississippi" label="Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="9905" end="9918" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231238" start="10216" end="10228" title="Conservative Democrat" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="10229" end="10246" title="Southern Democrat" label="Southern Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q50608" start="10376" end="10386" title="Trent Lott" label="Trent Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q723896" start="10391" end="10403" title="Thad Cochran" label="Thad Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="10578" end="10593" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="10597" end="10609" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="10720" end="10732" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="10736" end="10743" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="10791" end="10805" title="Gerald R. Ford" label="Gerald R. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491144" start="10847" end="10860" title="Larry Speakes" label="Larry Speakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="10969" end="10983" title="Robert J. Dole" label="Robert J. Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512264" start="11009" end="11028" title="G. Harrold Carswell" label="G. Harrold Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="11621" end="11635" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q322911" start="11640" end="11656" title="Sam J. Ervin Jr." label="Sam J. Ervin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q467328" start="11919" end="11929" title="Hugh Scott" label="Hugh Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800168" start="12346" end="12375" title="Internal Security Act of 1950" label="Internal Security Act of 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632445" start="12550" end="12585" title="Subversive Activities Control Board" label="Subversive Activities Control Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12636" end="12649" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="12660" end="12675" title="Lewis F. Powell" label="Lewis F. Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="12680" end="12697" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="12989" end="13000" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="13153" end="13202" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="13342" end="13354" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13381" end="13399" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="13631" end="13643" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335058" start="14055" end="14067" title="Griffin Bell" label="Griffin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="14473" end="14505" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="United States Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q475289" start="14506" end="14521" title="F. Ray Marshall" label="F. Ray Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="14700" end="14711" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="14943" end="14964" title="Panama Canal Treaties" label="Panama Canal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229639" start="15069" end="15082" title="Leon Jaworski" label="Leon Jaworski"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="15190" end="15199" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="16052" end="16060" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="16686" end="16707" title="President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="President pro tempore"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="16907" end="16918" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="16963" end="16974" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="17080" end="17098" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="17164" end="17195" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="presidential line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="17209" end="17229" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q288402" start="17230" end="17241" title="Carl Albert" label="Carl Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="17341" end="17362" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17371" end="17383" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="17517" end="17526" title="Nazism" label="Hitlerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="17895" end="17908" title="superior race" label="superior race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="17917" end="17922" title="Negro" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031455" start="17931" end="17944" title="inferior race" label="inferior race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545390" start="18030" end="18048" title="Smith v. Allwright" label="Smith v. Allwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995674" start="18069" end="18084" title="white primaries" label="white primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="18104" end="18130" title="Senate Judiciary Committee" label="Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q357511" start="18176" end="18192" title="Olin D. Johnston" label="Olin D. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283193" start="18196" end="18210" title="list of United States senators from South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q368666" start="18215" end="18232" title="Harley M. Kilgore" label="Harley M. Kilgore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851332" start="18236" end="18249" title="list of United States senators from West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="18299" end="18310" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619328" start="18316" end="18336" title="list of federal judges appointed by Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="President Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="18354" end="18371" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q957749" start="18425" end="18448" title="John Marshall Harlan II" label="John Marshall Harlan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="18486" end="18500" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="18511" end="18524" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="18572" end="18599" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073595" start="18757" end="18779" title="Senatobia, Mississippi" label="Senatobia, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994541" start="18864" end="18892" title="White Citizens&amp;#x27; Council" label="White Citizens&amp;#x27; Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q325487" start="19163" end="19175" title="Mike Wallace" label="Mike Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678778" start="19214" end="19238" title="Civil Rights Act of 1957" label="Civil Rights Act of 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196688" start="19603" end="19615" title="Pioneer Fund" label="Pioneer Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354034" start="19638" end="19654" title="Mickey Schwerner" label="Mickey Schwerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733240" start="19656" end="19668" title="James Chaney" label="James Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q331195" start="19674" end="19688" title="Andrew Goodman (activist)" label="Andrew Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q635051" start="19689" end="19701" title="Murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner" label="went missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024031" start="19746" end="19760" title="Freedom Summer" label="Freedom Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="19843" end="19857" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="19904" end="19916" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19971" end="19978" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="20061" end="20085" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="20206" end="20221" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="20246" end="20255" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="20363" end="20378" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097598" start="20413" end="20424" title="United States presidential election in Mississippi, 1960" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896374" start="20558" end="20569" title="United States presidential election in Mississippi, 1964" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318143" start="21127" end="21137" title="Abe Fortas" label="Abe Fortas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="21149" end="21183" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="21189" end="21200" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232625" start="21298" end="21316" title="Southern Manifesto" label="Southern Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q130235593" start="21397" end="21414" title="Southern senators" label="Southern senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010895" start="21513" end="21523" title="William Harold Cox" label="Harold Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="21598" end="21615" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="21880" end="21899" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q276524" start="22167" end="22178" title="Robert Byrd" label="Robert Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372619" start="22180" end="22194" title="John Little McClellan" label="John McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q357511" start="22196" end="22212" title="Olin D. Johnston" label="Olin D. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q322911" start="22214" end="22223" title="Sam Ervin" label="Sam Ervin"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="22229" end="22243" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="22362" end="22375" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="22410" end="22418" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387618" start="22549" end="22559" title="Ken Flower" label="Ken Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="22668" end="22677" title="Salisbury (Rhodesia)" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489719" start="22900" end="22911" title="Aaron Henry (politician)" label="Aaron Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="22954" end="23012" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077458" start="23265" end="23278" title="Charles Evers" label="Charles Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q113001904" start="23328" end="23342" title="Maurice Dantin" label="Maurice Dantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879019" start="23355" end="23367" title="Mississippi&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th District"/>
<link wikidata="Q723896" start="23383" end="23395" title="Thad Cochran" label="Thad Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="23462" end="23471" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q318143" start="23895" end="23905" title="Abe Fortas" label="Abe Fortas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="24157" end="24169" title="Jacob Javits" label="Jacob Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="24346" end="24361" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027895" start="24403" end="24433" title="United States Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security" label="Internal Security Subcommittee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="24438" end="24446" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24473" end="24491" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="24958" end="24967" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="25064" end="25067" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="25077" end="25092" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="25157" end="25173" title="United States State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="25205" end="25221" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="25222" end="25239" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428845" start="25273" end="25288" title="Walter Sheridan" label="Walter Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109758" start="25336" end="25347" title="Otto Otepka" label="Otto Otepka"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="25504" end="25519" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="25537" end="25555" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="25862" end="25870" title="modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="26140" end="26151" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="26153" end="26167" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="26169" end="26178" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086224" start="26183" end="26194" title="Philip Hart" label="Philip Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q59315" start="26379" end="26392" title="Patrick Leahy" label="Patrick Leahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="26413" end="26424" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509536" start="27408" end="27421" title="Leander Perez" label="Leander Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q986376" start="27455" end="27477" title="Greenwood, Mississippi" label="Greenwood, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q356029" start="27801" end="27816" title="Herman Talmadge" label="Herman Talmadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306052" start="27848" end="27862" title="Southern drawl" label="Southern drawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135767" start="28021" end="28032" title="Cory Booker" label="Cory Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851456" start="28441" end="28454" title="Jeff Doucette" label="Jeff Doucette"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="28467" end="28470" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527454" start="28482" end="28493" title="All the Way (2016 film)" label="All the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025047" start="28507" end="28520" title="Nicholas Bell" label="Nicholas Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q84362533" start="28544" end="28549" title="Elvis (2022 film)" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="29358" end="29383" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208632" start="29664" end="29677" title="Joe Bertram Frantz" label="Joe B. Frantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q325487" start="29973" end="29985" title="Mike Wallace" label="Mike Wallace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66240" wikidata="Q152513" url="?curid=66240" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow">
<text>Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (February 27, 1807 – March 24, 1882) was an American poet and educator. His original works include the poems &quot;Paul Revere&#x27;s Ride&quot;, &quot;The Song of Hiawatha&quot;, and &quot;Evangeline&quot;. He was the first American to completely translate Dante Alighieri&#x27;s &quot;Divine Comedy&quot; and was one of the fireside poets from New England.

Longfellow was born in Portland, District of Maine, Massachusetts (now Portland, Maine). He graduated from Bowdoin College and became a professor there and, later, at Harvard College after studying in Europe. His first major poetry collections were &quot;Voices of the Night&quot; (1839) and &quot;Ballads and Other Poems&quot; (1841). He retired from teaching in 1854 to focus on his writing, and he lived the remainder of his life in the Revolutionary War headquarters of George Washington in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

His first wife, Mary Potter, died in 1835 after a miscarriage. His second wife, Frances Appleton, died in 1861 after sustaining burns when her dress caught fire. After her death, Longfellow had difficulty writing poetry for a time and focused on translating works from foreign languages. Longfellow died in 1882.

Longfellow wrote many lyric poems known for their musicality and often presenting stories of mythology and legend. He became the most popular American poet of his day and had success overseas. He has been criticized for imitating European styles and writing poetry that was too sentimental.

==Life and work==

===Early life and education===

Longfellow was born on February 27, 1807, to Stephen Longfellow and Zilpah (Wadsworth) Longfellow in Portland, Maine, then a district of Massachusetts. Although he was born at the now-demolished 159–161 Fore Street, he grew up in what is now known as the Wadsworth-Longfellow House on Congress Street. His father was a lawyer, and his maternal grandfather was Peleg Wadsworth, a general in the American Revolutionary War and a Member of Congress. His mother was descended from Richard Warren, a passenger on the &quot;Mayflower&quot;. He was named after his mother&#x27;s brother Henry Wadsworth, a Navy lieutenant who had died three years earlier at the Battle of Tripoli. He was the second of eight children.

Longfellow was descended from English colonists who settled in New England in the early 1600s. They included &quot;Mayflower&quot; Pilgrims Richard Warren, William Brewster, and John and Priscilla Alden through their daughter Elizabeth Pabodie, the first child born in Plymouth Colony.

Longfellow attended a dame school at the age of three and was enrolled by age six at the private Portland Academy. In his years there, he earned a reputation as being very studious and became fluent in Latin. His mother encouraged his enthusiasm for reading and learning, introducing him to &quot;Robinson Crusoe&quot; and &quot;Don Quixote&quot;. He published his first poem at age 13 in the Portland &quot;Gazette&quot; on November 17, 1820, a patriotic and historical four-stanza poem called &quot;The Battle of Lovell&#x27;s Pond&quot;. He studied at the Portland Academy until age 14. He spent much of his summers as a child at his grandfather Peleg&#x27;s farm in Hiram, Maine.

In the fall of 1822, 15-year-old Longfellow enrolled at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine, along with his brother Stephen. His grandfather was a founder of the college and his father was a trustee. There Longfellow met Nathaniel Hawthorne who became his lifelong friend. He boarded with a clergyman for a time before rooming on the third floor in 1823 of what is now known as Winthrop Hall. He joined the Peucinian Society, a group of students with Federalist leanings. In his senior year, Longfellow wrote to his father about his aspirations:

I will not disguise it in the least...the fact is, I most eagerly aspire after future eminence in literature, my whole soul burns most ardently after it, and every earthly thought centres in it...I am almost confident in believing, that if I can ever rise in the world it must be by the exercise of my talents in the wide field of literature.

He pursued his literary goals by submitting poetry and prose to various newspapers and magazines, partly due to encouragement from Professor Thomas Cogswell Upham. He published nearly 40 minor poems between January 1824 and his graduation in 1825. About 24 of them were published in the short-lived Boston periodical &quot;The United States Literary Gazette&quot;. When Longfellow graduated from Bowdoin, he was ranked fourth in the class and had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa. He gave the student commencement address.

===European tours and professorships===
After graduating in 1825, Longfellow was offered a job as professor of modern languages at his alma mater. An apocryphal story claims that college trustee Benjamin Orr had been impressed by Longfellow&#x27;s translation of Horace and hired him under the condition that he travel to Europe to study French, Spanish, and Italian.

Whatever the catalyst, Longfellow began his tour of Europe in May 1826 aboard the ship &quot;Cadmus&quot;. His time abroad lasted three years and cost his father $2,604.24, the equivalent of over $67,000 today. He traveled to France, Spain, Italy, Germany, back to France, then to England before returning to the United States in mid-August 1829. While overseas, he learned French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and German, mostly without formal instruction. In Madrid, he spent time with Washington Irving and was particularly impressed by the author&#x27;s work ethic. Irving encouraged the young Longfellow to pursue writing. While in Spain, Longfellow was saddened to learn that his favorite sister Elizabeth had died of tuberculosis at the age of 20 in May of 1829.

On August 27, 1829, he wrote to the president of Bowdoin that he was turning down the professorship because he considered the $600 (~$ in ) salary &quot;disproportionate to the duties required&quot;. The trustees raised his salary to $800 with an additional $100 to serve as the college&#x27;s librarian, a post which required one hour of work per day. During his years teaching at the college, he translated textbooks from French, Italian, and Spanish; his first published book was a translation of the poetry of medieval Spanish poet Jorge Manrique in 1833.

He published the travel book &quot;Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea&quot; in serial form before a book edition was released in 1835. Shortly after the book&#x27;s publication, Longfellow attempted to join the literary circle in New York and asked George Pope Morris for an editorial role at one of Morris&#x27;s publications. He considered moving to New York after New York University proposed offering him a newly created professorship of modern languages, but there would be no salary. The professorship was not created and Longfellow agreed to continue teaching at Bowdoin. It may have been joyless work. He wrote, &quot;I hate the sight of pen, ink, and paper ... I do not believe that I was born for such a lot. I have aimed higher than this&quot;.
On September 14, 1831, Longfellow married Mary Storer Potter, a childhood friend from Portland. The couple settled in Brunswick, but the two were not happy there. Longfellow published several nonfiction and fiction prose pieces in 1833 inspired by Irving, including &quot;The Indian Summer&quot; and &quot;The Bald Eagle&quot;.

In December 1834, Longfellow received a letter from Josiah Quincy III, president of Harvard College, offering him the Smith Professorship of Modern Languages with the stipulation that he spend a year or so abroad. There, he further studied German as well as Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Finnish, and Icelandic. In October 1835, his wife Mary had a miscarriage during the trip, about six months into her pregnancy. She did not recover and died after several weeks of illness at the age of 22 on November 29, 1835. Longfellow had her body embalmed immediately and placed in a lead coffin inside an oak coffin, which was shipped to Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston. He was deeply saddened by her death and wrote: &quot;One thought occupies me night and day...She is dead – She is dead! All day I am weary and sad&quot;. Three years later, he was inspired to write the poem &quot;Footsteps of Angels&quot; about her. Several years later, he wrote the poem &quot;Mezzo Cammin&quot;, which expressed his personal struggles in his middle years.

Longfellow returned to the United States in 1836 and took up the professorship at Harvard. He was required to live in Cambridge to be close to the campus and, therefore, rented rooms at the Craigie House in the spring of 1837. The home was built in 1759 and was the headquarters of George Washington during the Siege of Boston beginning in July 1775. Elizabeth Craigie owned the home, the widow of Andrew Craigie, and she rented rooms on the second floor. Previous boarders included Jared Sparks, Edward Everett, and Joseph Emerson Worcester. It is preserved today as the Longfellow House–Washington&#x27;s Headquarters National Historic Site.

Longfellow began publishing his poetry in 1839, including the collection &quot;Voices of the Night&quot;, his debut book of poetry. The bulk of &quot;Voices of the Night&quot; was translations, but he included nine original poems and seven poems that he had written as a teenager. &quot;Ballads and Other Poems&quot; was published in 1841 and included &quot;The Village Blacksmith&quot; and &quot;The Wreck of the Hesperus&quot;, which were instantly popular. He became part of the local social scene, creating a group of friends who called themselves the Five of Clubs. Members included Cornelius Conway Felton, George Stillman Hillard, and Charles Sumner; Sumner became Longfellow&#x27;s closest friend over the next 30 years. Longfellow was well liked as a professor, but he disliked being &quot;constantly a playmate for boys&quot; rather than &quot;stretching out and grappling with men&#x27;s minds.&quot;

===Courtship of Frances Appleton===

Longfellow met Boston industrialist Nathan Appleton and his son Thomas Gold Appleton in the town of Thun, Switzerland. There he began courting Appleton&#x27;s daughter Frances &quot;Fanny&quot; Appleton. The independent-minded Fanny was not interested in marriage, but Longfellow was determined. In July 1839, he wrote to a friend: &quot;Victory hangs doubtful. The lady says she &quot;will not&quot;! I say she &quot;shall&quot;! It is not &quot;pride&quot;, but the madness of passion&quot;. His friend George Stillman Hillard encouraged him in the pursuit: &quot;I delight to see you keeping up so stout a heart for the resolve to conquer is half the battle in love as well as war&quot;. During the courtship, Longfellow frequently walked from Cambridge to the Appleton home in Beacon Hill in Boston by crossing the Boston Bridge. That bridge was replaced in 1906 by a new bridge which was later renamed the Longfellow Bridge.

In late 1839, Longfellow published &quot;Hyperion&quot;, inspired by his trips abroad and his unsuccessful courtship of Fanny Appleton. Amidst this, he fell into &quot;periods of neurotic depression with moments of panic&quot; and took a six-month leave of absence from Harvard University to attend a health spa in the former Marienberg Benedictine Convent at Boppard in Germany. After returning, he published the play &quot;The Spanish Student&quot; in 1842, reflecting his memories from his time in Spain in the 1820s.

The small collection &quot;Poems on Slavery&quot; was published in 1842 as Longfellow&#x27;s first public support of abolitionism. However, as Longfellow himself wrote, the poems were &quot;so mild that even a Slaveholder might read them without losing his appetite for breakfast&quot;. A critic for &quot;The Dial&quot; agreed, calling it &quot;the thinnest of all Mr. Longfellow&#x27;s thin books; spirited and polished like its forerunners; but the topic would warrant a deeper tone&quot;. The New England Anti-Slavery Society, however, was satisfied enough with the collection to reprint it for further distribution.

On May 10, 1843, Longfellow received a letter from Fanny Appleton agreeing to marry him. He was too restless to take a carriage and walked 90 minutes to meet her at her house. They were soon married; Nathan Appleton bought the Craigie House as a wedding present, and Longfellow lived there for the rest of his life. His love for Fanny is evident in the following lines from his only love poem, the sonnet &quot;The Evening Star&quot; which he wrote in October 1845: &quot;O my beloved, my sweet Hesperus! My morning and my evening star of love!&quot; He once attended a ball without her and noted, &quot;The lights seemed dimmer, the music sadder, the flowers fewer, and the women less fair.&quot;

He and Fanny had six children: Charles Appleton (1844–1893), Ernest Wadsworth (1845–1921), Fanny (1847–1848), Alice Mary (1850–1928), Edith (1853–1915), and Anne Allegra (1855–1934). Their second-youngest daughter was Edith who married Richard Henry Dana III, son of Richard Henry Dana Jr. who wrote &quot;Two Years Before the Mast&quot;. Their daughter Fanny was born on April 7, 1847, and Dr. Nathan Cooley Keep administered ether to the mother as the first obstetric anesthetic in the United States. Longfellow published his epic poem &quot;Evangeline&quot; for the first time a few months later on November 1, 1847. His literary income was increasing considerably; in 1840, he had made $219 from his work, but 1850 brought him $1,900.

On June 14, 1853, Longfellow held a farewell dinner party at his Cambridge home for his friend Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was preparing to move overseas. In 1854, he retired from Harvard, devoting himself entirely to writing. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws from Harvard in 1859.

===Death of Frances===
Frances was putting locks of her children&#x27;s hair into an envelope on July 9, 1861 and attempting to seal it with hot sealing wax while Longfellow took a nap. Her dress suddenly caught fire, but it is unclear exactly how; burning wax or a lighted candle may have fallen onto it. Longfellow was awakened from his nap and rushed to help her, throwing a rug over her, but it was too small. He stifled the flames with his body, but she was badly burned. Longfellow&#x27;s youngest daughter Annie explained the story differently some 50 years later, claiming that there had been no candle or wax but that the fire had started from a self-lighting match that had fallen on the floor. Both accounts state that Frances was taken to her room to recover, and a doctor was called. She was in and out of consciousness throughout the night and was administered ether. She died shortly after 10 the next morning, July 10, after requesting a cup of coffee. Longfellow had burned himself while trying to save her, badly enough that he was unable to attend her funeral. His facial injuries led him to stop shaving, and he wore a beard from then on which became his trademark.

Longfellow was devastated by Frances&#x27;s death and never fully recovered; he occasionally resorted to laudanum and ether to deal with his grief. He worried that he would go insane, begging &quot;not to be sent to an asylum&quot; and noting that he was &quot;inwardly bleeding to death&quot;. He expressed his grief in the sonnet &quot;The Cross of Snow&quot; (1879) which he wrote 18 years later to commemorate her death:

:Such is the cross I wear upon my breast
::These eighteen years, through all the changing scenes
::And seasons, changeless since the day she died.

===Later life and death===

Longfellow spent several years translating Dante Alighieri&#x27;s &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;. To aid him in perfecting the translation and reviewing proofs, he invited friends to meetings every Wednesday starting in 1864. The &quot;Dante Club&quot;, as it was called, regularly included William Dean Howells, James Russell Lowell, and Charles Eliot Norton, as well as other occasional guests. The full three-volume translation was published in the spring of 1867, but Longfellow continued to revise it. It went through four printings in its first year. By 1868, Longfellow&#x27;s annual income was over $48,000 (~$ in ). In 1874, Samuel Ward helped him sell the poem &quot;The Hanging of the Crane&quot; to &quot;The New York Ledger&quot; for $3,000 (~$ in ). At that time, this was the highest price ever paid for a poem.

Longfellow supported abolitionism and especially hoped for reconciliation between the northern and southern states after the American Civil War. His son Charles was injured during the war, and he wrote the poem &quot;Christmas Bells&quot;, later the basis of the carol &quot;I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day&quot;. He wrote in his journal in 1878: &quot;I have only one desire; and that is for harmony, and a frank and honest understanding between North and South&quot;. Longfellow accepted an offer from Joshua Chamberlain to speak at his fiftieth reunion at Bowdoin College, despite his aversion to public speaking. He read the poem &quot;Morituri Salutamus&quot; so quietly that few could hear him. The next year, he declined an offer to be nominated for the Board of Overseers at Harvard &quot;for reasons very conclusive to my own mind&quot;.

On August 22, 1879, a female admirer traveled to Longfellow&#x27;s house in Cambridge and, unaware to whom she was speaking, asked him: &quot;Is this the house where Longfellow was born?&quot; He told her that it was not. The visitor then asked if he had died here. &quot;Not yet&quot;, he replied. In March 1882, Longfellow went to bed with severe stomach pain. He endured the pain for several days with the help of opium before he died surrounded by family on Friday, March 24. He had been suffering from peritonitis. At the time of his death, his estate was worth an estimated $356,320 (~$ in 2024 terms). He is buried with both of his wives at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His last few years were spent translating the poetry of Michelangelo. Longfellow never considered it complete enough to be published during his lifetime, but a posthumous edition was collected in 1883. Scholars generally regard the work as autobiographical, reflecting the translator as an aging artist facing his impending death.

==Writing==

===Style===

Much of Longfellow&#x27;s work is categorized as lyric poetry, but he experimented with many forms, including hexameter and free verse. His published poetry shows great versatility, using anapestic and trochaic forms, blank verse, heroic couplets, ballads, and sonnets. Typically, he would carefully consider the subject of his poetic ideas for a long time before deciding on the right metrical form for it. Much of his work is recognized for its melodious musicality. As he says, &quot;what a writer asks of his reader is not so much to &quot;like&quot; as to &quot;listen&quot;&quot;.

As a very private man, Longfellow did not often add autobiographical elements to his poetry. Two notable exceptions are dedicated to the death of members of his family. &quot;Resignation&quot; was written as a response to the death of his daughter Fanny in 1848; it does not use first-person pronouns and is instead a generalized poem of mourning. The death of his second wife Frances, as biographer Charles Calhoun wrote, deeply affected Longfellow personally but &quot;seemed not to touch his poetry, at least directly&quot;. His memorial poem to her was the sonnet &quot;The Cross of Snow&quot; and was not published in his lifetime.

Longfellow often used didacticism in his poetry, but he focused on it less in his later years. Much of his poetry imparts cultural and moral values, particularly focused on life being more than material pursuits. He often used allegory in his work. In &quot;Nature&quot;, for example, death is depicted as bedtime for a cranky child. Many of the metaphors that he used in his poetry came from legends, mythology, and literature. He was inspired, for example, by Norse mythology for &quot;The Skeleton in Armor&quot; and by Finnish legends for &quot;The Song of Hiawatha&quot;.

Longfellow rarely wrote on current subjects and seemed detached from contemporary American concerns. Even so, he called for the development of high quality American literature, as did many others during this period. In &quot;Kavanagh&quot;, a character says:

We want a national literature commensurate with our mountains and rivers ... We want a national epic that shall correspond to the size of the country ... We want a national drama in which scope shall be given to our gigantic ideas and to the unparalleled activity of our people ... In a word, we want a national literature altogether shaggy and unshorn, that shall shake the earth, like a herd of buffaloes thundering over the prairies.

He was important as a translator; his translation of Dante became a required possession for those who wanted to be a part of high culture. He encouraged and supported other translators, as well. In 1845, he published &quot;The Poets and Poetry of Europe&quot;, an 800-page compilation of translations made by other writers, including many by his friend and colleague Cornelius Conway Felton. Longfellow intended the anthology &quot;to bring together, into a compact and convenient form, as large an amount as possible of those English translations which are scattered through many volumes, and are not accessible to the general reader&quot;. In honor of his role with translations, Harvard established the Longfellow Institute in 1994, dedicated to literature written in the United States in languages other than English.

In 1874, Longfellow oversaw a 31-volume anthology called &quot;Poems of Places&quot; which collected poems representing several geographical locations, including European, Asian, and Arabian countries. Emerson was disappointed and reportedly told Longfellow: &quot;The world is expecting better things of you than this ... You are wasting time that should be bestowed upon original production&quot;. In preparing the volume, Longfellow hired Katherine Sherwood Bonner as an amanuensis.

===Critical response===

Fellow Portland, Maine, native John Neal published the first substantial praise of Longfellow&#x27;s work. In the January 23, 1828, issue of his magazine &quot;The Yankee&quot;, he wrote, &quot;As for Mr. Longfellow, he has a fine genius and a pure and safe taste, and all that he wants, we believe, is a little more energy, and a little more stoutness.&quot;

Longfellow&#x27;s early collections &quot;Voices of the Night&quot; and &quot;Ballads and Other Poems&quot; made him instantly popular. The &quot;New-Yorker&quot; called him &quot;one of the very few in our time who has successfully aimed in putting poetry to its best and sweetest uses&quot;. The &quot;Southern Literary Messenger&quot; immediately put Longfellow &quot;among the first of our American poets&quot;. Poet John Greenleaf Whittier said that Longfellow&#x27;s poetry illustrated &quot;the careful moulding by which art attains the graceful ease and chaste simplicity of nature&quot;. Longfellow&#x27;s friend Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. wrote of him as &quot;our chief singer&quot; and one who &quot;wins and warms ... kindles, softens, cheers [and] calms the wildest woe and stays the bitterest tears!&quot;

The rapidity with which American readers embraced Longfellow was unparalleled in publishing history in the United States; by 1874, he was earning $3,000 (~$ in ) per poem. His popularity spread throughout Europe as well, and his poetry was translated during his lifetime into Italian, French, German, and other languages. Scholar Bliss Perry suggests that criticizing Longfellow at that time was almost a criminal act equal to &quot;carrying a rifle into a national park&quot;. In the last two decades of his life, he often received requests for autographs from strangers, which he always sent. John Greenleaf Whittier suggested that it was this massive correspondence which led to Longfellow&#x27;s death: &quot;My friend Longfellow was driven to death by these incessant demands&quot;.

Contemporaneous writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote to Longfellow in May 1841 of his &quot;fervent admiration which [your] genius has inspired in me&quot; and later called him &quot;unquestionably the best poet in America&quot;. Poe&#x27;s reputation increased as a critic, however, and he later publicly accused Longfellow of plagiarism in what Poe biographers call &quot;The Longfellow War&quot;. He wrote that Longfellow was &quot;a determined imitator and a dextrous adapter of the ideas of other people&quot;, specifically Alfred, Lord Tennyson. His accusations may have been a publicity stunt to boost readership of the &quot;Broadway Journal&quot;, for which he was the editor at the time. Longfellow did not respond publicly but, after Poe&#x27;s death, he wrote: &quot;The harshness of his criticisms I have never attributed to anything but the irritation of a sensitive nature chafed by some indefinite sense of wrong&quot;.

Margaret Fuller judged Longfellow &quot;artificial and imitative&quot; and lacking force. Poet Walt Whitman considered him an imitator of European forms, but he praised his ability to reach a popular audience as &quot;the expressor of common themes—of the little songs of the masses&quot;. He added, &quot;Longfellow was no revolutionarie: never traveled new paths: of course never broke new paths.&quot; Lewis Mumford said that Longfellow could be completely removed from the history of literature without much effect.

Toward the end of his life, contemporaries considered him as more of a children&#x27;s poet, as many of his readers were children. A reviewer in 1848 accused Longfellow of creating a &quot;goody two-shoes kind of literature ... slipshod, sentimental stories told in the style of the nursery, beginning in nothing and ending in nothing&quot;. A more modern critic said, &quot;Who, except wretched schoolchildren, now reads Longfellow?&quot; A London critic in the &quot;London Quarterly Review&quot;, however, condemned &quot;all&quot; American poetry—&quot;with two or three exceptions, there is not a poet of mark in the whole union&quot;—but he singled out Longfellow as one of those exceptions. An editor of the &quot;Boston Evening Transcript&quot; wrote in 1846, &quot;Whatever the miserable envy of trashy criticism may write against Longfellow, one thing is most certain, no American poet is more read&quot;.

==Legacy==
Longfellow was the most popular poet of his day. As a friend once wrote, &quot;no other poet was so fully recognized in his lifetime&quot;. Many of his works helped shape the American character and its legacy, particularly with the poem &quot;Paul Revere&#x27;s Ride&quot;. He was such an admired figure in the United States during his life that his 70th birthday in 1877 took on the air of a national holiday, with parades, speeches, and the reading of his poetry. Longfellow&#x27;s popularity rapidly declined, beginning shortly after his death and into the 20th century, as academics focused attention on other poets such as Walt Whitman, Edwin Arlington Robinson, and Robert Frost. In the 20th century, literary scholar Kermit Vanderbilt noted: &quot;Increasingly rare is the scholar who braves ridicule to justify the art of Longfellow&#x27;s popular rhymings.&quot; Twentieth-century poet Lewis Putnam Turco concluded that &quot;Longfellow was minor and derivative in every way throughout his career ... nothing more than a hack imitator of the English Romantics.&quot; Author Nicholas A. Basbanes, in his 2020 book &quot;Cross of Snow: A Life of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow&quot;, defended Longfellow as &quot;the victim of an orchestrated dismissal that may well be unique in American literary history&quot;.

Over the years, Longfellow&#x27;s personality has become part of his reputation. He has been presented as a gentle, placid, poetic soul, an image perpetuated by his brother Samuel Longfellow who wrote an early biography which specifically emphasized these points. As James Russell Lowell said, Longfellow had an &quot;absolute sweetness, simplicity, and modesty&quot;. At Longfellow&#x27;s funeral, his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson called him &quot;a sweet and beautiful soul&quot;. In reality, his life was much more difficult than was assumed. He suffered from neuralgia, which caused him constant pain, and he had poor eyesight. He wrote to friend Charles Sumner: &quot;I do not believe anyone &quot;can&quot; be perfectly well, who has a brain and a heart&quot;. He had difficulty coping with the death of his second wife Frances. Longfellow was very quiet, reserved, and private; in later years, he was known for being unsocial and avoided leaving home.

Longfellow had become one of the first American celebrities and was popular in Europe. It was reported that 10,000 copies of &quot;The Courtship of Miles Standish&quot; sold in London in a single day. Children adored him; &quot;The Village Blacksmith&quot;&#x27;s &quot;spreading chestnut-tree&quot; was cut down and the children of Cambridge had it converted into an armchair which they presented to him. In 1884, Longfellow became the first non-British writer for whom a commemorative bust was placed in Poet&#x27;s Corner of Westminster Abbey in London; he remains the only American poet represented with a bust. A public monument by Franklin Simmons was erected in Longfellow&#x27;s birthplace of Portland, Maine, in September 1888. In 1909, a statue of Longfellow was unveiled in Washington, DC, sculpted by William Couper. He was honored in February 1940 and March 2007 when the United States Postal Service issued stamps commemorating him.

As a memorial to their father, Longfellow&#x27;s children donated land across Brattle Street and facing the family home to the City of Cambridge, which became Longfellow Park. A monument featuring a bas relief of Miles Standish, Sadalphon, the Village Blacksmith, the Spanish Student, Evangeline, and Hiawatha, characters from Longfellow&#x27;s works, was dedicated in October 1914.

==Works==

===Poetry and prose===

* &quot;Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea&quot; (travelogue) (1835)
* &quot;Hyperion, a Romance&quot; (novel) (1839)
* &quot;The Spanish Student. A Play in Three Acts&quot; (drama) (1843)
* &quot;The Arrow and the Song&quot; (short poem) (1845)
* &quot;Evangeline: A Tale of Acadie&quot; (epic poem) (1847)
* &quot;Kavanagh&quot; (novel) (1849)
* &quot;The Golden Legend&quot; (poem) (1851)
* &quot;The Song of Hiawatha&quot; (epic poem) (1855)
* &quot;The Legend of Rabbi Ben Levi&quot; (poem) (1863)
* &quot;The New England Tragedies&quot; (poem) (1868)
* &quot;The Divine Tragedy&quot; (poem) (1871)
* &quot;Christus: A Mystery&quot; (poetry compilation) (1872)
===Poetry collections===

* &quot;Voices of the Night&quot; (1839)
* &quot;Ballads and Other Poems&quot; (1841)
* &quot;Poems on Slavery&quot; (1842)
* &quot;The Belfry of Bruges and Other Poems&quot; (1845)
* &quot;The Seaside and the Fireside&quot; (1850)
* &quot;The Poetical Works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow&quot; (London, 1852), with illustrations by John Gilbert
* &quot;The Courtship of Miles Standish and Other Poems&quot; (1858)
* &quot;Tales of a Wayside Inn&quot; (including the &quot;second flight&quot; of &quot;Birds of Passage&quot;) (1863)
* &quot;Household Poems&quot; (1865)
* &quot;Flower-de-Luce&quot; (1867)
* &quot;Three Books of Song&quot; (including the second part of &quot;Tales of a Wayside Inn&quot;) (1872)
* &quot;Aftermath&quot; (comprising the third part of &quot;Tales of a Wayside Inn&quot; and the &quot;third flight&quot; of &quot;Birds of Passage&quot;) (1873)
* &quot;The Masque of Pandora and Other Poems&quot; (1875)
* &quot;Kéramos and Other Poems&quot; (1878)
* &quot;Ultima Thule&quot; (1880)
* &quot;In the Harbor&quot; (1882)
* &quot;Michel Angelo: A Fragment&quot; (incomplete; published posthumously)
===Translations===
* &quot;Coplas de Don Jorge Manrique&quot; (translation from Spanish) (1833)
* &quot;Dante&#x27;s Divine Comedy&quot; (translation from Italian) (1867)
===Anthologies===
* &quot;Poets and Poetry of Europe&quot; (translations) (1844)
* &quot;The Waif&quot; (1845)
* &quot;Poems of Places&quot; (1874)

==See also==
* Whom the gods would destroy
* Alexander Wadsworth Longfellow Jr., his nephew
* &quot;The Golden Legend&quot; (cantata), a musical adaptation by Sullivan and Bennett, of his poem &quot;The Golden Legend&quot;
* Acadian literature

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

Sources
* Poems by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and biography at PoetryFoundation.org (archived November 10, 2010)
* 
* Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: Profile and Poems at Poets.org
* Audio, hear &quot;The Village Blacksmith&quot;
* Maine Historical Society Searchable poem text database, biographical data, lesson plans.
*Davidson, Thomas (1911). &quot;&quot;. In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.) &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;. 16. (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 977–980.

Other
* Longfellow House–Washington&#x27;s Headquarters National Historic Site in Cambridge, Massachusetts
* Wadsworth–Longfellow House in Portland, Maine
* Public Poet, Private Man: Henry Wadsworth Longfellow at 200 Online exhibition featuring material from the collection of Longfellow&#x27;s papers at the Houghton Library, Harvard University.
* Longfellow&#x27;s Translation of Dante rendered side by side with that of Cary and Norton
* Famous Quotations by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
* The Oliver Wendell Holmes Library at the Library of Congress has noteworthy representation volumes inscribed by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="0" end="26" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153196" start="142" end="165" title="Paul Revere&amp;#x27;s Ride" label="Paul Revere&amp;#x27;s Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q279486" start="179" end="199" title="The Song of Hiawatha" label="The Song of Hiawatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625102" start="217" end="227" title="Evangeline" label="Evangeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="285" end="300" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="314" end="327" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418997" start="353" end="367" title="fireside poets" label="fireside poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="410" end="418" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283452" start="420" end="437" title="District of Maine" label="District of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="458" end="473" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q895401" start="494" end="509" title="Bowdoin College" label="Bowdoin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="554" end="569" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q474665" start="827" end="857" title="Longfellow House–Washington&amp;#x27;s Headquarters National Historic Site" label="Revolutionary War headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="861" end="878" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="882" end="906" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453177" start="1611" end="1629" title="Stephen Longfellow" label="Stephen Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="1667" end="1682" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283452" start="1691" end="1716" title="district of Maine" label="district of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q127326956" start="1761" end="1780" title="159–161 Fore Street" label="159–161 Fore Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959331" start="1821" end="1847" title="Wadsworth-Longfellow House" label="Wadsworth-Longfellow House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160823" start="1851" end="1866" title="Congress Street (Portland, Maine)" label="Congress Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067953" start="1926" end="1941" title="Peleg Wadsworth" label="Peleg Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1960" end="1986" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329818" start="2043" end="2057" title="Richard Warren" label="Richard Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="2084" end="2093" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135223" start="2221" end="2238" title="Second Battle of Tripoli Harbor" label="Battle of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="2341" end="2352" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329818" start="2418" end="2432" title="Richard Warren" label="Richard Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q864709" start="2434" end="2450" title="William Brewster (Mayflower passenger)" label="William Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218491" start="2456" end="2460" title="John Alden" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245574" start="2465" end="2480" title="Priscilla Alden" label="Priscilla Alden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363299" start="2504" end="2521" title="Elizabeth Pabodie" label="Elizabeth Pabodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="2547" end="2562" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012674" start="2587" end="2598" title="dame school" label="dame school"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577465" start="2662" end="2678" title="Portland Academy (Maine)" label="Portland Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="2862" end="2877" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="Robinson Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="2894" end="2905" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449210" start="3235" end="3247" title="Hiram, Maine" label="Hiram, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q895401" start="3306" end="3321" title="Bowdoin College" label="Bowdoin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q518466" start="3325" end="3341" title="Brunswick, Maine" label="Brunswick, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="3471" end="3490" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q895401" start="3657" end="3674" title="Peucinian Society" label="Peucinian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="3701" end="3711" title="Federalist Party (United States)" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788513" start="4282" end="4303" title="Thomas Cogswell Upham" label="Thomas Cogswell Upham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="4604" end="4618" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q817638" start="4858" end="4870" title="Benjamin Orr (Massachusetts politician)" label="Benjamin Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="4926" end="4932" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="5521" end="5538" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5757" end="5769" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389233" start="6340" end="6354" title="Jorge Manrique" label="Jorge Manrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112902" start="6400" end="6438" title="Outre-Mer" label="Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="6448" end="6459" title="Serial (literature)" label="serial form"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543490" start="6618" end="6636" title="George Pope Morris" label="George Pope Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646391" start="7506" end="7523" title="Josiah Quincy III" label="Josiah Quincy III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="8078" end="8099" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="8771" end="8788" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="8800" end="8815" title="Siege of Boston" label="Siege of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q22919805" start="8887" end="8901" title="Andrew Craigie" label="Andrew Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q589759" start="8972" end="8984" title="Jared Sparks" label="Jared Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q434905" start="8986" end="9000" title="Edward Everett" label="Edward Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282899" start="9006" end="9030" title="Joseph Emerson Worcester" label="Joseph Emerson Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q474665" start="9061" end="9131" title="Longfellow House–Washington&amp;#x27;s Headquarters National Historic Site" label="Longfellow House–Washington&amp;#x27;s Headquarters National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772646" start="9492" end="9514" title="The Village Blacksmith" label="The Village Blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776274" start="9531" end="9556" title="The Wreck of the Hesperus" label="The Wreck of the Hesperus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133760" start="9722" end="9745" title="Cornelius Conway Felton" label="Cornelius Conway Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527838" start="9747" end="9770" title="George Stillman Hillard" label="George Stillman Hillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066198" start="9776" end="9790" title="Charles Sumner" label="Charles Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q553019" start="10120" end="10135" title="Nathan Appleton" label="Nathan Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790099" start="10148" end="10168" title="Thomas Gold Appleton" label="Thomas Gold Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q68978" start="10184" end="10188" title="Thun" label="Thun"/>
<link wikidata="Q812889" start="10865" end="10876" title="Beacon Hill, Boston" label="Beacon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479078" start="10995" end="11012" title="Longfellow Bridge" label="Longfellow Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386175" start="11056" end="11064" title="Hyperion (Longfellow novel)" label="Hyperion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="11285" end="11303" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q521148" start="11375" end="11382" title="Boppard" label="Boppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593998" start="11564" end="11580" title="Poems on Slavery" label="Poems on Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730061" start="11843" end="11851" title="The Dial" label="The Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415113" start="12034" end="12066" title="New England Anti-Slavery Society" label="New England Anti-Slavery Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q59697" start="12654" end="12662" title="Hesperus" label="Hesperus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393965" start="12919" end="12935" title="Ernest Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Ernest Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030391" start="12968" end="12978" title="Alice Mary Longfellow" label="Alice Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326394" start="13094" end="13116" title="Richard Henry Dana III" label="Richard Henry Dana III"/>
<link wikidata="Q527981" start="13125" end="13147" title="Richard Henry Dana Jr." label="Richard Henry Dana Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3024921" start="13164" end="13189" title="Two Years Before the Mast" label="Two Years Before the Mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968985" start="13253" end="13271" title="Nathan Cooley Keep" label="Nathan Cooley Keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="13285" end="13290" title="diethyl ether" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="13328" end="13338" title="anesthesia" label="anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625102" start="13402" end="13412" title="Evangeline" label="Evangeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="13693" end="13712" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14545" end="14564" title="Match#Friction_matches" label="self-lighting match"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14765" end="14770" title="Diethyl_ether#Anesthesia" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="15182" end="15190" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="15722" end="15737" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="15751" end="15764" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q526709" start="15965" end="15985" title="William Dean Howells" label="William Dean Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q449670" start="15987" end="16007" title="James Russell Lowell" label="James Russell Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628443" start="16013" end="16033" title="Charles Eliot Norton" label="Charles Eliot Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411203" start="16308" end="16319" title="Samuel Ward (lobbyist)" label="Samuel Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436579" start="16391" end="16410" title="The New York Ledger" label="The New York Ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="16523" end="16535" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="16627" end="16645" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544997" start="16777" end="16811" title="I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day" label="I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q80766" start="17009" end="17027" title="Joshua Chamberlain" label="Joshua Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="17770" end="17775" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="17860" end="17871" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="18001" end="18022" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="18108" end="18120" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="18459" end="18471" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="18520" end="18529" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q141126" start="18534" end="18544" title="free verse" label="free verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q465509" start="18598" end="18605" title="anapest" label="anapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q208653" start="18612" end="18620" title="trochee" label="trochaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739672" start="18628" end="18639" title="blank verse" label="blank verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714966" start="18641" end="18655" title="heroic couplet" label="heroic couplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="18658" end="18664" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80056" start="18671" end="18677" title="sonnet" label="sonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502127" start="19658" end="19669" title="didacticism" label="didacticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="19863" end="19871" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="19982" end="19990" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="20098" end="20113" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495128" start="20124" end="20145" title="The Skeleton in Armor" label="The Skeleton in Armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q279486" start="20185" end="20205" title="The Song of Hiawatha" label="The Song of Hiawatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379083" start="20439" end="20447" title="Kavanagh (novel)" label="Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133760" start="21279" end="21302" title="Cornelius Conway Felton" label="Cornelius Conway Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376542" start="22177" end="22202" title="Katherine Sherwood Bonner McDowell" label="Katherine Sherwood Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q499134" start="22209" end="22219" title="amanuensis" label="amanuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345564" start="22278" end="22287" title="John Neal" label="John Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324969" start="22407" end="22417" title="The Yankee" label="The Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129973" start="22912" end="22939" title="Southern Literary Messenger" label="Southern Literary Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q458372" start="23029" end="23052" title="John Greenleaf Whittier" label="John Greenleaf Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="23230" end="23255" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4926866" start="23759" end="23770" title="Bliss Perry" label="Bliss Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="24241" end="24256" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="24538" end="24548" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="24739" end="24760" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q129875" start="24843" end="24859" title="Broadway Journal" label="Broadway Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q257953" start="25147" end="25162" title="Margaret Fuller" label="Margaret Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="25242" end="25254" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="25552" end="25565" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098270" start="25739" end="25759" title="children&amp;#x27;s poetry" label="children&amp;#x27;s poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153196" start="26839" end="26862" title="Paul Revere&amp;#x27;s Ride" label="Paul Revere&amp;#x27;s Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294394" start="27238" end="27262" title="Edwin Arlington Robinson" label="Edwin Arlington Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="27268" end="27280" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537125" start="27491" end="27509" title="Lewis Turco" label="Lewis Putnam Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q14587596" start="27679" end="27699" title="Nicholas A. Basbanes" label="Nicholas A. Basbanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="28323" end="28342" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136940" start="28474" end="28483" title="neuralgia" label="neuralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727869" start="29002" end="29033" title="The Courtship of Miles Standish" label="The Courtship of Miles Standish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="29377" end="29395" title="Poet&amp;#x27;s Corner" label="Poet&amp;#x27;s Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="29399" end="29416" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715207" start="29489" end="29504" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Monument" label="public monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491827" start="29508" end="29524" title="Franklin Simmons" label="Franklin Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223678" start="29619" end="29639" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Memorial" label="statue of Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779937" start="29684" end="29698" title="William Couper (sculptor)" label="William Couper"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="29756" end="29784" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112902" start="30246" end="30255" title="Outre-Mer" label="Outre-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386175" start="30319" end="30338" title="Hyperion (Longfellow novel)" label="Hyperion, a Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625102" start="30496" end="30506" title="Evangeline" label="Evangeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379083" start="30558" end="30566" title="Kavanagh (novel)" label="Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q279486" start="30642" end="30662" title="The Song of Hiawatha" label="The Song of Hiawatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q359782" start="30716" end="30724" title="Joshua ben Levi" label="Ben Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593998" start="31028" end="31044" title="Poems on Slavery" label="Poems on Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727869" start="31288" end="31319" title="The Courtship of Miles Standish" label="The Courtship of Miles Standish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235207" start="31357" end="31379" title="Tales of a Wayside Inn" label="Tales of a Wayside Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="32176" end="32189" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864518" start="32394" end="32421" title="Whom the gods would destroy" label="Whom the gods would destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720315" start="32424" end="32458" title="Alexander Wadsworth Longfellow Jr." label="Alexander Wadsworth Longfellow Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7737071" start="32473" end="32512" title="The Golden Legend (cantata)" label="&amp;quot;The Golden Legend&amp;quot; (cantata)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="32538" end="32546" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281454" start="32551" end="32558" title="Joseph Bennett (critic)" label="Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256749" start="32604" end="32622" title="Acadian literature" label="Acadian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719374" start="33498" end="33514" title="Houghton Library" label="Houghton Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="33721" end="33740" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66241" wikidata="Q174240" url="?curid=66241" title="Transparency International">
<text>Transparency International e.V. (TI) is a German registered association founded in 1993 by former employees of the World Bank. Based in Berlin, its nonprofit and non-governmental purpose is to take action to combat global corruption with civil societal anti-corruption measures and to prevent criminal activities arising from corruption. Its most notable publications include the Global Corruption Barometer and the Corruption Perceptions Index. TI serves as an umbrella organization. From 1993 to today, its membership has grown from a few individuals to more than 100 national chapters, which engage in fighting perceived corruption in their home countries. TI is a member of G20 Think Tanks, UNESCO Consultative Status, United Nations Global Compact, Sustainable Development Solutions Network and shares the goals of peace, justice, strong institutions and partnerships of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG). TI is a social partner of Global Alliance in Management Education. TI confirmed the dis-accreditation of the national chapter of United States of America in 2017.

According to the 2016 Global Go To Think Tank Index Report, TI was number 9 of 100 in the &quot;Top Think Tanks Worldwide (non-U.S.)&quot; category and number 27 of 150 in the &quot;Top Think Tanks Worldwide (U.S. and non-U.S.)&quot; category.

==History==

Transparency International was founded on 9 February 1993 in The Hague, Netherlands; it was formally registered on 15 June 1993 in Berlin, Germany. According to political scientist Ellen Gutterman, &quot;TI&#x27;s presence in Germany, and indeed its organizational development and rise from a small operation to a prominent international TNGO [Transnational Non Governmental Organisation], benefited from the activities and personal connections of at least three key German individuals: Peter Eigen, Hansjoerg Elshorst, and Michael Wiehen&quot;.

The founding members included:

*Peter Eigen, a former regional director for the World Bank, is recognized as a founder. 
*Peter Conze, a former regional director of GTZ (then Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit)
*Laurence Cockcroft
*Fritz Heimann of General Electric. 
*Michael J. Hershman of the U.S. military intelligence establishment (now President and CEO of the Fairfax Group).
*Kamal Hossain, former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh.
*Gerald Parfitt, formerly of Coopers &amp; Lybrand (then PricewaterhouseCoopers) in Ukraine.
*Jeremy Pope, a New Zealand activist and writer.
*Roy Stacy
*Frank Vogl, a senior official at the World Bank and head of Vogl Communications, Inc., which has &quot;provided advice to leaders of international finance&quot;.
In 1995, TI developed the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI). The CPI ranked nations on the prevalence of corruption within each country, based upon surveys of business people. The CPI was subsequently published annually. It was initially criticized for poor methodology and unfair treatment of developing nations, while also being praised for highlighting corruption and embarrassing governments.

Starting in 1999 and ending in 2011, TI published the Bribe Payers Index (BPI) which ranked nations according to the perceived likelihood that a country&#x27;s multinational corporations would offer bribes. Spokesperson Shubham Kaushik said the organization &quot;decided to discontinue the survey due to funding issues and to focus on issues that are more in line with our advocacy goals&quot;. The &quot;Journal of Business Ethics&quot; states &quot;Bribery in international business transactions can be seen as a function of not only the demand for such bribes in different countries, but the supply, or willingness to provide bribes by multinational firms and their representatives. This study addresses the propensity of firms from 30 different countries to engage in international bribery&quot;.

Since 2005, TI has published thirteen Exporting Corruption reports. Exporting Corruption is a research report that rates the bribery-related performance of leading global exporters, including countries that are signatories of OECD Anti-Bribery Convention.

In April 2015 Russia&#x27;s Ministry of Justice added TI to the so-called list of &quot;foreign agents&quot;. On 6 March 2023, TI was declared an undesirable organization in Russia.

Since 2023 TI partners with ChatBot and utilises artificial intelligence technology on its website to enhance its digital engagement and support transparency initiatives at scale.

==Areas of work and products==
Transparency International is the global civil society organization leading the fight against corruption. It brings people together in a powerful worldwide coalition to end the devastating impact of corruption on men, women and children around the world. TI&#x27;s mission is to create change towards a world free of corruption.
The organization defines corruption as the abuse of entrusted power for private gain which eventually hurts everyone who depends on the integrity of people in a position of authority. It develops tools for fighting corruption and works with other civil society organizations, companies and governments to implement them. Since 1995, TI has issued an annual Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI); it also publishes a Global Corruption Report, a Global Corruption Barometer, and a Bribe Payers Index. In 2010, TI developed a five-year strategy with six strategic priorities organized by the following categories: People, Institutions, Laws, Values, Network, Impact. In 2015, TI developed a five-year strategy which sets out their collective ambition for the coming years. &quot;Together against Corruption: Transparency International Strategy 2020&quot; is a strategy by and for the TI movement. This strategy is based on more than 1500 external and internal contributions addressing both the corruption environment of today and the one TI anticipates in the years ahead.

=== Corruption Perceptions Index ===

The Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) ranks countries and territories based on how corrupt their public sector is perceived to be. It is a composite index – a combination of polls – drawing on corruption-related data collected by a variety of reputable institutions. The CPI reflects the views of observers from around the world.

The Corruption Perceptions Index has been criticised for measuring &quot;perception&quot; and not &quot;reality&quot;. The creators of the index argue that &quot;perceptions matter in their own right, since... firms and individuals take actions based on perceptions&quot;.

=== International Anti-Corruption Conference ===
First held in 1983, the International Anti-Corruption Conference (IACC) is a series of international conferences organised by the IACC Council, in association with local governments and organisations, with TI as its secretariat. The conferences take place every two years in different countries.

===Global Anti-Corruption Consortium (GACC)===
Since 2016, TI has partnered with the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP). The partnership enables knowledge and evidence gathered through OCCRP&#x27;s corruption investigations to inform TI&#x27;s policy and legal advocacy. The programme is co-funded by three governments, including the US, and private donors.

=== Other key products ===

*The Global Corruption Barometer (GCB) is a survey that asks citizens about their direct personal experience of corruption in their daily lives.
*The Global Corruption Report picks a specific topic like corruption in climate change for example and provides in-depth research.
*National integrity system assessments are designed to provide comprehensive analysis on a given country&#x27;s mechanisms to fight corruption.
*In 2013, TI published the Government Defence Anti-corruption Index with which corruption in the defence sector of 82 countries was measured. Some governments have expressed criticism towards the methodology of the report. Mark Pyman, the founder of TI&#x27;s Defence &amp; Security program, defended the report in an interview and stressed the importance of transparency in the military sector. The plan is to publish the index every two years.
*Exporting Corruption is a research report that rates the corruption performance of leading exporting countries, including signatories of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention.

== Organizational structure ==

According to its 2012 Annual Report, Transparency International is funded by western governments (with almost €5 million from the UK government) and several multinational companies, including oil companies Exxon Mobil and Shell, hedge funds KKR and Wermuth Asset Management, Deloitte and Ernst &amp; Young. Exxon Mobil itself was ranked in 2008 as the least transparent of 42 major oil and gas firms.

TI&#x27;s leadership structure includes an advisory council, a group of individuals with extensive experience in TI&#x27;s work. Drawn from diverse geographical, cultural and professional backgrounds, council members are appointed by the TI board of directors to advise them and to support the work of the organization as a whole.

Former head of technology Daniel Eriksson was appointed interim managing director in March 2020, and became CEO a year later. In October 2024, he announced he would be stepping down as CEO in January 2025. Maíra Martini succeeded him, taking office on 1 February 2025.

=== Chapters ===
Transparency International consists of chapters – locally established, independent organizations – that address corruption in their respective countries. From small bribes to large-scale looting, corruption differs from country to country. As chapters are staffed with local experts they are ideally placed to determine the priorities and approaches best suited to tackling corruption in their countries. This work ranges from visiting rural communities to provide free legal support to advising their government on policy reform. Corruption does not stop at national borders. The chapters play a crucial role in shaping its collective work and realising its regional and global goals, such as Strategy 2015. Transparency International&#x27;s multi-country research and advocacy initiatives are driven by the chapters.

* Transparency International Canada
* Transparency Serbia
* Transparency International Slovakia
* Transparency International Bangladesh
* Association for a More Just Society, TI Honduras
* Corruption Watch (South Africa), TI South Africa

==Controversies==
According to the newspaper &quot;Le Monde&quot;: &quot;In its main surveys, Transparency International does not measure the weight of corruption in economic terms for each country. It develops a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) based on surveys conducted by private structures or other NGOs: the Economist Intelligence Unit, backed by the British liberal weekly newspaper &quot;The Economist&quot;, the American neoconservative organization Freedom House, the World Economic Forum, or large corporations. (...) The IPC ignores corruption cases that concern the business world. So, the collapse of Lehman Brothers (2008) or the manipulation of the money market reference rate (Libor) by major British banks revealed in 2011 did not affect the ratings of the United States or United Kingdom.&quot; The organization also receives funding from companies that are themselves convicted of corruption offences. CPI&#x27;s reliance on opinions of a relatively small group of experts and businesspeople, has been criticised by some. Alex Cobham, fellow at the Center for Global Development, states that it &quot;embeds a powerful and misleading elite bias in popular perceptions of corruption&quot;. Others argue it is not plausible to ever measure the true scale and depth of a highly complex issue like corruption with a single number, and then rank countries accordingly.

===2013 attitude to Edward Snowden===
At its annual members&#x27; meeting in November 2013 in Berlin, TI&#x27;s national chapters from Germany and Ireland proposed a resolution calling for the &quot;end of the prosecution of Edward J. Snowden... He should be recognized as a whistleblower for his help to reveal the over-reaching and unlawful surveillance by secret services...He symbolizes the courage of numerous other whistleblowers around the world.&quot;

The final resolution that was passed by the plenary excluded any reference to Snowden, and excluded a call for &quot;comprehensive protection on whistleblowers from all forms of retaliation&quot;. The original resolution was weakened following the intervention of the USA chapter. Five months earlier, in June 2013, representatives from TI met Snowden at the Moscow airport, where he asked for political asylum in Russia.

===2014 funding from Siemens===
In January 2015 it was reported that TI accepted $3 million from the German engineering multinational Siemens, which in 2008 paid one of the largest corporate corruption fines in history – $1.6 billion – for bribing government officials in numerous countries. In 2014, Siemens made the donation to TI after pleading guilty in 2008 to bribery charges relating to widespread corrupt practices in Greece, Norway, Iraq, Vietnam, Italy, Israel, Argentina, Venezuela, China and Russia.

TI applied for and received the funding from Siemens, even though TI&#x27;s due diligence procedures prohibit the organization from accepting money from corporations that want to &quot;greenwash&quot; their reputations by making donations to TI. &quot;If any corporate donor is accused of having been involved in corruption, the donor can expect no protection from TI,&quot; the procedures state. Transparency International received the funding from the &quot;Siemens Integrity Initiative&quot; about a year after the &quot;Initiative&quot; hired former TI staffer Jana Mittermaier, raising questions of a &quot;revolving door&quot; that has benefited both the organization and the company.

Several of TI&#x27;s national chapters also have accepted money from Siemens: $660,000 for TI USA, $600,000 for TI Italy, $450,000 for TI Bulgaria, and $230,000 for TI Mexico – each for a period of three years. &quot;This really shows that Transparency International is not as pure as people think,&quot; a TI insider told Corporate Crime Reporter. TI&#x27;s then managing director, Cobus de Swardt, said, &quot;We did not file an application to Siemens, we applied to the Siemens Integrity Initiative. There&#x27;s a difference. We have not applied to Siemens.&quot; However, according to Siemens, the money for these grants is &quot;provided by Siemens&quot;.

===2015 whistleblowing===
In August 2015 former TI staffer Anna Buzzoni went public regarding retaliation she and her colleagues faced after reporting to managers questionable financial dealings at TI&#x27;s Water Integrity Network. Two of Buzzoni&#x27;s project responsibilities were suspended and she was transferred against her will. She left TI shortly before internal whistleblower guidelines were adopted in June 2014.

===2015 Croatia chapter disaccreditation===
Due to a &quot;lack of confidence&quot;, TI&#x27;s chapter in Croatia was disaccredited by the organization&#x27;s board of directors in November 2015. The previous year, several leaders of the Croatia chapter challenged the legality of the chapter president&#x27;s election. The president was accused of falsifying records, conflicts of interest, and arbitrarily expelling 10 chapter members who opposed the hiring of staff against the organization&#x27;s rules. The Croatian government eventually revoked the president&#x27;s appointment.

===2017 USA chapter disaccreditation===
In January 2017, the TI Secretariat confirmed that its International Board of Directors decided on 10 January 2017 to strip its US affiliate – Transparency International USA – of its accreditation as the National Chapter in the United States.
The stated basis for the dis-accreditation was the board&#x27;s recognition of differences in philosophies, strategies, and priorities between the former chapter and the Transparency International Movement. Elsewhere, it was reported that TI-USA came to be seen in the United States as a corporate front group, funded by multinational corporations. TI-USA&#x27;s funding was provided by Bechtel Corporation, Deloitte, Google, Pfizer ($50,000 or more), Citigroup, ExxonMobil, Fluor, General Electric, Lockheed Martin, Marsh &amp; McLennan, PepsiCo, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Raytheon, Realogy, Tyco ($25,000–$49,999), and Freeport-McMoRan and Johnson &amp; Johnson (up to $24,999). TI-USA previously awarded an annual corporate leadership award to one of its big corporate funders. In 2016, this award went to Bechtel. In April 2015 the Secretariat defended the decision by TI-USA to give Hillary Clinton its Integrity Award in 2012. Since January 1, 2020, Transparency International has an office in the United States.

===2017–21 reports of bullying, harassment and abuse of power by Board members and senior management===
In 2017, Cobus de Swardt stood down as TI&#x27;s managing director, following a dispute with the organisation&#x27;s board of directors. De Swardt agreed a settlement with TI in a Labour Court in Berlin.

In August 2019, accounts from seven current and former TI Secretariat staff were reported in &quot;The Guardian&quot; alleging a &quot;toxic&quot; workplace culture at the organisation.

De Swardt&#x27;s successor, Patricia Moreira, left in 2020 after making similar accusations to those of De Swardt, accusing the Board of failing to protect whistleblowers, as well as corruption.

The German newspaper &quot;Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung&quot; reported that TI dismissed Moreira &quot;without giving any reasons&quot;. The article added that, &quot;dozens of employees, including high-ranking ones, have left the organisation in recent years. Even long-standing and deeply committed employees complain that TI is involved in political intrigues in which some are only interested in their own progress. For a non-governmental organization whose goal is to fight corruption around the world, and which collects millions of dollars in funding from governments and companies every year, this is a disturbing finding.&quot; Investigations specialist Harriet Witchell has stated that the TI board’s handling of the complaints process was beset by conflicts of interest and failed to address allegations of misconduct made against the board.

In 2021, de Swardt published a book accusing TI of abuse of power and silencing whistleblowers. De Swardt also presented a video published on YouTube by his publisher, Springer, criticising corruption at TI.

===Political activities in Brazil===

TI&#x27;s political impartiality, as well as its own transparency, have been called into question over hacked conversations of prosecutors in Operation Car Wash, leaked to &quot;The Intercept&quot;. In these, chief prosecutor Deltan Dallagnol and head of TI Brazil, Bruno Brandão, discuss a &quot;backstage campaign&quot; to &quot;disarm resistance on the left&quot;, fund selected candidates, and target others, seen as adversaries, using social media. Plans extended to preparing a series of false accusations (&quot;denúncias sem materialidade&quot;) intended to damage the reputation of former president and potential candidate Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, and lead up to a chat in which participants celebrate the election of Jair Bolsonaro.

In April 2022, Brazil&#x27;s auditing court announced that it had opened an investigation against TI over the illegal imprisonment of Lula da Silva.

== See also ==
* European Public Prosecutor
* Group of States Against Corruption
* Information commissioner
* International Anti-Corruption Academy
* ISO 37001 Anti-bribery management systems
* United Nations Convention against Corruption
* Freedom of information
* Transparency (market)
* Transparency (trade)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="0" end="31" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International e.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="33" end="35" title="Transparency International" label="TI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299236" start="49" end="71" title="Registered association (Germany)" label="registered association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="115" end="125" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="136" end="142" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="148" end="157" title="Nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="222" end="232" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741353" start="253" end="268" title="anti-corruption" label="anti-corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q855848" start="285" end="312" title="Crime prevention" label="prevent criminal activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017394" start="380" end="407" title="Global Corruption Barometer" label="Global Corruption Barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="416" end="444" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156831" start="462" end="483" title="umbrella organization" label="umbrella organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="624" end="634" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="678" end="681" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="695" end="701" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231600" start="702" end="721" title="Consultative Status" label="Consultative Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387974" start="723" end="752" title="United Nations Global Compact" label="United Nations Global Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q17355018" start="754" end="795" title="Sustainable Development Solutions Network" label="Sustainable Development Solutions Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187686" start="880" end="932" title="United Nations Sustainable Development Group" label="United Nations Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023349" start="960" end="999" title="Global Alliance in Management Education" label="Global Alliance in Management Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1063" end="1087" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784536" start="1115" end="1156" title="Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program" label="2016 Global Go To Think Tank Index Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="1417" end="1426" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1428" end="1439" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1487" end="1493" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1495" end="1502" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926150" start="1694" end="1698" title="Transnational organization" label="TNGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q95830" start="1843" end="1854" title="Peter Eigen" label="Peter Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q95830" start="1936" end="1947" title="Peter Eigen" label="Peter Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1984" end="1994" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q462763" start="2079" end="2134" title="Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit" label="Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="2174" end="2190" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q129319702" start="2194" end="2213" title="Michael J. Hershman" label="Michael J. Hershman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="2226" end="2247" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q327967" start="2309" end="2322" title="Kamal Hossain" label="Kamal Hossain"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="2362" end="2372" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="2403" end="2424" title="Coopers &amp;amp; Lybrand" label="Coopers &amp;amp; Lybrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="2431" end="2453" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2458" end="2465" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15457412" start="2468" end="2479" title="Jeremy Pope (activist)" label="Jeremy Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2565" end="2575" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q913338" start="3143" end="3161" title="Bribe Payers Index" label="Bribe Payers Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="3249" end="3275" title="multinational corporations" label="multinational corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294886" start="3495" end="3521" title="Journal of Business Ethics" label="Journal of Business Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q626826" start="4118" end="4146" title="OECD Anti-Bribery Convention" label="OECD Anti-Bribery Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4163" end="4176" title="Russia" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q264356" start="4177" end="4196" title="Ministry of Justice (Russia)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071473" start="4231" end="4257" title="Russian foreign agent law" label="&amp;quot;foreign agents&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720744" start="4295" end="4319" title="Russian undesirable organizations law" label="undesirable organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4323" end="4329" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127602" start="4360" end="4367" title="ChatBot" label="ChatBot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="4381" end="4404" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="5230" end="5258" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570207" start="5286" end="5310" title="Global Corruption Report" label="Global Corruption Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017394" start="5314" end="5341" title="Global Corruption Barometer" label="Global Corruption Barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q625994" start="6735" end="6745" title="Business conference" label="conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102061" start="7016" end="7064" title="Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project" label="Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="8617" end="8628" title="ExxonMobil" label="Exxon Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="8633" end="8638" title="Shell plc" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="8652" end="8655" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="KKR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207254" start="8660" end="8667" title="Jochen Wermuth" label="Wermuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="8686" end="8694" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q489097" start="8699" end="8716" title="Ernst &amp;amp; Young" label="Ernst &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233399" start="10254" end="10287" title="Transparency International Canada" label="Transparency International Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q27105103" start="10290" end="10309" title="Transparency Serbia" label="Transparency Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834772" start="10312" end="10347" title="Transparency International Slovakia" label="Transparency International Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130431" start="10350" end="10387" title="Transparency International Bangladesh" label="Transparency International Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809541" start="10390" end="10425" title="Association for a More Just Society" label="Association for a More Just Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345612" start="10441" end="10472" title="Corruption Watch (South Africa)" label="Corruption Watch (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="10542" end="10550" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="10806" end="10833" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="10888" end="10901" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="10951" end="10964" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="10970" end="10990" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269580" start="11107" end="11122" title="Bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207351" start="11186" end="11191" title="Libor" label="Libor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11267" end="11280" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11284" end="11298" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355598" start="11561" end="11590" title="Center for Global Development" label="Center for Global Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="12102" end="12119" title="Edward J. Snowden" label="Edward J. Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="12152" end="12165" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="12895" end="12902" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q983063" start="13459" end="13468" title="greenwashing" label="greenwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256740" start="13886" end="13900" title="Revolving door (politics)" label="revolving door"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191200" start="14349" end="14364" title="Cobus de Swardt" label="Cobus de Swardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="15161" end="15168" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="15424" end="15445" title="conflicts of interest" label="conflicts of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q813639" start="16311" end="16330" title="Bechtel" label="Bechtel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="16350" end="16356" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="16376" end="16385" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="16406" end="16422" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="16424" end="16439" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="16463" end="16470" title="PepsiCo" label="PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="16472" end="16494" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q89368734" start="16496" end="16504" title="Raytheon Technologies" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333718" start="16564" end="16585" title="Johnson &amp;amp; Johnson" label="Johnson &amp;amp; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="16810" end="16825" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191200" start="17055" end="17070" title="Cobus de Swardt" label="Cobus de Swardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="17350" end="17362" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41558597" start="17466" end="17482" title="Patricia Moreira" label="Patricia Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q10184" start="17661" end="17691" title="Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung" label="Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975478" start="18541" end="18555" title="abuse of power" label="abuse of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="18658" end="18666" title="Springer Science+Business Media" label="Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18479704" start="18879" end="18897" title="Operation Car Wash" label="Operation Car Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725297" start="18915" end="18928" title="The Intercept" label="The Intercept"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809209" start="18963" end="18979" title="Deltan Dallagnol" label="Deltan Dallagnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="19369" end="19394" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304982" start="19466" end="19480" title="Jair Bolsonaro" label="Jair Bolsonaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413070" start="19650" end="19676" title="European Public Prosecutor" label="European Public Prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q866996" start="19679" end="19713" title="Group of States Against Corruption" label="Group of States Against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q56514255" start="19716" end="19740" title="Information commissioner" label="Information commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q876957" start="19743" end="19780" title="International Anti-Corruption Academy" label="International Anti-Corruption Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28949835" start="19783" end="19824" title="ISO 37001" label="ISO 37001 Anti-bribery management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q547979" start="19827" end="19871" title="United Nations Convention against Corruption" label="United Nations Convention against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084" start="19874" end="19896" title="Freedom of information" label="Freedom of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q568753" start="19899" end="19920" title="Transparency (market)" label="Transparency (market)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834770" start="19923" end="19943" title="Transparency (trade)" label="Transparency (trade)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66243" wikidata="Q574400" url="?curid=66243" title="Victor Gollancz">
<text>Sir Victor Gollancz (; 9 April 1893 – 8 February 1967) was a British publisher and humanitarian. Gollancz was known as a supporter of left-wing politics. His loyalties shifted between liberalism and communism; he defined himself as a Christian socialist and an internationalist. He used his publishing house, Victor Gollancz Ltd, chiefly to promote pacifist and socialist non-fiction, and he launched the Left Book Club.

In the postwar era, he focused his attention on Germany and became known for his promotion of friendship and reconciliation based on his internationalism and his ethic of brotherly love. He founded the organisation Save Europe Now (SEN) in 1945 to campaign for humane treatment of German civilians, and drew attention to their suffering, especially children, and atrocities committed against German civilians. He received an honorary doctorate at the University of Frankfurt in 1949, the Großes Bundesverdienstkreuz of Germany in 1953 and the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade in 1960, and several streets in Germany, including the Gollanczstraße in West Berlin, and two schools, the Victor Gollancz Elementary School and the Victor-Gollancz-Volkshochschule Steglitz-Zehlendorf, were named in his honour. He also campaigned for friendship with Soviet Russia. Gollancz once said: &quot;I hate everything that is pro and anti (different peoples). I am only one thing: I am pro-humanity.&quot; Since 2000, the Society for Threatened Peoples has awarded the Victor Gollancz Prize.

==Early life==

Born in Maida Vale, London, to a family of German Jewish and Polish Jewish backgrounds, Gollancz was the son of a wholesale jeweller and the nephew of Rabbi Professor Sir Hermann Gollancz and Professor Sir Israel Gollancz. His grandfather, Rabbi Samuel Marcus Gollancz, had migrated to the United Kingdom in the mid-19th century from Witkowo, near Gniezno (then Gnesen in Prussia) to become cantor of the Hambro&#x27; Synagogue in London.

After being educated at St Paul&#x27;s School, London and taking a degree in classics at New College, Oxford, he became a schoolteacher. Gollancz was commissioned into the Northumberland Fusiliers in October 1915, although he did not see active service. In March 1916, he transferred to Repton School Junior Officers&#x27; Training Corps. Gollancz proved to be an innovative and inspiring teacher; he introduced the first civics class to be taught at an English public school and many of his students went on to become teachers themselves, including James Harford and James Darling. 

In 1917, he became involved in the Reconstruction Committee, which was planning for post-war Britain. There he met Ernest Benn, who hired him to work in his publishing company, Ernest Benn Limited. Starting with magazines, Gollancz then brought out a series of art books, after which he started signing novelists.

==As a publisher==

Gollancz formed his own publishing company in 1927, publishing works by writers such as Ford Madox Ford and George Orwell, who wrote that &quot;Gollancz is of course part of the Communism-racket,&quot; to Rayner Heppenstall in July 1937 (Orwell went to Secker and Warburg from &quot;Homage to Catalonia&quot; onwards). Orwell had initially proposed to Gollancz to publish &quot;Animal Farm&quot;, but the latter had refused, according to Orwell, due to the fear of spoiling relations with a fundamental ally in the war against Nazism: &quot;I must tell you that it is I think completely unacceptable politically from your point of view (it is anti-Stalin)&quot;. Gollancz became very angry at this insinuation, but on 4 April 1944, he recognized his error of judgment: &quot;You were right and I was wrong. I am so sorry. I have returned the manuscript&quot;. The firm, Gollancz Ltd., published pacifist and socialist nonfiction as well as, by the mid-1930s, a solid selection of contemporary fiction, including authors such as Elizabeth Bowen, Daphne du Maurier, and Franz Kafka. While Gollancz published &quot;The Red Army Moves&quot; by Geoffrey Cox on the Winter War in 1941, he omitted some criticisms of the USSR.

Gollancz was one of the founders of the Left Book Club, the first book club in the UK. He had a knack for marketing, sometimes taking out full-page newspaper advertisements for the books he published, a novelty at the time. He also used eye-catching typography and book designs, and used yellow dust-covers on books. Starting in 1948, Gollancz made yearly scouting trips to the USA; by 1951 American books made up half of his publications.

Gollancz&#x27;s politics started as those of the Liberal Party and Guild Socialism. By 1931 he had joined the Labour Party, and by the early 1930s he had started publishing left-wing political works, in addition to his more popular titles. Although he never joined the CPGB, Gollancz was closely allied to the Communist Party during the second half of the 1930s. He finally broke with the party after the signing of the Molotov–Ribbentrop pact in 1939, and pledged himself to Christian socialism. In the early 1940s, Gollancz was sympathetic to Richard Acland&#x27;s socialist Common Wealth Party and gave talks for the group before the general election of 1945. Although he never thought the party would win an election, he believed it represented a useful, socialist pressure group.

Religious faith was important part of Gollancz&#x27;s life. His father was an Orthodox Jew with a very literal interpretation of his faith; Gollancz&#x27;s dislike of this attitude coloured his approach to organised Judaism for much of his life, but he continued to practise many Jewish rituals at home. Gollancz often claimed to be a Christian, although he was never baptised and his understanding of the religion was highly idiosyncratic. Overall his personal syncretic faith drew on Pelagian Christianity, Judaism, and wide-ranging reading across religious traditions. 

His faith manifested itself in a consciousness of bliss and his lifelong political and social campaigning. He compiled a number of books of religious writings, including &quot;A Year of Grace&quot;, &quot;From Darkness to Light&quot;, &quot;God of a Hundred Names&quot; and &quot;The New Year of Grace&quot;. Gollancz was also a keen music lover, an enthusiasm he explained in his final book, &quot;Journey Towards Music&quot;.

Gollancz was knighted in the 1965 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours List.

==As a campaigner==

In addition to his highly successful publishing business, Gollancz was a prolific writer on a variety of subjects, and put his ideas into action by establishing campaigning groups. The Left Book Club was not only a book club run along commercial lines, but also a campaigning group that aimed to propagate left-wing ideas in Britain. The founding of the club marked the end of his career solely as a publisher, after which he devoted much of his energy to campaigning.

His first few pamphlets addressed what he saw as the communist betrayal of left wing ideals, although after the Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany in 1941 he founded the Anglo-Soviet Public Relations Association (ASPRA) to promote cordial relations between the Britain and the Soviet Union. This was followed by refutation of the anti-German (as opposed to anti-Nazi) doctrine of Sir Robert Vansittart in the pamphlet &quot;Shall Our Children Live or Die&quot; published in late 1941.

After World War II, Gollancz criticized the rise of what he saw as excessive nationalism in the Allied countries (both Czechoslovakia and the UK), describing nationalism &quot;partly an invention of ambitious and unscrupulous politicians, and partly a drug from which the populace derives [. . .] a kind of bogus and vicarious satisfaction&quot;.

===1943 publication of description of the Holocaust===
Gollancz publicised the anti-Semitism of the Nazi regime early on; in 1933 he had published the compilation volume &quot;The Little Brown Book of the Hitler Terror&quot; and Fritz Seidler&#x27;s book on the Nazi persecution of the Jews &quot;The Bloodless Pogrom&quot; in 1934. 

In the summer of 1942, Gollancz came to realise that he and the rest of the world had been seriously underestimating the horrific extent of the Nazi persecution of the Jews. He explained in his 16,000-word pamphlet &quot;Let My People Go&quot;, written over Christmas 1942, that between one and two million Jews had already been murdered in Nazi-controlled Europe and &quot;unless something effective is done, within a very few months these six million Jews will all be dead.&quot;. 

Gollancz proposed a series of practical responses, centred around a rescue plan, and undertook a lecture and fundraising tour; he was also made vice-president of Eleanor Rathbone&#x27;s &quot;National Committee for Rescue from Nazi Terror&quot;. Published early in the new year of 1943, the pamphlet sold a quarter of a million copies within three months and was quoted in the Parliament of Canada in 1943, and in &quot;The Adelaide Advertiser&quot; on Saturday 15 May 1943. 

Along with Rathbone, Gollancz was the foremost British campaigner during the Second World War on the issue of the Nazi extermination of European Jewry.

Towards the end of June 1943, Gollancz suffered a serious nervous breakdown, believed to have been brought on by overwork (he had cut out holidays and reduced his social and cultural life) and his identification with the Nazis&#x27; victims. After his recovery he started work on a book to be called &quot;The Necessity for Zionism&quot;; although the book was never written, he did publish a number of books on Jewish topics. His work for Zionism at this time led to him being appointed as a governor of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In May 1945, he wrote his last major contribution to Jewish refugees, the pamphlet &quot;Nowhere to Lay Their Heads: The Jewish tragedy in Europe and its solution&quot;, a personal appeal for the opening up of Palestine for large-scale Jewish immigration from Europe, which he distributed for free and was a great success.

===Occupation of Germany after World War II===
In April 1945, Gollancz addressed the issue of German collective guilt in a pamphlet, &quot;What Buchenwald Really Means&quot; that explained that not all Germans were guilty. He maintained that hundreds of thousands of gentiles had been persecuted by the Nazis and many more had been terrorized into silence. He also argued that British citizens who had allegedly done nothing to save the Jews despite living in a democracy were not free of guilt. This marked a shift of Gollancz&#x27;s attention towards the people of Germany. In September 1945, he started an organisation Save Europe Now (SEN) to campaign for the support of Germans, and over the next four years he wrote another eight pamphlets and books addressing the issue and visited the country several times.

Gollancz&#x27;s campaign for the humane treatment of German civilians involved efforts to persuade the British government to end the ban on sending provisions to Germany and ask that it pursue a policy of reconciliation, as well as organising an airlift to provide Germany and other war-torn European countries with provisions and books. He wrote regular critical articles for, and letters to, British newspapers, and after a visit to the British Zone of Occupation in October and November 1946, he published these along with photographs of malnourished German children he took there in &quot;In Darkest Germany&quot; in January 1947.

On the expulsion of Germans after World War II he said: &quot;So far as the conscience of humanity should ever again become sensitive, will this expulsion be an undying disgrace for all those who remember it, who caused it or who put up with it. The Germans have been driven out, but not simply with an imperfection of excessive consideration, but with the highest imaginable degree of brutality.&quot; In his 1946 book &quot;Our Threatened Values&quot;, Gollancz described the conditions Sudeten German prisoners faced in a Czech internment camp: &quot;They live crammed together in shacks without consideration for gender and age... They ranged in age from 4 to 80. Everyone looked emaciated... the most shocking sights were the babies... nearby stood another mother with a shrivelled bundle of skin and bones in her arms... Two old women lay as if dead on two cots. Only upon closer inspection, did one discover that they were still lightly breathing. They were, like those babies, nearly dead from hunger&quot;.

When Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery wanted to allot each German citizen a guaranteed diet of only 1,000 calories a day and justified this by referring to the fact that the prisoners of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp had received only 800, Gollancz wrote in response about food shortages in Germany before the end of World War II, pointing out that many prisoners in Nazi concentration camps never even received 800 calories. &quot;There is really only one method of re-educating people&quot;, explained Gollancz, &quot;namely the example that one lives oneself.&quot;

Gollancz explained his rationale thus, &quot;In the management of our helping actions should nothing, but absolutely nothing else, be decisive than the degree of need.&quot; For his biographer, Ruth Dudley Edwards, Gollancz&#x27;s campaign was based in his concern for the moral underdog and his enjoyment in fighting for unpopular causes. The campaign led Gollancz&#x27;s friend, Rev. John Collins, to start &quot;Christian Action&quot; in December 1946, an organisation with similar aims (which later became involved in the campaign against Apartheid). In 1960, Gollancz was awarded the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade for his work with SEN.

===Other issues===
During the fighting that marked the creation of the state of Israel, Gollancz became concerned for the plight of the Arabs and in October 1948 he founded the Jewish Society for Human Service (JSHS), with Rabbi Leo Baeck as its president. This body was based on &quot;the universalist ethic of Judaism&quot; and aimed to work in the newly formed state of Israel &quot;to relieve the suffering of Jews and Arabs indifferently.&quot;

In February 1951, Victor Gollancz wrote a letter to &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; asking people to join an international struggle against poverty. Gollancz&#x27;s letter called for a negotiated end to the Korean War and the creation of an international fund &quot;to turn swords into ploughshares&quot;, readers were asked to send a postcard to Gollancz with the simple word &#x27;yes&#x27;. He received 5,000 responses. This led to the founding of the Association for World Peace (AWP) with Gollancz as chairman and Canon Charles Raven the vice-chairman. In May 1951, Gollancz invited Harold Wilson to chair an AWP committee and write a pamphlet which was eventually called &#x27;War on Want – a Plan for World Development&#x27;, published on 9 June 1952. This document led to the founding of the international anti-poverty charity War on Want; its parent body, the AWP, waned after Gollancz stepped down from the chairmanship in 1952.

With Arthur Koestler and John Collins, Gollancz set up the National Campaign for the Prevention of Legal Cruelty in 1955. This organisation was renamed The National Campaign for the Abolition of Capital Punishment (NCACP) and campaigned against capital punishment in the United Kingdom. This drive against capital punishment would later lead Gollancz to campaign against the execution of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann. He addressed the issue in a controversial pamphlet, &quot;The Case of Adolf Eichmann&quot;.

Gollancz was a member of Bertrand Russell&#x27;s &quot;Who Killed Kennedy Committee?&quot; which challenged the official version of the assassination of John F. Kennedy.

==Personal life and death==
In 1919, Victor married Ruth Lowy, an artist who had studied at the Slade School of Art under Henry Tonks. The couple had five daughters among them Vita Gollancz, an artist; Livia Ruth Gollancz, musician and later head of Victor Gollancz Ltd; and Diana Gollancz, a confidante of poet Philip Larkin.

Gollancz died in London on 8 February 1967.

==Selected bibliography==
*&quot;The Making of Women, Oxford Essays in Feminism&quot; (1918)
*&quot;Industrial Ideals&quot; (1920)
*&quot;The Yellow Spot: The Extermination of the Jews in Germany&quot; (1936)
*&quot;Is Mr Chamberlain Saving Peace?&quot; (1939)
*&quot;The Betrayal of the Left: An Examination &amp; Refutation of Communist Policy from October 1939 to January 1941: with Suggestions for an Alternative and an Epilogue on Political Morality&quot; (1941)
*&quot;Russia and Ourselves&quot; (1941)
*&quot;&quot;Let My People Go&quot;: Some Practical Proposals for Dealing with Hitler&#x27;s Massacre of the Jews and an Appeal to the British Public&quot; (1943)
*&quot;Leaving Them to Their Fate: The Ethics of Starvation&quot; (1946)
*&quot;Our Threatened Values&quot; (1946)
*&quot;In Darkest Germany&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Germany Revisited&quot;, London: Victor Gollancz Ltd, 1947
*&quot;A Year of Grace: Passages chosen &amp; arranged to express a mood about God and man&quot; (1950)
*&quot;Capital Punishment: The Heart of the Matter&quot; (1955)
*&quot;Devil&#x27;s Repertoire: or, Nuclear Bombing and the Life of Man&quot; (1959)
*&quot;Case of Adolf Eichmann&quot; (1961)
*&quot;Journey Towards Music: A Memoir&quot; (1964)
*&quot;Reminiscences of Affection&quot; (1968) - posthumous

==References==
==External links==

* War on Want&#x27;s history page
* Paul Foot, Victor Gollancz: From Marx to Muddle &quot;Socialist Worker Review&quot;, 102, (1987)
* Catalogue of Gollancz&#x27;s papers, held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q574400" start="0" end="19" title="Victor Gollancz" label="Sir Victor Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="134" end="152" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="184" end="194" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="199" end="208" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="234" end="253" title="Christian socialist" label="Christian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="309" end="328" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Victor Gollancz Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="349" end="357" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="362" end="371" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050628" start="405" end="419" title="Left Book Club" label="Left Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q105276165" start="637" end="652" title="Save Europe Now" label="Save Europe Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q50662" start="873" end="896" title="Goethe University Frankfurt" label="University of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="910" end="937" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Großes Bundesverdienstkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q265920" start="965" end="1001" title="Peace Prize of the German Book Trade" label="Peace Prize of the German Book Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090993" start="1057" end="1071" title="Gollanczstraße" label="Gollanczstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1075" end="1086" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1269" end="1282" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q562018" start="1432" end="1462" title="Society for Threatened Peoples" label="Society for Threatened Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754764" start="1479" end="1500" title="Victor Gollancz Prize" label="Victor Gollancz Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q122744" start="1527" end="1537" title="Maida Vale" label="Maida Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="1562" end="1575" title="German Jews" label="German Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="1580" end="1593" title="Polish Jews" label="Polish Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q350713" start="1690" end="1706" title="Hermann Gollancz" label="Hermann Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763371" start="1725" end="1740" title="Israel Gollancz" label="Israel Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122800" start="1853" end="1860" title="Witkowo" label="Witkowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51432" start="1867" end="1874" title="Gniezno" label="Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1891" end="1898" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30906402" start="1910" end="1916" title="cantor" label="cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893580" start="1924" end="1946" title="United Synagogue" label="Hambro&amp;#x27; Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227526" start="1983" end="2012" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School, London" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="2048" end="2067" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115291" start="2131" end="2155" title="Northumberland Fusiliers" label="Northumberland Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933220" start="2246" end="2259" title="Repton School" label="Repton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q731977" start="2260" end="2296" title="Junior Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Junior Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q837313" start="2381" end="2387" title="civics" label="civics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010689" start="2509" end="2522" title="James Harford" label="James Harford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141797" start="2527" end="2540" title="James Ralph Darling" label="James Darling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2579" end="2603" title="Reconstruction Committee" label="Reconstruction Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392787" start="2659" end="2670" title="Ernest Benn" label="Ernest Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="2701" end="2711" title="publishing" label="publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392786" start="2721" end="2740" title="Ernest Benn Limited" label="Ernest Benn Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="2895" end="2921" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="his own publishing company"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="2967" end="2982" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford Madox Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="2987" end="3000" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299323" start="3084" end="3102" title="Rayner Heppenstall" label="Rayner Heppenstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677798" start="3132" end="3150" title="Secker and Warburg" label="Secker and Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q514694" start="3162" end="3181" title="Homage to Catalonia" label="Homage to Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="3257" end="3268" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="3527" end="3533" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q235308" start="3907" end="3922" title="Elizabeth Bowen" label="Elizabeth Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="3924" end="3941" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="3947" end="3958" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534546" start="4019" end="4031" title="Geoffrey Cox (journalist)" label="Geoffrey Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="4039" end="4049" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050628" start="4140" end="4154" title="Left Book Club" label="Left Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q998421" start="4166" end="4175" title="Book sales club" label="book club"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="4206" end="4215" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4590" end="4603" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q831159" start="4608" end="4623" title="Guild Socialism" label="Guild Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="4851" end="4866" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="4961" end="4984" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="5017" end="5036" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323631" start="5086" end="5100" title="Richard Acland" label="Richard Acland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153505" start="5118" end="5137" title="Common Wealth Party" label="Common Wealth Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="5813" end="5821" title="Pelagianism" label="Pelagian"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="6343" end="6351" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960777" start="6359" end="6398" title="1965 Birthday Honours" label="1965 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours List"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="7004" end="7044" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q336379" start="7278" end="7299" title="Sir Robert Vansittart" label="Sir Robert Vansittart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="8211" end="8239" title="The Holocaust" label="Nazi persecution of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q333992" start="8714" end="8730" title="Eleanor Rathbone" label="Eleanor Rathbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="8929" end="8949" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519246" start="8972" end="8995" title="The Adelaide Advertiser" label="The Adelaide Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="9622" end="9629" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="9691" end="9721" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082166" start="10141" end="10164" title="German collective guilt" label="German collective guilt"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10669" end="10690" title=":de:Save Europe Now" label="Save Europe Now (SEN)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11303" end="11329" title="Allied-occupied Germany#British Zone of Occupation" label="British Zone of Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="11507" end="11546" title="expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="expulsion of Germans after World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q663389" start="11989" end="12003" title="Sudeten Germans" label="Sudeten German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="12031" end="12046" title="Internment" label="internment camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="12536" end="12554" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332" start="12708" end="12740" title="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp" label="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382954" start="13288" end="13307" title="Ruth Dudley Edwards" label="Ruth Dudley Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226731" start="13480" end="13492" title="John Collins (priest)" label="John Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q265920" start="13683" end="13719" title="Peace Prize of the German Book Trade" label="Peace Prize of the German Book Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q704954" start="13973" end="13982" title="Leo Baeck" label="Leo Baeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="14253" end="14276" title="The Guardian" label="The Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="14406" end="14416" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453298" start="14724" end="14737" title="Charles E. Raven" label="Charles Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="14787" end="14800" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968725" start="15034" end="15045" title="War on Want" label="War on Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="15144" end="15159" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865659" start="15384" end="15424" title="capital punishment in the United Kingdom" label="capital punishment in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="15549" end="15563" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="15683" end="15699" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="15794" end="15826" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007392" start="15881" end="15890" title="Ruth Gollancz" label="Ruth Lowy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399299" start="15925" end="15944" title="Slade School of Fine Art" label="Slade School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q364658" start="15951" end="15962" title="Henry Tonks" label="Henry Tonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936689" start="16005" end="16018" title="Vita Gollancz" label="Vita Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q99869533" start="16031" end="16050" title="Livia Ruth Gollancz" label="Livia Ruth Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="16141" end="16154" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660864" start="17102" end="17185" title="A Year of Grace" label="A Year of Grace: Passages chosen &amp;amp; arranged to express a mood about God and man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769371" start="17575" end="17584" title="Paul Foot (journalist)" label="Paul Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888832" start="17723" end="17767" title="Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick" label="Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66245" wikidata="Q297325" url="?curid=66245" title="DSC">
<text>DSC or Dsc may refer to:

==Education==
* Doctor of Science (D.Sc.)
* District Selection Committee, an entrance exam in India
* Doctor of Surgical Chiropody, superseded in the 1960s by Doctor of Podiatric Medicine

===Educational institutions===
* Dyal Singh College, Delhi, India
* DSC International School, Hong Kong, China

====United States====
* Dalton State College, Georgia
* Daytona State College, Florida
* Deep Springs College, California
* Dixie State College, now Utah Tech University, Utah

==Science and technology==
* Dice similarity coefficient, a statistical measure
* Differential scanning calorimetry, or the differential scanning calorimeter
* Digital setting circles, on telescopes
* Digital still camera, a type of camera
* Doppler shift compensation, in bat echolocation
* Dye-sensitized solar cell, a low-cost solar cell
* Dynamic stability control, computerized technology that improves a vehicle&#x27;s stability
* Dynamic susceptibility contrast, a technique in perfusion MRI
* Subarctic climate (Köppen climate classification: Dsc)

===Computing and telecommunications===
* DECT Standard Cipher, an encryption algorithm used by wireless telephone systems
* Digital selective calling, in marine telecommunications
* Digital signal controller, a hybrid microcontroller and digital signal processor
* Display Stream Compression, a VESA-developed video compression algorithm
* Distributed source coding, in information theory and communication
* Document Structuring Conventions, a PostScript standard
* Desired State Configuration, a feature of Windows PowerShell

==Government and military==
* Defence Security Corps, of the Indian Army
* Defense Security Command, of the Republic of Korea Armed Forces
* Distinguished Service Cross (Australia), an Australian military award
* Distinguished Service Cross (United Kingdom), a British naval award
* Distinguished Service Cross (United States), an American military award
* United States District Court for the District of South Carolina

==Media and entertainment==
* &quot;Daily Source Code&quot;, a podcast by Adam Curry
* Dallas Symphony Chorus, an American choir
* &quot;Dave, Shelly, and Chainsaw&quot;, a morning radio show in the San Diego, California, US
* DeepSouthCon, a science fiction convention in the southern US
* Dutch Swing College Band, a Dutch jazz ensemble
* &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;, an American science fiction television series

==Sport==
* Delbrücker SC, a German association football club from Delbrück, North Rhine-Westphalia
* Deep South Conference, a defunct NCAA athletic conference
* Dresdner SC, a German multisport club from Dresden, Saxony
* Dubai Sports City, a multi-venue sports complex in Dubai, United Arab Emirates
* U.S. Postal Service Pro Cycling Team, an American professional road bicycle racing team

==Other uses==
* Directory of Social Change, a British charity
* Down Syndrome Centre, a registered charity in Ireland
* Dschang Airport (IATA code), in Cameroon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297325" start="0" end="3" title="DSC" label="DSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q297325" start="7" end="10" title="DSC" label="Dsc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="42" end="59" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051939" start="70" end="98" title="District Selection Committee" label="District Selection Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q52875" start="128" end="156" title="Doctor of Surgical Chiropody" label="Doctor of Surgical Chiropody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318408" start="248" end="273" title="Dyal Singh College, Delhi" label="Dyal Singh College, Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253887" start="283" end="318" title="DSC International School, Hong Kong" label="DSC International School, Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211714" start="351" end="371" title="Dalton State College" label="Dalton State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243619" start="383" end="404" title="Daytona State College" label="Daytona State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182421" start="416" end="436" title="Deep Springs College" label="Deep Springs College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231724" start="451" end="470" title="Dixie State College" label="Dixie State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613728" start="533" end="560" title="Dice similarity coefficient" label="Dice similarity coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q904893" start="586" end="619" title="Differential scanning calorimetry" label="Differential scanning calorimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456891" start="664" end="687" title="Digital setting circles" label="Digital setting circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="705" end="725" title="Digital still camera" label="Digital still camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297351" start="746" end="772" title="Doppler shift compensation" label="Doppler shift compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81121" start="796" end="821" title="Dye-sensitized solar cell" label="Dye-sensitized solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q595839" start="847" end="872" title="Dynamic stability control" label="Dynamic stability control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884406" start="989" end="1002" title="perfusion MRI" label="perfusion MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="1005" end="1022" title="Subarctic climate" label="Subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224749" start="1102" end="1122" title="DECT Standard Cipher" label="DECT Standard Cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752377" start="1185" end="1210" title="Digital selective calling" label="Digital selective calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276158" start="1243" end="1268" title="Digital signal controller" label="Digital signal controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158550" start="1326" end="1352" title="Display Stream Compression" label="Display Stream Compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283181" start="1401" end="1426" title="Distributed source coding" label="Distributed source coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287631" start="1470" end="1502" title="Document Structuring Conventions" label="Document Structuring Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="1578" end="1588" title="PowerShell" label="PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251258" start="1620" end="1642" title="Defence Security Corps" label="Defence Security Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q56084716" start="1665" end="1689" title="Defense Security Command" label="Defense Security Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282995" start="1731" end="1770" title="Distinguished Service Cross (Australia)" label="Distinguished Service Cross (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229529" start="1803" end="1847" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Service Cross (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="1873" end="1916" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889791" start="1947" end="2010" title="United States District Court for the District of South Carolina" label="United States District Court for the District of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209366" start="2048" end="2065" title="Daily Source Code" label="Daily Source Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211422" start="2099" end="2121" title="Dallas Symphony Chorus" label="Dallas Symphony Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228200" start="2149" end="2175" title="Dave, Shelly, and Chainsaw" label="Dave, Shelly, and Chainsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250066" start="2239" end="2251" title="DeepSouthCon" label="DeepSouthCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634876" start="2303" end="2327" title="Dutch Swing College Band" label="Dutch Swing College Band"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2359" end="2379" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q325006" start="2446" end="2459" title="Delbrücker SC" label="Delbrücker SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250316" start="2536" end="2557" title="Deep South Conference" label="Deep South Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q300355" start="2596" end="2607" title="Dresdner SC" label="Dresdner SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q910493" start="2657" end="2674" title="Dubai Sports City" label="Dubai Sports City"/>
<link wikidata="Q757046" start="2738" end="2774" title="U.S. Postal Service Pro Cycling Team" label="U.S. Postal Service Pro Cycling Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280721" start="2844" end="2870" title="Directory of Social Change" label="Directory of Social Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302861" start="2892" end="2912" title="Down Syndrome Centre" label="Down Syndrome Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309958" start="2948" end="2963" title="Dschang Airport" label="Dschang Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66248" wikidata="Q295871" url="?curid=66248" title="Adamstown">
<text>Adamstown may refer to:

==Locations==
===Australia===
* Adamstown, New South Wales, a suburb in New South Wales

===Ireland===
* Adamstown, Castletownkindalen, a townland in Castletownkindalen civil parish, barony of Moycashel, County Westmeath
* Adamstown, Conry, a townland in Conry civil parish, barony of Rathconrath, County Westmeath
* Adamstown, a townland in County Louth
* Adamstown, a townland in County Meath
* Adamstown, County Wexford, a village in County Wexford
* Adamstown, Dublin, a suburb of Dublin

===Pitcairn Island===
* Adamstown, Pitcairn Islands, the capital and only city of the Pitcairn Islands

===United States===
* Adamstown, alternate name for Neals Diggins, California
* Adamstown, Maryland, a town in Frederick County, Maryland
* Adamstown, Pennsylvania, a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania

==Transportation==
*Adamstown railway station, New South Wales, in Adamstown, New South Wales, Australia
*Adamstown railway station (Ireland), in Adamstown, Dublin, Ireland

==See also==
* Adamston (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295871" start="0" end="9" title="Adamstown" label="Adamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400942" start="57" end="83" title="Adamstown, New South Wales" label="Adamstown, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130" end="159" title="Adamstown, Castletownkindalen" label="Adamstown, Castletownkindalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083906" start="175" end="193" title="Castletownkindalen" label="Castletownkindalen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="264" title="Adamstown, Conry" label="Adamstown, Conry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083925" start="280" end="285" title="Conry (civil parish)" label="Conry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183539" start="367" end="379" title="County Louth" label="County Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="407" end="419" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657350" start="422" end="447" title="Adamstown, County Wexford" label="Adamstown, County Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778876" start="479" end="496" title="Adamstown, Dublin" label="Adamstown, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48273" start="542" end="569" title="Adamstown, Pitcairn Islands" label="Adamstown, Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984247" start="674" end="699" title="Neals Diggins, California" label="Neals Diggins, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886989" start="702" end="721" title="Adamstown, Maryland" label="Adamstown, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q352108" start="762" end="785" title="Adamstown, Pennsylvania" label="Adamstown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680521" start="852" end="894" title="Adamstown railway station, New South Wales" label="Adamstown railway station, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968830" start="938" end="973" title="Adamstown railway station (Ireland)" label="Adamstown railway station (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q352096" start="1021" end="1046" title="Adamston (disambiguation)" label="Adamston (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66251" wikidata="Q1411875" url="?curid=66251" title="Ladder logic">
<text>Ladder logic was originally a written method to document the design and construction of relay racks as used in manufacturing and process control. Each device in the relay rack would be represented by a symbol on the ladder diagram with connections between those devices shown. In addition, other items external to the relay rack such as pumps, heaters, and so forth would also be shown on the ladder diagram.

Ladder logic has evolved into a programming language that represents a program by a graphical diagram based on the circuit diagrams of relay logic hardware. Ladder logic is used to develop software for programmable logic controllers (PLCs) used in industrial control applications. The name is based on the observation that programs in this language resemble ladders, with two vertical rails and a series of horizontal rungs between them. Ladder diagrams were once the only way to record programmable controller programs, but today, other forms are standardized in IEC 61131-3. For example, instead of the graphical ladder logic form, there is a language called Structured text, which is similar to C, within the IEC 61131-3 standard.

==Overview==

Ladder logic is widely used to program PLCs, where sequential control of a process or manufacturing operation is required. Ladder logic is useful for simple but critical control systems or for reworking old hardwired relay circuits. As programmable logic controllers became more sophisticated it has also been used in very complex automation systems. Often the ladder logic program is used in conjunction with a human–machine interface (HMI) program operating on a computer workstation.

The motivation for representing sequential control logic in a ladder diagram was to allow factory engineers and technicians to develop software without additional training to learn a language such as FORTRAN or other general-purpose computer language. Development and maintenance were simplified because of the resemblance to familiar relay hardware systems. Implementations of ladder logic may have characteristics, such as sequential execution and support for control flow features, that make the analogy to hardware somewhat inaccurate.

Ladder logic can be thought of as a rule-based language rather than a procedural language. A &quot;rung&quot; in the ladder represents a rule. When implemented with relays and other electro-mechanical devices, the various rules execute simultaneously and immediately. When implemented in a programmable logic controller, the rules are typically executed sequentially by software in a continuous loop, or &quot;scan&quot;. By executing the loop fast enough, typically many times per second, the effect of simultaneous and immediate execution is achieved. Proper use of programmable controllers requires an understanding of the limitations of the execution order of rungs.

==Syntax and examples==
The language itself can be seen as a set of connections between logical checkers (contacts) and actuators (coils). When a path exists from the left side of the rung to the output through asserted (true or &quot;closed&quot;) contacts, the rung is considered true, and the output coil storage bit is set to 1 or (true). If no such path exists, the output is false (0), and the &quot;coil&quot; by analogy to electromechanical relays is considered &quot;de-energized&quot;. This analogy between logical propositions and relay contact status was established by Claude Shannon.

Ladder logic has contacts that make or break circuits to control coils. Each coil or contact corresponds to the status of a single bit in the programmable controller&#x27;s memory. Unlike electromechanical relays, a ladder program can refer any number of times to the status of a single bit, equivalent to a relay with an indefinitely large number of contacts.

So-called &quot;contacts&quot; may refer to physical (&quot;hard&quot;) inputs to the programmable controller from physical devices such as pushbuttons and limit switches via an integrated or external input module, or may represent the status of internal storage bits which may be generated elsewhere in the program.

Each rung of ladder language typically has one coil at the far right. Some manufacturers may allow more than one output coil on a rung.

; Rung input: Checkers (contacts)
; Rung output: Actuators (coils)

The &quot;coil&quot; (output of a rung) may represent a physical output which operates some device connected to the programmable controller, or may represent an internal storage bit for use elsewhere in the program.

A way to recall these is to imagine the checkers (contacts) as a push button input, and the actuators (coils) as a light bulb output. The presence of a slash within the checkers or actuators would indicate the default state of the device at rest.

===Logical AND===

The above realizes the function: Door motor = Key switch 1 AND Key switch 2

This circuit shows two key switches that security guards might use to activate an electric motor on a bank vault door. When the normally open contacts of both switches close, electricity is able to flow to the motor which opens the door.

===Logical AND with NOT===

The above realizes the function: Door motor = Close door AND NOT Obstruction.

This circuit shows a push button that closes a door and an obstruction detector that senses if something is in the way of the closing door. When the normally open push button contact closes and the normally closed obstruction detector is closed (no obstruction detected), electricity is able to flow to the motor which closes the door.

===Logical OR===

The above realizes the function: Unlock = Interior unlock OR Exterior unlock

This circuit shows the two things that can trigger a car&#x27;s power door locks. The remote receiver is always powered. The unlock solenoid gets power when either set of contacts is closed.

===Industrial STOP/START===
In common industrial latching start/stop logic we have a &quot;Start&quot; button to turn on a motor contactor, and a &quot;Stop&quot; button to turn off the contactor.

When the &quot;Start&quot; button is pushed the input goes true, via the &quot;Stop&quot; button NC contact. When the &quot;Run&quot; input becomes true the seal-in &quot;Run&quot; NO contact in parallel with the &quot;Start&quot; NO contact will close maintaining the input logic true (latched or sealed-in). After the circuit is latched the &quot;Stop&quot; button may be pushed causing its NC contact to open and consequently the input to go false. The &quot;Run&quot; NO contact then opens and the circuit logic returns to its inactive state.
The above realizes the function: Run = (Start OR Run) AND (NOT Stop)

This latch configuration is a common idiom in ladder logic. It may also be referred to as &quot;seal-in logic&quot;. The key to understanding the latch is in recognizing that the &quot;Start&quot; switch is a momentary switch (once the user releases the button, the switch is open again). As soon as the &quot;Run&quot; solenoid engages, it closes the &quot;Run&quot; NO contact, which latches the solenoid on. The &quot;Start&quot; switch opening up then has no effect.
: Note: In this example, &quot;Run&quot; represents the status of a bit in the PLC, while &quot;Motor&quot; represents the actual output to the real-world relay that closes the motor&#x27;s real-world circuit.

For safety reasons, an emergency stop (&quot;ES&quot;) may be hardwired in series with the &quot;Start&quot; switch, and the relay logic should reflect this.
===Complex logic===
Here is an example of what two rungs in a ladder logic program might look like. In real-world applications, there may be hundreds or thousands of rungs.

Typically, complex ladder logic is &quot;read&quot; left to right and top to bottom. As each of the lines (or rungs) are evaluated the output coil of a rung may feed into the next stage of the ladder as an input. In a complex system there will be many &quot;rungs&quot; on a ladder, which are numbered in order of evaluation:
This represents a slightly more complex system for rung 2. After the first line has been evaluated, the output coil &quot;A/C&quot; is fed into rung 2, which is then evaluated and the output coil &quot;Cooling&quot; could be fed into an output device &quot;Compressor&quot; or into rung 3 on the ladder. This system allows very complex logic designs to be broken down and evaluated.

===Additional functionality===
Additional functionality can be added to a ladder logic implementation by the PLC manufacturer as a special block. When the special block is powered, it executes code on predetermined arguments. These arguments may be displayed within the special block.

In this example, the system will count the number of times that the interior and remote unlock buttons are pressed. This information will be stored in memory locations A and B. Memory location C will hold the total number of times that the door has been unlocked electronically.

PLCs have many types of special blocks. They include timers, arithmetic operators and comparisons, table lookups, text processing, PID control, and filtering functions. More powerful PLCs can operate on a group of internal memory locations and execute an operation on a range of addresses, for example, to simulate a physical sequential drum controller or a finite-state machine. In some cases, users can define their own special blocks, which effectively are subroutines or macros. The large library of special blocks along with high-speed execution has allowed use of PLCs to implement very complex automation systems.

==Limitations and successor languages==
Ladder notation is best suited to control problems where only binary variables are required and where interlocking and sequencing of binary is the primary control problem. Like all parallel programming languages, the sequential order of operations may be undefined or obscure; logic race conditions are possible which may produce unexpected results. Complex rungs are best broken into several simpler steps to avoid this problem. Some manufacturers avoid this problem by explicitly and completely defining the execution order of a rung, however, programmers may still have problems fully grasping the resulting complex semantics.

Analog quantities and arithmetical operations are clumsy to express in ladder logic and each manufacturer has different ways of extending the notation for these problems. There is usually limited support for arrays and loops, often resulting in duplication of code to express cases that in other languages would call for use of indexed variables.

As microprocessors have become more powerful, notations such as sequential function charts and function block diagrams can replace ladder logic for some limited applications. Some newer PLCs may have all or part of the programming carried out in a dialect that resembles BASIC, C, or other programming language with bindings appropriate for a real-time application environment.

==Popularity==
In 2019, IEEE Spectrum ranked ladder logic as number 50 out of 52 in a list of popular programming languages.

==See also==
* Circuit (computer science)
* IEC 61131
* Parallel computing
* Structured text

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* &quot;Chapter 6: ladder logic&quot; by Tony R. Kuphaldt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1411875" start="0" end="12" title="Ladder logic" label="Ladder logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514145" start="88" end="99" title="relay logic" label="relay racks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649571" start="129" end="144" title="process control" label="process control"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="442" end="462" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045991" start="525" end="540" title="circuit diagram" label="circuit diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514145" start="545" end="556" title="relay logic" label="relay logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="612" end="641" title="programmable logic controller" label="programmable logic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q168639" start="768" end="774" title="ladder" label="ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931263" start="974" end="985" title="IEC 61131-3" label="IEC 61131-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753738" start="1071" end="1086" title="Structured text" label="Structured text"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931263" start="1122" end="1133" title="IEC 61131-3" label="IEC 61131-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="1198" end="1201" title="programmable logic controller" label="PLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q192043" start="1366" end="1375" title="Electrical wiring" label="hardwired"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="1571" end="1594" title="human–machine interface" label="human–machine interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q173245" start="1679" end="1689" title="sequential logic" label="sequential"/>
<link wikidata="Q843479" start="1690" end="1703" title="control logic" label="control logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="1847" end="1854" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q389085" start="2224" end="2243" title="rule-based language" label="rule-based language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418502" start="2258" end="2277" title="procedural language" label="procedural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="3309" end="3314" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="3442" end="3456" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340519" start="3977" end="3989" title="limit switch" label="limit switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="4887" end="4890" title="logical AND" label="AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="5229" end="5232" title="logical AND" label="AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="5233" end="5236" title="logical NOT" label="NOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="5664" end="5666" title="logical OR" label="OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190863" start="5748" end="5764" title="power door locks" label="power door locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q245739" start="5816" end="5824" title="solenoid" label="solenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="6667" end="6669" title="logical OR" label="OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="6675" end="6678" title="logical AND" label="AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="6680" end="6683" title="logical NOT" label="NOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="6696" end="6701" title="Latch (electronic)" label="latch"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="6728" end="6733" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="7230" end="7233" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="7241" end="7244" title="programmable logic controller" label="PLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="7317" end="7322" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="7363" end="7370" title="electrical circuit" label="circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q716829" start="9112" end="9115" title="PID controller" label="PID"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="9339" end="9359" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913888" start="9705" end="9721" title="binary data" label="binary variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="9824" end="9853" title="parallel programming language" label="parallel programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="9926" end="9940" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="10625" end="10640" title="microprocessors" label="microprocessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8143615" start="10686" end="10711" title="sequential function chart" label="sequential function chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q625752" start="10717" end="10739" title="function block diagram" label="function block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="10893" end="10898" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="10900" end="10901" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="10912" end="10932" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121567" start="11142" end="11168" title="Circuit (computer science)" label="Circuit (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275526" start="11171" end="11180" title="IEC 61131" label="IEC 61131"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="11183" end="11201" title="Parallel computing" label="Parallel computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753738" start="11204" end="11219" title="Structured text" label="Structured text"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66252" wikidata="Q12776523" url="?curid=66252" title="Spin (propaganda)">
<text>In public relations and politics, spin is a form of propaganda, achieved through knowingly 
providing a biased interpretation of an event. While traditional public relations and advertising may manage their presentation of facts, &quot;spin&quot; often implies the use of , deceptive, and manipulative tactics.

Because of the frequent association between spin and press conferences (especially government press conferences), the room in which these conferences take place is sometimes described as a &quot;spin room&quot;. Public relations advisors, pollsters and media consultants who develop deceptive or misleading messages may be referred to as &quot;spin doctors&quot; or &quot;spinmeisters&quot;.

A standard tactic used in &quot;spinning&quot; is to reframe or modify the perception of an issue or event to reduce any negative impact it might have on public opinion. For example, a company whose top-selling product is found to have a significant safety problem may &quot;reframe&quot; the issue by criticizing the safety of its main competitor&#x27;s products or by highlighting the risk associated with the entire product category. This might be done using a &quot;catchy&quot; slogan or sound bite that can help to persuade the public of the company&#x27;s biased point of view. This tactic could enable the company to refocus the public&#x27;s attention away from the negative aspects of its product.

Spinning is typically a service provided by paid media advisors and media consultants. The largest and most powerful companies may have in-house employees and sophisticated units with expertise in spinning issues. While spin is often considered to be a private-sector tactic, in the 1990s and 2000s some politicians and political staff were accused of using deceptive &quot;spin&quot; tactics to manipulate or deceive the public. Spin may include &quot;burying&quot; potentially negative new information by releasing it at the end of the workday on the last day before a long weekend; selectively cherry-picking quotes from previous speeches made by their employer or an opposing politician to give the impression that they advocate a certain position; or purposely leaking misinformation about an opposing politician or candidate that casts them in a negative light.

== History ==

=== Rise of political spin ===
Edward Bernays has been called the &quot;Father of Public Relations&quot;. Bernays helped tobacco and alcohol companies make consumption of their products more socially acceptable, and he was proud of his work as a propagandist. Throughout the 1990s, the use of spin by politicians and parties accelerated, especially in the United Kingdom; the emergence of 24-hour news increased pressures placed upon journalists to provide nonstop content, which was further intensified by the competitive nature of British broadcasters and newspapers, and content quality declined due to 24-hour news&#x27; and political parties&#x27; techniques for handling the increased demand. This led to journalists relying more heavily on the public relations industry as a source for stories, and advertising revenue as a profit source, making them more susceptible to spin.

Spin in the United Kingdom began to break down with the high-profile resignations of the architects of spin within the New Labour government, with Charlie Whelan resigning as Gordon Brown&#x27;s spokesman in 1999 and Alastair Campbell resigning as Tony Blair&#x27;s Press Secretary in 2003. As information technology has increased since the end of the 20th century, commentators like Joe Trippi have advanced the theory that modern Internet activism spells the end for political spin, in that the Internet may reduce the effectiveness of spin by providing immediate counterpoints.

=== Examples of spin doctors ===
Spin doctors can either command media attention or remain anonymous. Examples from the UK include Jamie Shea during his time as NATO&#x27;s press secretary throughout the Kosovo War, Charlie Whelan, and Alastair Campbell.

Campbell, previously a journalist before becoming Tony Blair&#x27;s Press Secretary, was the driving force behind a government that was able to produce the message it wanted in the media. He played a key role in important decisions, with advisors viewing him as a &#x27;Deputy Prime Minister&#x27; inseparable from Blair. Campbell identifies how he was able to spin Rupert Murdoch, during a meeting in July 1995, into positively reporting an upcoming Blair speech, gathering the support from &quot;The Sun&quot; and &quot;The Times&quot;, popular British newspapers. Campbell later acknowledged that his and the government&#x27;s spinning had contributed to the electorate&#x27;s growing distrust of politicians, and he asserted that spin must cease.

&quot;Spin doctors&quot; such as Shea praised and respected Campbell&#x27;s work. In 1999, during the beginning of NATO&#x27;s intervention in Kosovo, Shea&#x27;s media strategy was non-existent before the arrival of Campbell and his team. Campbell taught Shea how to organise his team to deliver what he wanted to be in the media, which led to Shea being appreciated for his work by President Bill Clinton.

== Techniques ==
Some spin techniques include:

*Selectively presenting facts and quotes that support one&#x27;s position (&quot;cherry picking&quot;). For example, a pharmaceutical company could choose only two trials where their product shows a positive effect and ignore hundreds of unsuccessful trials, or a politician&#x27;s staff could handpick short speech quotations from past years which appear to show their candidate&#x27;s support for a certain position.
* Non-denial denial
* Non-apology apology
* &quot;Mistakes were made&quot; is an example of distancing language, commonly used as a rhetorical device, whereby a speaker acknowledges that a situation was managed inappropriately but evades any direct responsibility. The expression focuses on the action, omitting any actor, via the passive voice, and &quot;mistakes&quot; are framed in an indirect sense that does not imply intent. A less evasive active voice construction would focus on the actor, such as: &quot;I made mistakes&quot; or &quot;John Doe made mistakes.&quot; 
* Speaking in a way that assumes unproven claims or avoids the question
* &quot;Burying bad news&quot;: announcing unpopular things when the media is expected to be focusing on other news. In some cases, governments have released potentially controversial reports on summer long weekends. Sometimes &quot;other news&quot; is deliberately supplied.
* Misdirection and diversion This is when a government leaks a story to the news to limit the coverage of a more damaging story that has been circulating. New Labour used this tactic to reduce the coverage of Foreign Secretary Robin Cook’s affair. This was achieved by leaking a story that a previous Governor of Hong Kong was under investigation by MI6.
* Limited hangout
*Rewarding like-minded or amenable journalists with stories. During the Rhodesia crisis of 1964, Harold Wilson formulated a list of journalists that he trusted to write stories that aligned with the government’s opinion.
*Preventing access to journalists or broadcasters that are reporting to the disliking of the spin doctor. An example is the &quot;World at One&quot; being ignored by New Labour in the build up to the 1997 General election due to an interview they held with Blair that asked difficult questions, leading to interviews being handed to other stations.

For years, businesses have used fake or misleading customer testimonials by editing/spinning customers to reflect a much more satisfied experience than was actually the case. In 2009, the Federal Trade Commission updated their laws to include measures to prohibit this type of &quot;spinning&quot; and have been enforcing these laws as of late.

== Impact on elections ==
The extent of the impact of &quot;spin doctors&quot; is contested, though their presence is still recognized in the political environment. The 1997 General election in the United Kingdom saw a landslide victory for New Labour with a 10.3% swing from Conservative to Labour, with help from newspapers such as &quot;The Sun&quot; towards which Alastair Campbell focused his spinning tactics as he greatly valued their support. The famous newspaper headline &#x27;The Sun Backs Blair&#x27; was a key turning point in the campaign which provided New Labour with a lot of confidence and hope of increased electoral support. The change in political alignment had an impact on the electorate, with the number of individuals voting for Labour that read switching newspapers rising by 19.4%, compared to only 10.8% by those that did not read switching newspapers; a study conducted by Ladd and Lenz.

==See also==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Kathleen Hall Jamieson and Brooks Jackson (2007): &quot;unSpun: Finding Facts in a World of Disinformation&quot;, (Random House Paperback, )</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="3" end="19" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="24" end="32" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="34" end="38" title="Spin (propaganda)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="52" end="62" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="178" end="189" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="274" end="283" title="deceptive" label="deceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q905726" start="289" end="301" title="Psychological manipulation" label="manipulative"/>
<link wikidata="Q272281" start="365" end="381" title="press conference" label="press conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="395" end="405" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577414" start="507" end="516" title="spin room" label="spin room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994387" start="541" end="549" title="Adviser" label="advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805589" start="565" end="582" title="Media consultant" label="media consultants"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="656" end="668" title="Spin (propaganda)" label="spin doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="684" end="696" title="Spin (propaganda)" label="spinmeisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q30515" start="1188" end="1194" title="slogan" label="slogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635030" start="1198" end="1208" title="sound bite" label="sound bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12558574" start="1275" end="1288" title="point of view (philosophy)" label="point of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006765" start="2011" end="2025" title="cherry-picking" label="cherry-picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q21694520" start="2180" end="2187" title="News leak" label="leaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q13579947" start="2188" end="2202" title="misinformation" label="misinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q434839" start="2329" end="2343" title="Edward Bernays" label="Edward Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2419" end="2426" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="2431" end="2438" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2654" end="2668" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="3302" end="3312" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085692" start="3330" end="3344" title="Charlie Whelan" label="Charlie Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="3358" end="3370" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="3400" end="3417" title="Alastair Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="3431" end="3441" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565655" start="3567" end="3577" title="Joe Trippi" label="Joe Trippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147114" start="3615" end="3632" title="Internet activism" label="Internet activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q930267" start="3896" end="3906" title="Jamie Shea" label="Jamie Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3926" end="3930" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="3969" end="3979" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="4387" end="4401" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="4519" end="4526" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="4543" end="4552" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5167" end="5179" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006765" start="5311" end="5325" title="Cherry picking (fallacy)" label="cherry picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048894" start="5651" end="5668" title="Non-denial denial" label="Non-denial denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048837" start="5671" end="5690" title="Non-apology apology" label="Non-apology apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880052" start="5699" end="5717" title="Mistakes were made" label="Mistakes were made"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282879" start="5741" end="5760" title="distancing language" label="distancing language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14621144" start="5980" end="5993" title="English passive voice" label="passive voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317831" start="6095" end="6107" title="active voice" label="active voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q219429" start="6249" end="6272" title="Begging the question" label="assumes unproven claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416089" start="6276" end="6295" title="avoiding the question" label="avoids the question"/>
<link wikidata="Q311214" start="6799" end="6809" title="Robin Cook" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549537" start="6929" end="6944" title="Limited hangout" label="Limited hangout"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="7017" end="7032" title="Rhodesia crisis" label="Rhodesia crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="7042" end="7055" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776100" start="7286" end="7314" title="The World at One" label="the &amp;quot;World at One&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="7366" end="7387" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 General election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7567" end="7588" title="Testimonial#Customer" label="customer testimonials"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="7704" end="7728" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="8031" end="8052" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 General election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="8138" end="8150" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8154" end="8160" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="8230" end="8247" title="Alastair Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376735" start="8831" end="8853" title="Kathleen Hall Jamieson" label="Kathleen Hall Jamieson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66254" wikidata="Q876776" url="?curid=66254" title="Drinking">
<text>Drinking is the act of ingesting water or other liquids into the body through the mouth, proboscis, or elsewhere. Humans drink by swallowing, completed by peristalsis in the esophagus. The physiological processes of drinking vary widely among other animals.

Most animals drink water to maintain bodily hydration, although many can survive on the water gained from their food. Water is required for many physiological processes. Both inadequate and (less commonly) excessive water intake are associated with health problems.

== Methods of drinking ==

=== In humans ===
When a liquid enters a human mouth, the swallowing process is completed by peristalsis which delivers the liquid through the esophagus to the stomach; much of the activity is abetted by gravity. The liquid may be poured from the hands or drinkware may be used as vessels. Drinking can also be performed by acts of inhalation, typically when imbibing hot liquids or drinking from a spoon. Infants employ a method of suction wherein the lips are pressed tight around a source, as in breastfeeding: a combination of breath and tongue movement creates a vacuum which draws in liquid.

=== In other land mammals ===
By necessity, terrestrial animals in captivity become accustomed to drinking water, but most free-roaming animals stay hydrated through the fluids and moisture in fresh food, and learn to actively seek foods with high fluid content. When conditions impel them to drink from bodies of water, the methods and motions differ greatly among species.

Cats, canines, and ruminants all lower the neck and lap in water with their powerful tongues. Cats and canines lap up water with the tongue in a spoon-like shape. Canines lap water by scooping it into their mouth with a tongue which has taken the shape of a ladle. However, with cats, only the tip of their tongue (which is smooth) touches the water, and then the cat quickly pulls its tongue back into its mouth which soon closes; this results in a column of liquid being pulled into the cat&#x27;s mouth, which is then secured by its mouth closing. Ruminants and most other herbivores partially submerge the tip of the mouth in order to draw in water by means of a plunging action with the tongue held straight. Cats drink at a significantly slower pace than ruminants, who face greater natural predation hazards.

Many desert animals do not drink even if water becomes available, but rely on eating succulent plants. In cold and frozen environments, some animals like hares, tree squirrels, and bighorn sheep resort to consuming snow and icicles. In savannas, the drinking method of giraffes has been a source of speculation for its apparent defiance of gravity; the most recent theory contemplates the animal&#x27;s long neck functions like a plunger pump. Uniquely, elephants draw water into their trunks and squirt it into their mouths.

=== In birds ===

Most birds scoop or draw water into the buccal areas of their bills, raising and tilting their heads back to drink. An exception is the common pigeon, which can suck in water directly by inhalation.

=== In insects ===

Most insects obtain adequate water from their food: When dehydrated from a lack of moist food, however, many species will drink from standing water. Additionally, all terrestrial insects constantly absorb a certain amount of the air&#x27;s humidity through their cuticles. Some desert insects, such as &quot;Onymacris unguicularis&quot;, have evolved to drink substantially from nighttime fog.

=== In marine life ===
Amphibians and aquatic animals which live in freshwater do not need to drink: they absorb water steadily through the skin by osmosis. Saltwater fish, however, drink through the mouth as they swim, and purge the excess salt through the gills. Saltwater fishes do drink plenty of water and excrete a small volume of concentrated urine.

==Hydration and dehydration==

Like nearly all other life forms, humans require water for tissue hydration. Lack of hydration causes thirst, a desire to drink which is regulated by the hypothalamus in response to subtle changes in the body&#x27;s electrolyte levels and blood volume. A decline in total body water is called dehydration and will eventually lead to death by hypernatremia. Methods used in the management of dehydration include assisted drinking or oral rehydration therapy.

An overconsumption of water can lead to water intoxication, which can dangerously dilute the concentration of salts in the body. Overhydration sometimes occurs among athletes and outdoor laborers, but it can also be a sign of disease or damage to the hypothalamus. A persistent desire to drink inordinate quantities of water is a psychological condition termed polydipsia. It is often accompanied by polyuria and may itself be a symptom of diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus.

===Human water requirements===

A daily intake of water is required for the normal physiological functioning of the human body. The USDA recommends a daily intake of &quot;total water&quot;: not necessarily by drinking but by consumption of water contained in other beverages and foods. The recommended intake is 3.7 liters (appx. 1 gallon) per day for an adult male, and 2.7 liters (appx. 0.75 gallon) for an adult female.

Other sources, however, claim that a high intake of fresh drinking water, separate and distinct from other sources of moisture, is necessary for good health – eight servings per day of eight fluid ounces (1.8 liters, or 0.5 gallon) is the amount recommended by many nutritionists, although there is no scientific evidence supporting this recommendation.

Evidence-based hydration experts say that the amount of drinking water needed depends on ambient temperature, activity level, body size, and sweat rate. Research shows drinking when thirsty will maintain hydration to within about 2% of the needed level. Drinking beyond thirst might be beneficial for people who need to perform tasks that require intense concentration, and those with kidney disease, kidney stones, urinary tract infections, and people with a weak sense of thirst (which may include more older people).

==Alcoholic beverages==

The term &quot;drinking&quot; is often used metonymically for the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Most cultures throughout history have incorporated some number of the wide variety of &quot;strong drinks&quot; into their meals, celebrations, ceremonies, toasts and other occasions. Evidence of fermented drinks in human culture goes back as early as the Neolithic Period, and the first pictorial evidence can be found in Egypt around 4,000 BC.

Alcohol consumption has developed into a variety of well-established drinking cultures around the world. Despite its popularity, alcohol consumption poses significant health risks. Alcohol abuse and the addiction of alcoholism are common maladies in developed countries worldwide. A high rate of consumption can also lead to cirrhosis, gastritis, gout, pancreatitis, hypertension, various forms of cancer, and numerous other illnesses.

== See also ==

* Eating
* Hydration (disambiguation)

==References==
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* &quot;Are You Drinking Enough?&quot;, recommendations by the European Hydration Institute (Madrid)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q876776" start="0" end="8" title="Drinking" label="Drinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663054" start="23" end="32" title="Ingestion" label="ingesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="33" end="38" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="48" end="54" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82" end="87" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q899348" start="89" end="98" title="proboscis" label="proboscis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211669" start="130" end="140" title="swallowing" label="swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q308695" start="155" end="166" title="peristalsis" label="peristalsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="174" end="183" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="249" end="256" title="animals" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="272" end="283" title="Drinking water" label="drink water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809662" start="296" end="312" title="Tissue hydration" label="bodily hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="404" end="417" title="Physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="578" end="584" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="600" end="605" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211669" start="611" end="621" title="swallowing" label="swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q308695" start="646" end="657" title="peristalsis" label="peristalsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="696" end="705" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="713" end="720" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862987" start="809" end="818" title="drinkware" label="drinkware"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="885" end="895" title="inhalation" label="inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="1052" end="1065" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="1196" end="1214" title="terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="1528" end="1532" title="Cats" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="1534" end="1541" title="Canidae" label="canines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="1547" end="1556" title="ruminants" label="ruminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043801" start="2350" end="2364" title="desert animals" label="desert animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="2430" end="2445" title="succulent plant" label="succulent plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="2499" end="2504" title="hares" label="hares"/>
<link wikidata="Q858243" start="2506" end="2520" title="tree squirrels" label="tree squirrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="2526" end="2539" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="2581" end="2589" title="savannas" label="savannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="2614" end="2622" title="giraffes" label="giraffes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756696" start="2775" end="2787" title="plunger pump" label="plunger pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="2799" end="2808" title="elephants" label="elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461972" start="2930" end="2936" title="Buccal cavity" label="buccal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42326" start="3033" end="3039" title="rock dove" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="3373" end="3381" title="Arthropod cuticle" label="cuticles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398440" start="3418" end="3440" title="Onymacris unguicularis" label="Onymacris unguicularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="3528" end="3537" title="Amphibian" label="Amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="3543" end="3557" title="aquatic animal" label="aquatic animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="3573" end="3583" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="3653" end="3660" title="osmosis" label="osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364423" start="3662" end="3676" title="Saltwater fish" label="Saltwater fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809662" start="3953" end="3969" title="tissue hydration" label="tissue hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q474187" start="3996" end="4002" title="thirst" label="thirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="4048" end="4060" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="4110" end="4121" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936981" start="4166" end="4176" title="body water" label="body water"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="4187" end="4198" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132653" start="4236" end="4249" title="hypernatremia" label="hypernatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156403" start="4271" end="4296" title="management of dehydration" label="management of dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381652" start="4326" end="4350" title="oral rehydration therapy" label="oral rehydration therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144913" start="4393" end="4411" title="water intoxication" label="water intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q635195" start="4714" end="4724" title="polydipsia" label="polydipsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124286" start="4753" end="4761" title="polyuria" label="polyuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="4793" end="4810" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220551" start="4814" end="4832" title="diabetes insipidus" label="diabetes insipidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="4951" end="4961" title="human body" label="human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="4967" end="4971" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="5101" end="5109" title="beverage" label="beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="5318" end="5332" title="drinking water" label="drinking water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576499" start="5526" end="5538" title="nutritionist" label="nutritionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="6000" end="6014" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="6016" end="6029" title="kidney stones" label="kidney stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="6031" end="6054" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="6205" end="6218" title="Metonymy" label="metonymically"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="6242" end="6260" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcoholic beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468826" start="6333" end="6374" title="List of alcoholic beverages" label="wide variety of &amp;quot;strong drinks&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154168" start="6419" end="6425" title="Toast (honor)" label="toasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16797981" start="6459" end="6474" title="fermented drink" label="fermented drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="6519" end="6528" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="6610" end="6629" title="Alcohol consumption" label="Alcohol consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068248" start="6679" end="6695" title="drinking culture" label="drinking culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331102" start="6791" end="6804" title="Alcohol abuse" label="Alcohol abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="6826" end="6836" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="6935" end="6944" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183130" start="6946" end="6955" title="gastritis" label="gastritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="6957" end="6961" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527888" start="6963" end="6975" title="pancreatitis" label="pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="6977" end="6989" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="7008" end="7014" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213449" start="7065" end="7071" title="Eating" label="Eating"/>
<link wikidata="Q356243" start="7074" end="7100" title="Hydration (disambiguation)" label="Hydration (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="66255" wikidata="Q283563" url="?curid=66255" title="Bzip2">
<text>bzip2 is a free and open-source file compression program that uses the Burrows–Wheeler algorithm. It only compresses single files and is not a file archiver. It relies on separate external utilities such as codice_1 for tasks such as handling multiple files, and other tools for encryption, and archive splitting.

bzip2 was initially released in 1996 by Julian Seward. It compresses most files more effectively than older LZW and Deflate compression algorithms but is slower. bzip2 is particularly efficient for text data, and decompression is relatively fast. The algorithm uses several layers of compression techniques, such as run-length encoding (RLE), Burrows–Wheeler transform (BWT), move-to-front transform (MTF), and Huffman coding. 
bzip2 compresses data in blocks between 100 and 900 kB and uses the Burrows–Wheeler transform to convert frequently recurring character sequences into strings of identical letters. The move-to-front transform and Huffman coding are then applied. The compression performance is asymmetric, with decompression being faster than compression.

The algorithm has gone through multiple maintainers since its initial release, with Micah Snyder being the maintainer since June 2021. There have been some modifications to the algorithm, such as pbzip2, which uses multi-threading to improve compression speed on multi-CPU and multi-core computers.

bzip2 is suitable for use in big data applications with cluster computing frameworks like Hadoop and Apache Spark, as a compressed block can be decompressed without having to process earlier blocks.

The bundled &quot;bzip2recover&quot; utility tries recovering readable parts of damaged bzip2 data. It works by searching for individual blocks and dumping them into separate files.

== History ==
Seward made the first public release of bzip2, version 0.15, in July 1996. The compressor&#x27;s stability and popularity grew over the next several years, and Seward released version 1.0 in late 2000. Following a nine-year hiatus of updates for the project since 2010, on 4 June 2019 Federico Mena accepted maintainership of the bzip2 project. Since June 2021, the maintainer is Micah Snyder.

== Implementation ==
bzip2 uses several layers of compression techniques stacked on top of each other, which occur in the following order during compression and the reverse order during decompression:

# Run-length encoding (RLE) of initial data.
# Burrows–Wheeler transform (BWT), or block sorting.
# Move-to-front (MTF) transform.
# Run-length encoding (RLE) of MTF result.
# Huffman coding.
# Selection between multiple Huffman tables.
# Unary base-1 encoding of Huffman table selection.
# Delta encoding (Δ) of Huffman-code bit lengths.
# Sparse bit array showing which symbols are used.

Any sequence of 4 to 255 consecutive duplicate symbols is replaced by the first 4 symbols and a repeat length between 0 and 251. Thus the sequence codice_2 is replaced with codice_3, where codice_4 and codice_5 represent byte values 3 and 0 respectively. Runs of symbols are always transformed after 4 consecutive symbols, even if the run-length is set to zero, to keep the transformation reversible.

In the worst case, it can cause an expansion of 1.25, and in the best case, a reduction to &lt;0.02. While the specification theoretically allows for runs of length 256–259 to be encoded, the reference encoder will not produce such output.

The author of bzip2 has stated that the RLE step was a historical mistake and was only intended to protect the original BWT implementation from pathological cases.

The Burrows–Wheeler transform is the reversible block-sort that is at the core of bzip2. The block is entirely self-contained, with input and output buffers remaining of the same size—in bzip2, the operating limit for this stage is For the block-sort, a (notional) matrix is created, in which row &quot;i&quot; contains the whole of the buffer, rotated to start from the &quot;i&quot;-th symbol. Following rotation, the rows of the matrix are sorted into alphabetic (numerical) order. A 24-bit pointer is stored marking the &quot;starting position&quot; for when the block is untransformed. In practice, it is not necessary to construct the full matrix; rather, the sort is performed using pointers for each position in the buffer. The output buffer is the last column of the matrix; this contains the whole buffer, but reordered so that it is likely to contain large runs of identical symbols.

The move-to-front transform again does not alter the size of the processed block. Each of the symbols in use in the document is placed in an array. When a symbol is processed, it is replaced by its location (index) in the array and that symbol is shuffled to the front of the array. The effect is that immediately recurring symbols are replaced by zero symbols (long runs of &quot;any&quot; arbitrary symbol thus become runs of zero symbols), while other symbols are remapped according to their local frequency.

Much &quot;natural&quot; data contains identical symbols that recur within a limited range (text is a good example). As the MTF transform assigns low values to symbols that reappear frequently, this results in a data stream containing many symbols in the low integer range, many of them being identical (different recurring input symbols can actually map to the same output symbol). Such data can be very efficiently encoded by any legacy compression method.

Long strings of zeros in the output of the move-to-front transform (which come from repeated symbols in the output of the BWT) are replaced by a sequence of two special codes, RUNA and RUNB, which represent the run-length as a binary number. Actual zeros are never encoded in the output; a lone zero becomes RUNA. (This step in fact is done at the same time as MTF is; whenever MTF would produce zero, it instead increases a counter to then encode with RUNA and RUNB.)

The sequence codice_6 would be represented as codice_7; codice_8 represents the value 5 as described below. The run-length code is terminated by reaching another normal symbol. This RLE process is more flexible than the initial RLE step, as it is able to encode arbitrarily long integers (in practice, this is usually limited by the block size, so that this step does not encode a run of more than ). The run-length is encoded in this fashion: assigning place values of 1 to the first bit, 2 to the second, 4 to the third, etc. in the sequence, multiply each place value in a RUNB spot by 2, and add all the resulting place values (for RUNA and RUNB values alike) together. This is similar to base-2 bijective numeration. Thus, the sequence codice_8 results in the value (1 + 2 × 2) = 5. As a more complicated example:

 RUNA RUNB RUNA RUNA RUNB (ABAAB)
 1 2 4 8 16
 1 4 4 8 32 = 49

This process replaces fixed-length symbols in the range 0–258 with variable-length codes based on the frequency of use. More frequently used codes end up shorter (2–3 bits), whilst rare codes can be allocated up to 20 bits. The codes are selected carefully so that no sequence of bits can be confused for a different code.

The end-of-stream code is particularly interesting. If there are &quot;n&quot; different bytes (symbols) used in the uncompressed data, then the Huffman code will consist of two RLE codes (RUNA and RUNB), &quot;n&quot; − 1 symbol codes and one end-of-stream code. Because of the combined result of the MTF and RLE encodings in the previous two steps, there is never any need to explicitly reference the first symbol in the MTF table (would be zero in the ordinary MTF), thus saving one symbol for the end-of-stream marker (and explaining why only &quot;n&quot; − 1 symbols are coded in the Huffman tree). In the extreme case where only one symbol is used in the uncompressed data, there will be no symbol codes at all in the Huffman tree, and the entire block will consist of RUNA and RUNB (implicitly repeating the single byte) and an end-of-stream marker with value 2.

: 0: RUNA,
: 1: RUNB,
: 2–257: byte values 0–255,
: 258: end of stream, finish processing (could be as low as 2).

Several identically sized Huffman tables can be used with a block if the gain from using them is greater than the cost of including the extra table. At least 2 and up to 6 tables can be present, with the most appropriate table being reselected before every 50 symbols processed. This has the advantage of having very responsive Huffman dynamics without having to continuously supply new tables, as would be required in DEFLATE. Run-length encoding in the previous step is designed to take care of codes that have an inverse probability of use higher than the shortest code Huffman code in use.

If multiple Huffman tables are in use, the selection of each table (numbered 0 to 5) is done from a list by a zero-terminated bit run between 1 and 6 bits in length. The selection is into a MTF list of the tables. Using this feature results in a maximal expansion of around 1.015, but generally less. This expansion is likely to be greatly over-shadowed by the advantage of selecting more appropriate Huffman tables, and the common-case of continuing to use the same Huffman table is represented as a single bit. Rather than unary encoding, effectively this is an extreme form of a Huffman tree, where each code has half the probability of the previous code.

Huffman-code bit lengths are required to reconstruct each of the used canonical Huffman tables. Each bit length is stored as an encoded difference against the previous-code bit length. A zero bit (0) means that the previous bit length should be duplicated for the current code, whilst a one bit (1) means that a further bit should be read and the bit length incremented or decremented based on that value. In the common case a single bit is used per symbol per table and the worst case—going from length 1 to length 20—would require approximately 37 bits. As a result of the earlier MTF encoding, code lengths would start at 2–3 bits long (very frequently used codes) and gradually increase, meaning that the delta format is fairly efficient, requiring around 300 bits (38 bytes) per full Huffman table.

A bitmap is used to show which symbols are used inside the block and should be included in the Huffman trees. Binary data is likely to use all 256 symbols representable by a byte, whereas textual data may only use a small subset of available values, perhaps covering the ASCII range between 32 and 126. Storing 256 zero bits would be inefficient if they were mostly unused. A &quot;sparse&quot; method is used: the 256 symbols are divided up into 16 ranges, and only if symbols are used within that block is a 16-bit array included. The presence of each of these 16 ranges is indicated by an additional 16-bit bit array at the front. The total bitmap uses between 32 and 272 bits of storage (4–34 bytes). For contrast, the DEFLATE algorithm would show the absence of symbols by encoding the symbols as having a zero bit length with run-length encoding and additional Huffman coding.

== File format ==

No formal specification for bzip2 exists, although an informal specification has been reverse engineered from the reference implementation.

As an overview, a codice_10 stream consists of a 4-byte header, followed by zero or more compressed blocks, immediately followed by an end-of-stream marker containing a 32-bit CRC for the plaintext whole stream processed. The compressed blocks are bit-aligned and no padding occurs.

Because of the first-stage RLE compression (see above), the maximum length of plaintext that a single 900 kB bzip2 block can contain is around 46 MB (45,899,236 bytes). This can occur if the whole plaintext consists entirely of repeated values (the resulting codice_10 file in this case is 46 bytes long). An even smaller file of 40 bytes can be achieved by using an input containing entirely values of 251, an apparent compression ratio of 1147480.9:1.

A compressed block in bzip2 can be decompressed without having to process earlier blocks. This means that bzip2 files can be decompressed in parallel, making it a good format for use in big data applications with cluster computing frameworks like Hadoop and Apache Spark.

== Efficiency ==

bzip2 compresses most files more effectively than the older LZW (.Z) and Deflate (.zip and .gz) compression algorithms, but is considerably slower. LZMA is generally more space-efficient than bzip2 at the expense of even slower compression speed, while having faster decompression.

bzip2 compresses data in blocks of size between 100 and 900 kB and uses the Burrows–Wheeler transform to convert frequently-recurring character sequences into strings of identical letters. It then applies move-to-front transform and Huffman coding. bzip2&#x27;s ancestor bzip used arithmetic coding instead of Huffman. The change was made because of a software patent restriction. bzip3, a modern compressor that shares common ancestry and set of algorithms with bzip2, switched back to arithmetic coding.

bzip2 performance is asymmetric, as decompression is relatively fast. Motivated by the long time required for compression, a modified version was created in 2003 called pbzip2 that used multi-threading to encode the file in multiple chunks, giving almost linear speedup on multi-CPU and multi-core computers. , this functionality has not been incorporated into the main project.

Like gzip, bzip2 is only a data compressor. It is not an archiver like tar or ZIP; the bzip2 file format does not support storing the contents of multiple files in a single compressed file, and the program itself has no facilities for multiple files, encryption or archive-splitting. In the UNIX tradition, archiving could be done by a separate program producing an archive which is then compressed with bzip2, and un-archiving could be done by bzip2 uncompressing the compressed archive file and a separate program decompressing it. Some archivers have built-in support for compression and decompression, so that it is not necessary to use the bzip2 program to compress or decompress the archive. GnuPG also has built-in support for bzip2 compression and decompression.

The codice_12-based codice_13 tool allows directly searching through compressed text without needing to uncompress the contents first.

== See also ==
* Comparison of archive formats
* Comparison of file archivers
* List of archive formats
* List of file archivers
* rzip

== References ==

== External links ==

* The bzip2 Command - by The Linux Information Project (LINFO)
* bzip2 for Windows
* Graphical bzip2 for Windows(WBZip2)
* MacBzip2 (for Classic Mac OS; under Mac OS X, the standard bzip2 is available at the command line)
* Feature comparison and benchmarks for different kinds of parallel bzip2 implementations available
* 4 Parallel bzip2 Implementations at The Data Compression News Blog
* The original bzip compressor - may be restricted by patents</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283563" start="0" end="5" title="Bzip2" label="bzip2"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="11" end="31" title="free and open-source" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="32" end="36" title="computer file" label="file"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="37" end="56" title="compression program" label="compression program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806" start="71" end="96" title="Burrows–Wheeler transform" label="Burrows–Wheeler algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303924" start="143" end="156" title="file archiver" label="file archiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q354027" start="355" end="368" title="Julian Seward" label="Julian Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681" start="423" end="426" title="LZW" label="LZW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712" start="431" end="438" title="Deflate" label="Deflate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="439" end="461" title="compression algorithms" label="compression algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797" start="631" end="650" title="run-length encoding" label="run-length encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806" start="658" end="683" title="Burrows–Wheeler transform" label="Burrows–Wheeler transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803" start="691" end="714" title="move-to-front transform" label="move-to-front transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="726" end="740" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="1298" end="1313" title="Multithreading (software)" label="multi-threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="1412" end="1420" title="big data" label="big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="1439" end="1456" title="cluster computing" label="cluster computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29120" start="1473" end="1479" title="Hadoop" label="Hadoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573619" start="1484" end="1496" title="Apache Spark" label="Apache Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="2065" end="2078" title="Federico Mena" label="Federico Mena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797" start="2379" end="2398" title="Run-length encoding" label="Run-length encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806" start="2424" end="2449" title="Burrows–Wheeler transform" label="Burrows–Wheeler transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803" start="2477" end="2490" title="Move-to-front" label="Move-to-front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="2553" end="2567" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q724775" start="2622" end="2628" title="base-1" label="base-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626" start="2668" end="2682" title="Elias delta coding" label="Delta encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992074" start="2725" end="2734" title="bit array" label="bit array"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509335" start="6615" end="6635" title="bijective numeration" label="bijective numeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712" start="8529" end="8536" title="DEFLATE" label="DEFLATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803" start="8895" end="8898" title="Move-to-front transform" label="MTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885542" start="9435" end="9459" title="canonical Huffman code" label="canonical Huffman tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="10441" end="10446" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712" start="10893" end="10900" title="DEFLATE" label="DEFLATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="12139" end="12147" title="big data" label="big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q29120" start="12200" end="12206" title="Hadoop" label="Hadoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573619" start="12211" end="12223" title="Apache Spark" label="Apache Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681" start="12304" end="12307" title="Lempel–Ziv–Welch" label="LZW"/>
<link wikidata="Q291486" start="12309" end="12311" title="Compress" label=".Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712" start="12317" end="12324" title="Deflate" label="Deflate"/>
<link wikidata="Q136218" start="12326" end="12330" title="ZIP (file format)" label=".zip"/>
<link wikidata="Q283647" start="12335" end="12338" title="gzip" label=".gz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733" start="12392" end="12396" title="Lempel–Ziv–Markov chain algorithm" label="LZMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="12587" end="12589" title="Kilobyte" label="kB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806" start="12603" end="12628" title="Burrows–Wheeler transform" label="Burrows–Wheeler transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803" start="12732" end="12755" title="move-to-front transform" label="move-to-front transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="12760" end="12774" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651" start="12808" end="12825" title="arithmetic coding" label="arithmetic coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q913351" start="12879" end="12894" title="software patent" label="software patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="13220" end="13235" title="Thread (computer science)" label="multi-threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q283647" start="13419" end="13423" title="gzip" label="gzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q283579" start="13485" end="13488" title="tar (file format)" label="tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14652" start="13705" end="13719" title="Unix philosophy" label="UNIX tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q223204" start="14112" end="14117" title="GNU Privacy Guard" label="GnuPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606126" start="14339" end="14368" title="Comparison of archive formats" label="Comparison of archive formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188465" start="14371" end="14399" title="Comparison of file archivers" label="Comparison of file archivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606126" start="14402" end="14425" title="List of archive formats" label="List of archive formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188465" start="14428" end="14450" title="List of file archivers" label="List of file archivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454119" start="14453" end="14457" title="rzip" label="rzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="14636" end="14650" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="14658" end="14666" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
</links>
</doc>
