<doc id="73126" wikidata="Q209636" url="?curid=73126" title="Chicago Blackhawks">
<text>The Chicago Blackhawks (spelled Black Hawks until 1986, and known colloquially as the Hawks) are a professional ice hockey team based in Chicago. The Blackhawks compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Central Division in the Western Conference. The Blackhawks have won six Stanley Cup championships since their founding in 1926. They are one of the &quot;Original Six&quot; NHL teams, along with the Detroit Red Wings, Montreal Canadiens, Toronto Maple Leafs, Boston Bruins, and New York Rangers. Since , the team has played its home games at the United Center, which they share with the National Basketball Association&#x27;s Chicago Bulls; both teams previously played at the now-demolished Chicago Stadium.

The Blackhawks&#x27; original owner was Frederic McLaughlin, a &quot;hands-on&quot; owner who fired many coaches during his ownership and led the team to win two Stanley Cup titles in 1934 and 1938. After McLaughlin&#x27;s death in 1944, the team came under the ownership of the Norris family, who acted as their landlord as owners of the Chicago Stadium, and also owned stakes in several of the NHL teams. At first, the Norris ownership was as part of a syndicate fronted by longtime executive Bill Tobin, and the team languished in favor of the Norris-owned Detroit Red Wings. After the senior James E. Norris died in 1952, the Norris assets were spread among family members, and James D. Norris became the owner of the Blackhawks. The younger Norris took an active interest in the team, which won another Stanley Cup title under his ownership in 1961. After James D. Norris died in 1966, the Wirtz family became owners of the franchise. In 2007, the team came under the control of Rocky Wirtz, who is credited with turning around the organization, which had lost fan interest and competitiveness; under Wirtz, the Blackhawks won the Stanley Cup three times, in 2010, 2013 and 2015. Rocky died in July 2023, and his son, Danny Wirtz, was named chairman of the Blackhawks.

==History==

===Founding===
On May 1, 1926, the NHL awarded an expansion franchise for Chicago to a syndicate headed by former football star Huntington Hardwick of Boston. At the same meeting, Hardwick arranged the purchase of the players of the Portland Rosebuds of the Western Hockey League for $100,000 from WHL president Frank Patrick in a deal brokered by Boston Bruins&#x27; owner Charles Adams. However, only a month later, Hardwick&#x27;s group sold out to Chicago coffee tycoon Frederic McLaughlin.

McLaughlin had been a commander with the 333rd Machine Gun Battalion of the 86th Infantry Division during World War I. This division was nicknamed the &quot;Blackhawk Division&quot; after Black Hawk, a Native American of the Sauk nation who was a prominent figure in the history of Illinois. McLaughlin named the new hockey team in honor of the military unit, making it one of many sports team names using Native Americans as icons. However, unlike the military division, the team&#x27;s name was spelled in two words as &quot;Black Hawks&quot; until 1986, when the club officially became the &quot;Blackhawks&quot;, based on the spelling found in the original franchise documents.

The Black Hawks began play in the 1926–27 season, along with its fellow expansion franchises, the Detroit Cougars (now the Detroit Red Wings) and New York Rangers. The team had to face immediate competition in Chicago from Eddie Livingstone&#x27;s rival, the Chicago Cardinals, who played in the same building. McLaughlin took a very active role in running the team despite having no background in the sport. He hired Bill Tobin, a former goaltender who had played in the Western League, as his assistant, but directed the team himself. He was also very interested in promoting American players, then very rare in professional hockey. Several of them, including Doc Romnes, Taffy Abel, Alex Levinsky, Mike Karakas, and Cully Dahlstrom, become staples with the team, and under McLaughlin, the Black Hawks were the first NHL team with an all-American-born lineup.

===McLaughlin era (1926–1944)===

The Black Hawks played their first game on November 17, 1926, against the Toronto St. Patricks at the Chicago Coliseum. They won their first game 4–1, in front of a crowd of over 7,000. The Hawks&#x27; first season was a moderate success, as they finished the season in third place with a record of 19–22–3. However, they lost the 1927 first-round playoff series to the Boston Bruins.

Following the series, McLaughlin fired head coach Pete Muldoon. According to Jim Coleman, sportswriter for the Toronto-based &quot;Globe and Mail&quot;, McLaughlin felt that the Hawks were good enough to finish first. Muldoon disagreed, and in a fit of pique, McLaughlin fired him. According to Coleman, Muldoon responded by yelling, &quot;Fire me, Major, and you&#x27;ll never finish first. I&#x27;ll put a curse on this team that will hoodoo it until the end of time.&quot; The Curse of Muldoon was born – although Coleman admitted years after the fact that he had fabricated the whole incident – and became one of the first widely known sports &quot;curses.&quot; While the team would go on to win three Stanley Cups in its first 39 years of existence, it did so without ever having finished in first place, either in a single- or multi-division format. The Black Hawks proceeded to have the worst record in the league in 1927–28, winning only seven of 44 games.
For the 1928–29 season, the Black Hawks were originally slated to play in the newly built Chicago Stadium, but due to construction delays and a dispute between McLaughlin and arena promoter Paddy Harmon, they instead divided their time between the Coliseum, the Detroit Olympia, and the Peace Bridge Arena in Fort Erie, Ontario, before moving to Chicago Stadium the following season.

By 1931, with goal-scorer Johnny Gottselig, Cy Wentworth on defense, and Charlie Gardiner in goal, the Hawks reached their first Stanley Cup Finals, but fizzled in the final two games against the Montreal Canadiens. They had another stellar season in 1932, but that did not translate into playoff success. However, two years later, Gardiner led his team to victory by shutting out the Detroit Red Wings in the final game of the Stanley Cup Finals; Mush March scored the winning goal in double-overtime as the Hawks beat Detroit 1–0.

In 1938, the Black Hawks had a record of 14–25–9, almost missing the playoffs. They stunned the Canadiens and New York Americans on overtime goals in the deciding games of both semi-final series, advancing to the 1938 Stanley Cup Finals against the Toronto Maple Leafs. Black Hawks goaltender Mike Karakas was injured and could not play, forcing a desperate Chicago team to pull minor-leaguer Alfie Moore out of a Toronto bar and onto the ice. Moore played one game and won it. Toronto refused to let Moore play the next, so Chicago used Paul Goodman in Game 2 and lost. However, for the third and fourth games, Karakas was fitted with a special skate to protect his injured toe, and the team won both games. It was too late for Toronto, as the Hawks won their second championship. , the 1938 Black Hawks possess the poorest regular season record of any Stanley Cup champion.

The Black Hawks next returned to the Finals in 1944 behind Doug Bentley&#x27;s 38 goals, with Bentley&#x27;s linemate Clint Smith leading the team in assists. After upsetting the Red Wings in the semifinals, they were promptly dispatched by the dominant Canadiens in four games.

===Norris era (1944–1966)===
After McLaughlin died in December 1944, his estate sold the team to a syndicate headed by longtime team president Bill Tobin. However, Tobin was only a puppet for James E. Norris, who owned the rival Red Wings. Norris had also been the Black Hawks&#x27; landlord since his 1936 purchase of the Chicago Stadium. For the next eight years, the Norris-Tobin ownership, as a rule, paid almost no attention to the Black Hawks. Nearly every trade made between Detroit and Chicago ended up being Red Wing heists. As a result, for the next several years, the Black Hawks were the model of futility in the NHL. Between 1945 and 1958, they only made the playoffs twice.

In 1950, Norris&#x27; eldest son, James D. Norris, and Red Wings minority owner Arthur Wirtz (the senior Norris&#x27; original partner in buying the Red Wings 23 years earlier) took over the floundering club. They guided it through financial reversals, and rebuilt the team from there. One of their first moves was to hire former Detroit coach and general manager Tommy Ivan as general manager.

In the late 1950s, the Hawks struck gold, acquiring three young prospects (forwards Bobby Hull and Stan Mikita and defenseman Pierre Pilote), and obtaining both star goaltender Glenn Hall and veteran forward Ted Lindsay (who had just had a career season with 30 goals and 55 assists) from Detroit. Hull, Mikita, Pilote, and Hall became preeminent stars of the team, and all four would eventually be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame.

After two first-round exits at the hands of the eventual champions from Montreal in 1959 and 1960, it was expected the Canadiens would once again defeat the Hawks when they met in the semifinals in 1961. A defensive plan that completely wore down Montreal&#x27;s superstars worked, however, as Chicago won the series in six games. They then bested the Wings to win their third Stanley Cup championship.
The Hawks made the Cup Finals twice more in the 1960s, losing to the Leafs in 1962 and the Canadiens in 1965. They remained a force to be reckoned with throughout the decade, with Hull enjoying four 50-goal seasons, Mikita winning back-to-back scoring titles and MVP accolades, Pilote winning three consecutive Norris Trophies, and Hall being named the First or Second All-Star goaltender eight out of nine seasons. Hull and Mikita especially were widely regarded as the most feared one-two punch in the league. However, despite a strong supporting cast which included Bill Hay, Ken Wharram, Phil Esposito, Moose Vasko, Doug Mohns, and Pat Stapleton, the Hawks never quite put it all together.

In 1966–67, the last season of the six-team NHL, the Black Hawks finished first, breaking the supposed &quot;Curse of Muldoon&quot;, 23 years after the death of Frederic McLaughlin. However, they lost in the semifinals to Toronto, who went on to win their last Stanley Cup of the era. Afterward, Coleman, who first printed the story of the curse in 1943, admitted that he made the story up to break a writer&#x27;s block he had as a column deadline approached.

===Arthur Wirtz era (1966–1983)===
Before his death in 1966, one of James D. Norris&#x27; last moves in the NHL was to arrange an expansion franchise in St. Louis, where he owned the St. Louis Arena. Tobin died in 1963, a vice president of the team until his death. Ownership now passed to Norris&#x27; longtime partner Arthur Wirtz and his son Bill Wirtz. The Wirtz–Norris partnership dated over three decades; Arthur Wirtz had been a minority partner in the syndicate the senior Norris put together to buy the Red Wings in 1932.

Goaltender Glenn Hall was drafted by the St. Louis Blues expansion team for the 1967–68 season, while Pierre Pilote was traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Jim Pappin in 1968. In the 1968–69 season, despite Bobby Hull breaking his own previous record of 54 goals in a season with 58, the Black Hawks missed the playoffs for the first time since 1958, and the last time before .

In 1967, the Black Hawks made a trade with the Boston Bruins that turned out to be one of the most one-sided in the history of the sport. Chicago sent young forwards Phil Esposito, Ken Hodge and Fred Stanfield to Boston in exchange for Pit Martin, Jack Norris and Gilles Marotte. While Martin would star for the Hawks for many seasons, Esposito, Hodge and Stanfield would lead the Bruins to the top of the NHL for several years and capture two Stanley Cups. In Boston, Esposito set numerous scoring records en route to a career as one of the NHL&#x27;s all-time greats.
Nonetheless, in the 1970–71 season, life was made easier for the Black Hawks, as in an attempt to better balance the divisions, the expansion Buffalo Sabres and Vancouver Canucks were both placed in the East Division while the Hawks moved into the West Division. The Hawks became the class of the West overnight, rampaging to a 46–17–15 record and an easy first-place finish. With second-year goalie Tony Esposito (Phil&#x27;s younger brother and winner of the Calder Memorial Trophy for Rookie of the Year the previous season), Hull, his younger brother Dennis, Mikita, and sterling defensemen Stapleton, Keith Magnuson and Bill White, the Hawks reached the Stanley Cup Finals, losing to the Canadiens.

A critical blow to the franchise came in with the start of the World Hockey Association (WHA). Long dissatisfied with how little he was paid as the NHL&#x27;s marquee star, Hull jumped to the upstart Winnipeg Jets for a million-dollar contract. Former Philadelphia Flyers star Andre Lacroix joined him, having received very little ice time during his single season with Chicago, and the pair became two of the WHA&#x27;s great stars. However, the Black Hawks repeated their appearance in the Stanley Cup Finals that year, again losing to Montreal. Stapleton also left for the WHA after that year, depleting the team further.

While the team led or was second in the West Division for four straight seasons, for the rest of the 1970s, the Black Hawks made the playoffs each year—winning seven division championships in the decade in all—but were never a successful Stanley Cup contender, losing 16-straight playoff games at one point. The team acquired legendary blueliner Bobby Orr from the Boston Bruins in 1976, but ill health forced him to sit out for most of the season, and he eventually retired in 1979, having played only 26 games for the Hawks. Stan Mikita did the same the following year after playing for Chicago for 22 years, the third-longest career for a single team in league history.

By 1982, the Black Hawks squeaked into the playoffs as the fourth seed in the Norris Division (at the time the top four teams in each division automatically made the playoffs), and were one of the NHL&#x27;s Cinderella teams that year. Led by second-year Denis Savard&#x27;s 32 goals and 119 points and Doug Wilson&#x27;s 39 goals, the Hawks stunned the Minnesota North Stars and St. Louis Blues in the playoffs before losing to another surprise team, the Vancouver Canucks, who made the Stanley Cup Finals. Chicago proved they were no fluke the next season, also making the third round before losing to the eventual runner-up Edmonton Oilers. After an off-year in 1984, the Hawks again faced a now fresh-off-a-ring Edmonton offensive juggernaut of a team and lost in the third round in 1985.

===Bill Wirtz era (1983–2007)===
In 1983, Arthur Wirtz died and the club came under the sole control of his son Bill Wirtz. Although the Black Hawks continued to make the playoffs each season, the club began a slow decline, punctuated with an appearance in the 1992 Stanley Cup Finals.

During the 1985 playoff series against Edmonton, the Black Hawks and their fans started a tradition of cheering during the singing of &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;.

Prior to the 1986–87 season, while going through the team&#x27;s records, someone discovered the team&#x27;s original NHL contract and found that the team&#x27;s name was printed as a compound word (&quot;Blackhawks&quot;) as opposed to two separate words (&quot;Black Hawks&quot;), which was the way most sources had been printing it for 60 years and as the team had always officially listed it. The name officially became &quot;Chicago Blackhawks&quot; from that point on.

In the late 1980s, Chicago still made the playoffs on an annual basis but made early-round exits each time. In , after three-straight first-round defeats and despite a fourth-place finish in their division in the regular season, Chicago made it to the conference finals in the rookie seasons of both goaltender Ed Belfour and center Jeremy Roenick. However, they would once again fail to make the Stanley Cup Finals, losing to the eventual champions, the Calgary Flames.

The following season, the Hawks did prove they were late-round playoff material, running away with the Norris Division title, but, yet again, the third round continued to stymie them, this time against the eventual champion Oilers, despite 1970s Soviet star goaltender Vladislav Tretiak coming to Chicago to become the Blackhawks&#x27; goaltender coach.

In , Chicago was poised to fare even better in the playoffs, winning the Presidents&#x27; Trophy for best regular season record, but the Minnesota North Stars stunned them in six games in the first round en route to an improbable Stanley Cup Finals appearance. In , the Blackhawks – with Roenick scoring 53 goals, Steve Larmer scoring 29 goals, Chris Chelios (acquired from Montreal two years earlier) on defense, and Belfour in goal – finally reached the Finals after 19 years out of such status, winning 11 consecutive playoff games that year, setting an NHL record in the process. However, they were swept four games to none by the Mario Lemieux-led defending Stanley Cup champion, the Pittsburgh Penguins. In sweeping the Blackhawks, the Penguins tied the record Chicago had set only days before. Although the 4–0 sweep indicated Pittsburgh&#x27;s dominance in games won, the individual games were contested closely. Game 1 saw the Blackhawks squander leads of 3–0 and 4–1, and would eventually be beaten 5–4 after a Lemieux power-play goal with nine seconds remaining in regulation. The Blackhawks&#x27; most lackluster match was game two, losing 3–1. A frustrating loss of 1–0 followed in game three, and a natural hat trick from Dirk Graham and stellar play from Dominik Hasek (who showed indications of the goaltender he would later become) could not secure a win in Game 4, which ended in a 6–5 final in favor of Pittsburgh. The defending NBA champion Chicago Bulls were in their finals in , but won their championship in six. This was the only year the city of Chicago would host the NBA and NHL finals concurrently in the same year; Blackhawks head coach Mike Keenan would see this again in New York, when he coached the Rangers to their first Stanley Cup in 54 years in 1994.

Belfour posted a 40-win season in as the Hawks looked to go deep yet again, and Chris Chelios accumulated career-high penalty time with 282 minutes in the box, but St. Louis stunned Chicago with a first-round sweep to continue Chicago&#x27;s playoff losing streak.
Although they finished near .500 in 1994, the Blackhawks again qualified for the playoffs. They were eliminated by eventual Western Conference finalist Toronto, but broke their playoff losing streak at 10 games with a game three win. It was not enough, however, and the Blackhawks fell in six games. The 1993–94 season was also the Blackhawks&#x27; last at the Chicago Stadium, as the team moved into the newly built United Center across the street for the lockout-shortened 1994–95 season. Bernie Nicholls and Joe Murphy both scored 20 goals over 48 games, and Chicago once again made it to the conference finals, losing to the rival Detroit Red Wings. Also in 1994, management fired Wayne Messmer, popular singer of &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;.

Jeremy Roenick, Ed Belfour and Chris Chelios were all traded away as the Blackhawks faltered through the late 1990s, until they missed the playoffs by five points in 1998 for the first time in 29 years, one season short of tying the Boston Bruins&#x27; record for the longest such streak in North American professional sport history. Chicago would also miss the playoffs for a second consecutive season in 1999, and missed the playoffs again in 2000 and 2001.

The new millennium started with disappointment for the Blackhawks. Éric Daze, Alexei Zhamnov and Tony Amonte emerged as some of the team&#x27;s leading stars by this time. However, aside from a quick first-round exit in 2002 (where they lost to the St. Louis Blues in five games after winning Game 1 of the series), the Blackhawks were consistently out of the playoffs from the 1997–98 season until the 2008–09 season, in most years finishing well out of contention, despite finishing in third place in the Central Division six times. Amonte left for the Phoenix Coyotes in the summer of 2002. During the 2002–03 season, the Blackhawks finished third in the Central Division with 79 points, but would finish ninth in the Western Conference, which would make them miss the playoffs by 13 points.

A somber note was struck in February 2004, when ESPN named the Blackhawks the worst franchise in professional sports. Indeed, the Blackhawks were viewed with much indifference by Chicagoans for much of the 1990s and early 2000s due to anger over several policies instituted by then-owner Bill Wirtz, who was derisively known as &quot;Dollar Bill&quot;. For example, Wirtz did not allow home games to be televised in the Chicago area, claiming it was unfair to the team&#x27;s season ticket holders. He also raised ticket prices to an average of $50, making them among the most expensive in the NHL. The Chicago Wolves, an American Hockey League (AHL) team based in Rosemont, Illinois, mocked the Blackhawks&#x27; struggle by using the marketing slogan, &quot;We Play Hockey the Old-Fashioned Way: We Actually Win.&quot;

Following the lockout of the 2004–05 season, new general manager Dale Tallon set about restructuring the team in the hopes of making a playoff run. Tallon made several moves in the summer of 2005, most notably the signing of the Tampa Bay Lightning&#x27;s Stanley Cup-winning goaltender Nikolai Khabibulin and All-Star defenseman Adrian Aucoin. However, injuries plagued Khabibulin and Aucoin among others, and the Blackhawks again finished well out of the playoffs with a 26–43–13 record, next-to-last in the Western Conference and second-worst in the NHL. The Blackhawks reached another low point on May 16, 2006, when they announced that popular TV/radio play-by-play announcer Pat Foley would not be brought back after 25 years with the team, a move unpopular amongst most fans; Foley then became the television/radio voice for the Chicago Wolves.

With the third overall pick in the 2006 NHL entry draft, the team selected Jonathan Toews, who led the University of North Dakota Fighting Sioux hockey team to the 2006 NCAA Frozen Four. The Blackhawks were eager to make a splash in the free-agent market, and offered big money to many of the top free agents. However, they were denied, only being able to acquire two backup goaltenders in Patrick Lalime and Sebastien Caron. Chicago was one of the biggest buyers in the trade market, acquiring a future franchise player in left-winger Martin Havlat, as well as center Bryan Smolinski from the Ottawa Senators in a three-way trade that also involved the San Jose Sharks. The Hawks dealt forward Mark Bell to the Sharks, Michal Barinka and a 2008 second-round draft pick to the Senators, while Ottawa also received defenseman Tom Preissing and center Josh Hennessy from San Jose. Havlat gave the Blackhawks the talented first-line caliber game breaker they desperately needed. The Havlat trade was soon followed by another major trade: winger and key Blackhawk player Kyle Calder was traded to the Philadelphia Flyers in exchange for grinding defensive center Michal Handzus. The move caused a stir in Chicago, as Calder had won an increase in his contract through arbitration, which was accepted by the Hawks, but rather than ink their leading scorer, the team decided to address their need for a proven center by acquiring Handzus. Injuries to both Havlat and Handzus hurt the Blackhawks, and Smolinski was eventually traded at the trade deadline to the Vancouver Canucks. On November 26, 2006, Blackhawks general manager Dale Tallon fired head coach Trent Yawney and appointed assistant coach Denis Savard as the head coach. Savard had been the assistant coach of the team since 1997, a year after he retired as one of the most popular and successful Blackhawks players of all time. The Blackhawks continued to struggle, and finished last in the Central Division, 12 points out of the playoffs. They finished with the fourth-worst record in the NHL, and in the draft lottery, won the opportunity to select first overall in the draft. The team had never had a draft pick higher than third overall before, and used the pick to draft right wing Patrick Kane from the London Knights of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL).

===Rocky Wirtz era (2007–2023)===
====2007–2009: rebuilding====
On September 26, 2007, longtime Blackhawks owner Bill Wirtz died after a brief battle with cancer. He was succeeded by his son Rocky, who drastically altered his father&#x27;s long-standing policies.

Midway into the 2007–08 season, the franchise experimented with a partnership with Comcast SportsNet Chicago and WGN-TV by airing selected Blackhawks home games on television. During the next season, Comcast and WGN began airing all of the team&#x27;s regular season games. Rocky also named John McDonough, former president of Major League Baseball&#x27;s Chicago Cubs, as the Blackhawks&#x27; new president. After taking over the position, McDonough was an instrumental figure in the Blackhawks&#x27; current marketing success. Wirtz was also able to bring back former Blackhawks greats Tony Esposito, Stan Mikita and Bobby Hull as the franchise&#x27;s &quot;hockey ambassadors&quot;.
In addition to the changes in the team&#x27;s policies and front office, the younger Wirtz also made a concerted effort to rebuild the team. The Blackhawks roster was bolstered by the addition of Patrick Kane, the first overall selection in the 2007 NHL entry draft, who led all rookies in points. Kane and Jonathan Toews were finalists for the Calder Memorial Trophy, awarded to the NHL&#x27;s best rookie. Kane ultimately beat his teammate for the award. Kane finished the 2007–08 season with 21 goals and 51 assists in 82 games. The Blackhawks finished with a record of 40–34–8, missing the playoffs by three points. The 2007–08 season marked the first time in six years that the team finished above .500.

Prior to the 2008–09 season opener, the Blackhawks named 20-year-old Toews as the new captain, succeeding Adrian Aucoin (who was traded to the Calgary Flames, after the 2006–07 season) and making him the third-youngest captain at the time of appointment. In addition to a new captain, the Blackhawks made several major roster changes before the season, trading Tuomo Ruutu, their longest-tenured player, to the Carolina Hurricanes in exchange for forward Andrew Ladd on February 26, 2008. Later that day, the Blackhawks traded captain Martin Lapointe to the Ottawa Senators in exchange for a sixth-round draft pick in the 2008 NHL entry draft. On July 1, the first day of free agency, the team signed goaltender Cristobal Huet to a four-year, US$22.5 million contract, and later signed defenseman Brian Campbell to an eight-year, $56.8 million contract. They also added former coaches Joel Quenneville and Scotty Bowman to their organization.

On February 13, 2008, the Blackhawks announced they would hold their first fan convention. On July 16, 2008, the team announced that they would host the 2009 Winter Classic on a temporary ice rink at the Chicago Cubs&#x27; home park Wrigley Field on New Year&#x27;s Day against fellow &quot;Original Six&quot; members, the Detroit Red Wings; the Red Wings defeated Chicago 6–4. On June 16, Pat Foley returned as the Blackhawks&#x27; TV play-by-play man, replacing Dan Kelly; Foley called Blackhawks games from 1981 to 2006, and spent the next two years broadcasting for the AHL&#x27;s Chicago Wolves. Foley was partnered with Ed Olczyk to broadcast all of the Blackhawks&#x27; games. On October 16, 2008, the Blackhawks relieved Denis Savard of his head coaching duties and replaced him with Joel Quenneville. Savard has since been brought back to the organization as an ambassador.
The Blackhawks finished the 2008–09 regular season in second place in their division with a record of 46–24–12, putting them in fourth place in the Western Conference with 104 points. The Blackhawks clinched a playoff berth for the first time since the 2001–02 season with a 3–1 win over the Nashville Predators on April 3. On April 8, with a shootout loss to the Columbus Blue Jackets, the Blackhawks clinched their first 100-point season in 17 years. The Blackhawks defeated the fifth-seeded Calgary Flames in six games to advance to the conference semifinals for the first time since 1996. The team proceeded to defeat the third-seeded Vancouver Canucks in six games,&lt;ref name=&quot;www.nhl.com/ice/recap.htm?id=2008030246&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and then played the then-Stanley Cup champion, the Detroit Red Wings, for the Western Conference Championship, losing the series in five games.

During the 2008–09 season, the team led the NHL in home attendance, with a total of 912,155 spectators, averaging 22,247 per game. This figure includes the 40,818 fans from the Winter Classic at Wrigley Field. Therefore, the total attendance for games hosted at the United Center is 871,337, good for an average of 21,783, which still led the NHL over Montreal&#x27;s 21,273 average. The Blackhawks welcomed their one millionth fan of the season at the United Center before Game 6 of the conference semifinals on May 11, 2009.

====2009–2010: the Stanley Cup returns to Chicago====

Prior to the 2009–10 season, the Blackhawks made another major free agent purchase, signing Marian Hossa to a 12-year, US$62.8 million contract. The team also acquired Tomas Kopecky, John Madden and Richard Petiot. In early July, general manager Dale Tallon and the Blackhawks management came under fire when the National Hockey League Players&#x27; Association (NHLPA) claimed that the team did not submit offers to their restricted free agents before the deadline. In the worst-case scenario, the team&#x27;s unsigned restricted free agents at the time, including Calder Memorial Trophy finalist Kris Versteeg, would have become unrestricted free agents. Despite the ordeal, the Blackhawks were able to sign Versteeg and all of their restricted free agents before the NHLPA could take further action. On July 14, 2009, the Blackhawks demoted Dale Tallon to the position of senior adviser. Stan Bowman, son of Scotty Bowman, was promoted to general manager. The Blackhawks continued to sell-out games, with the best average attendance of 21,356 over the Montreal Canadiens&#x27; 21,273 in the NHL, and had a total of 854,267, excluding the playoffs. The Blackhawks reached the one million mark in Game 3 of the conference finals against the San Jose Sharks.

The Blackhawks re-signed Patrick Kane and Jonathan Toews to contract extensions worth $31.5 million over five years, and Duncan Keith to a 13-year extension worth $72 million on December 1, 2009. On April 6, 2010, the Hawks won their 50th game of the 2009–10 season against the Dallas Stars, setting a new franchise record for wins in a season. The next night, the Blackhawks notched their 109th point of the season in a game against the St. Louis Blues, setting another franchise record.

The Blackhawks made the playoffs for the second consecutive season with a regular season record of 52–22–8. They defeated the Nashville Predators in six games in the first round before defeating the third-seeded Vancouver Canucks for the second straight year, again in six games. The Blackhawks then swept the top-seeded San Jose Sharks in the conference finals, advancing to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since , where they played the Philadelphia Flyers. The Blackhawks prevailed in six games to secure their fourth Stanley Cup in franchise history, and their first since 1961, ending the team&#x27;s 49-year championship drought.

====2010–2012: Building up for more consistency====
The Blackhawks immediately faced salary cap constraints prior to the 2010–11 season. The team was forced to trade several players who played an integral role to their 2009–10 Stanley Cup victory, including Dustin Byfuglien, Andrew Ladd, Kris Versteeg, Brent Sopel, Ben Eager and Colin Fraser. The team was also unable to agree to terms with starting goaltender Antti Niemi, who left as restricted free agent to the San Jose Sharks. The Blackhawks signed former Dallas Stars starting goalie Marty Turco as his replacement, but eventually turned to rookie Corey Crawford to become their full-time starting goaltender. The Blackhawks also acquired Viktor Stalberg from the Toronto Maple Leafs and signed rookies Nick Leddy and Marcus Kruger to three-year entry-level contracts. The Blackhawks also made a mid-season trade to acquire winger Michael Frolik from the Florida Panthers in exchange for Jack Skille, Hugh Jessiman and David Pacan.

Amidst the roster turnaround, the defending Stanley Cup champion Blackhawks finished the season with a 44–29–9 record, and placed third in the Central Division and eighth in the Western Conference. The team&#x27;s playoff fate was determined on the final day of the regular season on April 10, 2011. The Blackhawks lost their regular season finale to the Detroit Red Wings 4–3 but still received the eighth and final seed in the Western Conference after the Minnesota Wild defeated the Dallas Stars later that same day 5–3. In the first round of the 2011 playoffs, the Blackhawks faced the Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning Vancouver Canucks, marking the third consecutive playoffs that the two teams faced each other, this time in the first round in contrast to the second round the previous two years prior. The Canucks built a three-game lead in the series before the Blackhawks were able to win the next three games in a row. Alex Burrows won Game 7 for the Canucks in overtime, 2–1 to win the series 4–3.

Before the 2011–12 season, the Blackhawks continued to make roster moves to optimize their salary cap situation. The team traded winger Troy Brouwer to the Washington Capitals in exchange for the 26th overall pick in the 2011 NHL entry draft (used to select Phillip Danault), and traded veteran defenseman Brian Campbell, who had one of the richest contracts in the franchise&#x27;s history, to the Florida Panthers. The Blackhawks also traded veteran forward Tomas Kopecky to the Panthers and forward Jake Dowell signed with the Dallas Stars in free agency in the 2011 off-season. The team bolstered their forward depth by signing veteran forwards Daniel Carcillo, Jamal Mayers and Andrew Brunette in free agency, while also acquiring goaltender Ray Emery in free agency to back-up Corey Crawford after Marty Turco left the team as a free agent. The Blackhawks also signed Andrew Shaw to a three-year, entry-level contract.

The Blackhawks placed fourth in the Central Division and sixth in the Western Conference with a 45–26–11 record, and qualified for the playoffs for a fourth consecutive season. They faced the third seeded Phoenix Coyotes in the opening round, who eliminated the Blackhawks in six games. The series saw five of the six games going to overtime, with Bryan Bickell (Game 2) and Jonathan Toews (Game 5) scoring the only Blackhawk overtime winners of the series.

====2012–2013: Presidents&#x27; Trophy and fifth Stanley Cup====
The Blackhawks started the lockout-shortened 2012–13 season with much success by establishing several new records. On January 27, 2013, they set a new franchise record for starting the season 6–0–0 after a win against the Detroit Red Wings. On February 19, the Blackhawks tied the NHL record previously set by the Anaheim Ducks in the 2006–07 season for earning points in the first 16 consecutive games of a season, and defeated the Ducks&#x27; record (28 points) by one point. On March 6, the Blackhawks extended the NHL record to 24 games with a record of 21–0–3, and the franchise record for most consecutive wins to 11 games. However, they lost 6–2 to the Colorado Avalanche on March 8, their first loss in regulation, which ended their 24-game streak in which they earned at least one point, an NHL record to start a season and the third-longest in NHL history.
The United Center also recorded its 200th consecutive combined regular season and playoff Blackhawks sell-out on March 1 against the Columbus Blue Jackets, which began during the 2007–08 season with the game against the Blue Jackets on March 30, 2008. The Blackhawks won the Presidents&#x27; Trophy for the best regular season record in the NHL, and clinched home-ice advantage throughout the playoffs. After dispatching the eighth seeded Minnesota Wild in the first round, the Blackhawks faced the seventh Detroit Red Wings in the conference semifinals. The Blackhawks won the series opener but lost the next three games and faced elimination. However, the Blackhawks clawed back into the series, eventually winning the series on a goal by Brent Seabrook in overtime of Game 7. The team then defeated the defending Stanley Cup champion and fifth seeded Los Angeles Kings in five games to secure a second Stanley Cup Finals appearance in four seasons.

The Blackhawks faced the Boston Bruins in the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals. It was the first time since 1979 that two Original Six teams had made the Stanley Cup Finals and the first time since 1945 that the last four teams to win the Stanley Cup were in the conference finals. The Bruins made their second appearance in the Finals in three years (winning in 2011 in seven games against the Vancouver Canucks) and were making a similar resurgence as the Blackhawks. On June 24, the Blackhawks defeated the Bruins in the sixth game of the series to win the Stanley Cup, having overcome a 2–1 deficit with just over a minute remaining in the game. Bryan Bickell and Dave Bolland scored goals with 1:16 and 0:58.3 remaining in the game, just 17 seconds apart, to win 3–2.

====2013–2016: sixth Stanley Cup and continued contention====

The Blackhawks began the 2013–14 season in hopes of becoming the first team to win consecutive Stanley Cups since the Detroit Red Wings in 1997 and 1998. The team was slightly altered in the off-season to remain under the salary cap. The team traded veteran forwards Dave Bolland, Daniel Carcillo and Michael Frolik in exchange for future draft picks, while parting ways with veteran goaltender Ray Emery and veteran winger Viktor Stalberg by having them leave in free agency. Despite these changes, the Blackhawks tallied a 28–7–7 record going into January 2014. The team played their second outdoor game in franchise history, against the Pittsburgh Penguins at Soldier Field, as part of the 2014 Stadium Series. The Blackhawks defeated the Penguins 5–1 in front of 62,921 fans.

The franchise recorded its 2,500th regular season win, while head coach Joel Quenneville won 693 wins as a coach, the third most in the history of the NHL. The Blackhawks finished the season with a 46–21–15 record, good for third in the Central Division. They opened the playoffs by losing two games to the St. Louis Blues. The Blackhawks surged back with four straight wins to take the series. The team then defeated the Minnesota Wild for the second consecutive year. However, the Los Angeles Kings defeated the Blackhawks in seven games and ultimately went on to win the Stanley Cup. After the season&#x27;s conclusion, Duncan Keith won the James Norris Memorial Trophy for the second time in his career, and captain Jonathan Toews was named a finalist for the Frank J. Selke Trophy for the second consecutive season and third time altogether.
The Blackhawks&#x27; roster from the previous three seasons remained largely intact going into the 2014–15 season. In the 2014 off-season prior to the beginning of the 2014–15 season, the team signed veteran center Brad Richards and rookie goaltender Scott Darling to one-year contracts, and traded veteran defenseman Nick Leddy to the New York Islanders in exchange for three prospects. For the first half of the season, Patrick Kane led the team in scoring and points. The Blackhawks mustered a 30–15–2 record going into the All-Star break. The Blackhawks sent six players to the All-Star Game, including Kane, Jonathan Toews, Duncan Keith, Brent Seabrook and Corey Crawford. The team also played in the 2015 Winter Classic at Nationals Park in Washington, D.C., where they lost 3–2 to the Washington Capitals.

However, in late February, Kane suffered a shoulder injury that was expected to sideline him for the remainder of the regular season and much of the playoffs. The team called up rookie Teuvo Teravainen from the AHL, and traded their first-round pick in the 2015 NHL entry draft to acquire center Antoine Vermette from the Arizona Coyotes. The Blackhawks also acquired veteran defenseman Kimmo Timonen from the Philadelphia Flyers for second-round picks in 2015 and 2016, and Andrew Desjardins from the San Jose Sharks in exchange for Ben Smith. The Blackhawks finished the season with a 48–28–6 record, placing third in their division, and allowed the fewest goals in the NHL.
Kane recovered quicker than expected, and was ready for the start of the playoffs. The Blackhawks dispatched the Nashville Predators in six games and swept the Minnesota Wild to advance to the conference finals for the fifth time in seven years. The top-seeded Anaheim Ducks held a 3–2 lead in the series, but the Blackhawks rallied back in the series to win games six and seven. The team then defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning in the 2015 Stanley Cup Finals to secure their third Stanley Cup in six seasons to solidify themselves as a modern day NHL dynasty.

The Blackhawks&#x27; roster experienced another dramatic reconstruction before the 2015–16 season. The team was unable to come to terms with pending free agent Brandon Saad, who had played a pivotal role in the 2013 and 2015 Stanley Cup championships. The Blackhawks traded Saad&#x27;s negotiation rights (along with prospects Alex Broadhurst and Michael Paliotta) to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for Artem Anisimov, Marko Dano, Corey Tropp, Jeremy Morin and fourth-round draft pick Anatoly Golyshev in the 2016 NHL entry draft. The Blackhawks were unable to re-sign unrestricted free agents veterans Brad Richards, Antoine Vermette and Johnny Oduya due to salary cap constraints. The team then traded longtime veteran and fan-favorite Patrick Sharp (along with Stephen Johns) to the Dallas Stars in exchange for Trevor Daley and forward Ryan Garbutt in order to stay under the salary cap. Amidst the roster turnover, the Blackhawks signed free agent Artemi Panarin from the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL) to an entry-level contract.

The Blackhawks&#x27; offense was led by Patrick Kane, who scored an NHL-best 106 points in 2015–16 and also won the season&#x27;s Hart Memorial Trophy as league MVP. Panarin, who skated on Kane&#x27;s line, won the Calder Memorial Trophy, awarded to the NHL&#x27;s best first-year player. Midway through the season, the Blackhawks attempted to supplement their roster by making several trades. The Blackhawks dealt Jeremy Morin to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Richard Panik. The team then reacquired Andrew Ladd from the Winnipeg Jets in exchange for their first round selection in the 2016 NHL entry draft and Marko Dano. The team then traded Phillip Danault and their 2018 second-round pick to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for forwards Dale Weise and Tomas Fleischmann. The team finished with a 46–26–9 record, good for 103 points and third place in their division. The defending Stanley Cup champion Blackhawks were defeated by the St. Louis Blues in a seven-game series in the first round of the 2016 playoffs. The loss marked the Blackhawks&#x27; earliest playoff exit since 2012.

====2016–2020: post-Cup years and retooling ====
Salary cap constraints forced the Blackhawks to make additional trades before the 2016–17 season. The team traded pending free-agent Andrew Shaw to Montreal in exchange for two second-round 2016 draft picks. The Blackhawks also traded Bryan Bickell and Teuvo Teravainen to the Carolina Hurricanes in exchange for another 2016 second-round pick in order to free additional salary cap space. The Blackhawks brought back veteran defenseman Brian Campbell and signed KHL stand-out Michal Kempny during free agency. The team then turned to their farm system to replenish their depth. The Blackhawks promoted rookies Ryan Hartman, Gustav Forsling, John Hayden, Tyler Motte, Nick Schmaltz and Vinnie Hinostroza to their starting line-up to fill the vacancies left by Ladd, Bickell, Shaw and Teravainen.

Patrick Kane spearheaded the Blackhawks offense with 34 goals and 55 assists for 89 points in all 82 contests played, tying for second in scoring during the regular season among all skaters. He was aided by his linemate, Panarin, who scored 31 goals and 43 assists. In addition to Kane and Panarin, Jonathan Toews, Marian Hossa, Artem Anisimov and Richard Panik all scored at least 20 goals. Toews, Kane, Duncan Keith and Corey Crawford were also selected to play in the All-Star Game. The Blackhawks finished the season with 109 points, placing first in the Central Division and earning the top-seed in the Western Conference for the 2017 playoffs. However, they were swept in the first round by the eighth-seeded Nashville Predators in one of the biggest upsets in NHL playoff history; this was the first time that an eighth seed swept a playoff series against the top team in the conference. Goaltender Pekka Rinne and the Predators&#x27; defense marginalized the Blackhawks&#x27; offense, limiting the team to only three total goals in the series, including a pair of shutouts in Game 1 (1–0) and Game 2 (5–0) at United Center to begin the series.

Prior to the 2017–18 season, the Blackhawks revealed Marian Hossa would miss the entire 2017–18 season due to a progressive skin disorder. The team made two major trades before the 2017 NHL entry draft; veteran defenseman Niklas Hjalmarsson was dealt to the Arizona Coyotes in exchange for Connor Murphy and Laurent Dauphin, while Artemi Panarin was traded to the Columbus Blue Jackets to reacquire Brandon Saad in a four-player deal. Both Hjalmarsson and Hossa were core members of the Blackhawks roster that won three Stanley Cups in 2010, 2013 and 2015. The team also traded goaltender Scott Darling to the Carolina Hurricanes and center Marcus Kruger to the Vegas Golden Knights, while also lost defensemen Trevor van Riemsdyk to the Golden Knights in the 2017 NHL Expansion Draft and Brian Campbell, who retired. The Blackhawks acquired wingers Patrick Sharp, Tommy Wingels and Lance Bouma in free agency.

The Blackhawks opened the 2017–18 season with a resounding 10–1 victory over the defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins. The Blackhawks were four games above .500 with an 18–14–6 record at the end of December 2017, and only four points out of a playoff spot. However, goaltender Corey Crawford missed much of 2018 due to an upper-body injury. Inconsistent defense and goaltending, coupled with limited offense, resulted in the team falling to the bottom of the Central Division. The Blackhawks were eliminated from playoff contention on March 20, 2018, marking the first time in nine years that the team failed to qualify for the Stanley Cup playoffs. The team finished the season with a 33–39–10 record and 76 points in the standings, 19 points out of a playoff spot.

The Blackhawks made modest acquisitions during the opening day of free agency by acquiring veterans Cam Ward, Chris Kunitz and Brandon Manning. The team made their biggest move of the off-season by offloading Hossa&#x27;s contract onto the Arizona Coyotes by trading Vinnie Hinostroza, Jordan Oesterle and third-round draft pick in the 2019 draft in exchange for Marcus Kruger, MacKenzie Entwistle, Jordan Maletta, Andrew Campbell and a fifth-round draft pick in the 2019 NHL Draft. Quenneville named Ward the team&#x27;s starting goaltender as Crawford missed the first five games of the 2018–19 season with concussion-like symptoms. The Blackhawks opened the season with a promising 6–2–2 start despite Crawford&#x27;s initial absence. However, after losing their next five games, head coach Joel Quenneville (as well as assistant coaches Kevin Dineen and Ulf Samuelsson) were fired on November 6, 2018. Jeremy Colliton, previously the head coach of the Blackhawks&#x27; AHL affiliate, the Rockford IceHogs, was named the 38th head coach in franchise history.

The team adjusted their roster by trading Nick Schmaltz to the Arizona Coyotes in exchange for Dylan Strome and Brendan Perlini. The Blackhawks then dealt Brandon Manning to the Edmonton Oilers in exchange for Drake Caggiula. The team struggled despite these changes and plummeted to the bottom of the NHL&#x27;s standings by the All-Star break, but then rebounded with an 18–10–3 record during the second half of the season, and missed playoffs by six points, while finishing in sixth place in the Central Division. After missing the playoffs for the second straight season, the Blackhawks won the third-overall pick in the 2019 NHL entry draft at the draft lottery, which they used to select Kirby Dach.

Prior to the 2019–20 season, the Blackhawks signed center Ryan Carpenter and goaltender Robin Lehner on the opening day of free agency. The team made three separate trades to acquire Olli Maatta, Calvin de Haan and Alex Nylander. The team reacquired fan-favorite Andrew Shaw in a trade with the Montreal Canadiens. The Blackhawks also inserted rookie Dominik Kubalik into their roster, whom they acquired from the Los Angeles Kings in the previous season. The Blackhawks posted a 32–30–8 record and finished last in their division before the remainder of the regular season was canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The team fired John McDonough, who served as the Blackhawks&#x27; president for 13 years. The Blackhawks obtained a spot in the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs, which used a 24-team playoff format among the top 12 teams in each conference. The 12th-seeded Blackhawks defeated the Edmonton Oilers in the qualifying round of the playoffs to advance to the Western Conference first round, where they lost to the Vegas Golden Knights in five games.

====2020–2023: the Toews and Kane era ends====
The 2020–21 season would be delayed to January 2021 and condensed to 56 games due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The Blackhawks signed forwards Mattias Janmark, Lucas Wallmark and Carl Soderberg during free agency to one-year deals. Veteran forward Brandon Saad was traded to the Colorado Avalanche for defensemen Nikita Zadorov and Anton Lindholm. The team&#x27;s captain, Jonathan Toews, announced he would forgo the season due to an undisclosed medical illness. The Blackhawks parted with longtime goaltender Corey Crawford, who signed with the New Jersey Devils but ultimately retired before the season&#x27;s start without playing any games for the Devils. Brent Seabrook, the team&#x27;s veteran defenseman, announced his retirement midway through the season due a lingering hip injury sustained the previous season. Andrew Shaw, who previously rejoined the Blackhawks in 2019, also announced he would retire from playing due to concussions suffered throughout his career. The Blackhawks relied heavily on their rookies during the season to replenish their depth, including forwards Brandon Hagel, Philipp Kurashev and Pius Suter, defensemen Ian Mitchell and Wyatt Kalynuk and goaltender Kevin Lankinen. Despite the roster turnaround, the Blackhawks completed the first half of the season with a 14–9–5 record and sat in fourth place in their division. The team struggled from mid-March through April, going 8–15–1, and subsequently traded away Janmark, Wallmark and Soderberg at the trade deadline. The Blackhawks failed to qualify for the playoffs once more and finished in sixth place with a 24–25–7 record. The Blackhawks named Danny Wirtz, the son of Rocky Wirtz, as their new chief executive officer on December 16, 2020. The team made some significant changes in their front office, promoting the general manager, Stan Bowman, to the role of president of hockey operations, and appointing Jaime Faulkner as the new president of business operations.

Prior to the 2021–22 season, former Blackhawks prospect Kyle Beach alleged he was sexually assaulted by Brad Aldrich, the team&#x27;s former video coach, during the 2009–10 season. Beach filed a lawsuit against the Blackhawks for failing to adequately address Aldrich&#x27;s wrongdoings or file formal police reports. A separate party, a former high school student whom Aldrich sexually assaulted during his tenure at Houghton High School also filed a lawsuit against the Blackhawks, alleging the team gave a positive reference on behalf of Aldrich and failed to disclose any details about his sexual assault in 2010. The Blackhawks retained law firm Jenner &amp; Block to conduct an internal investigation that spanned 139 interviews over four months. It revealed that the team&#x27;s brain trust, including team president John McDonough, executive vice president Jay Blunk, general manager Stan Bowman, assistant general manager Kevin Cheveldayoff and head coach Joel Quenneville, met just days before the start of the 2010 Stanley Cup Finals and deferred any action on Aldrich until after the Finals. Aldrich was subsequently allowed to quietly resign after taking part in the Stanley Cup victory celebration.
Within hours of the report&#x27;s release on October 26, 2021, Bowman and senior director of hockey operations Al MacIsaac, the only participants in the 2010 meeting still with the Blackhawks, resigned. Assistant general manager Kyle Davidson took over as interim general manager. The NHL also imposed a $2 million fine on the Blackhawks for &quot;inadequate internal procedures and insufficient and untimely response in the handling of matters related to former video coach Brad Aldrich&#x27;s employment&quot;. It also stated that most of the participants in the meeting, including McDonough, Bowman, Blunk, and MacIssac, will not be allowed to work in the NHL again without permission from the league office. Quenneville, by then head coach of the Florida Panthers, resigned after meeting with Bettman on October 28, and will also have to meet with Bettman if he wants to work in the league again. Bettman subsequently met with Cheveldayoff, by now the general manager of the Winnipeg Jets, but cleared him of wrongdoing. Bettman stated that he could not &quot;assign to [Cheveldayoff] responsibility for the Club&#x27;s actions, or inactions&quot; because Cheveldayoff was not a member of the Blackhawks&#x27; senior leadership team at the time. Aldrich&#x27;s name was removed from the Stanley Cup, as requested by the team. Beach and the Blackhawks reached an undisclosed settlement on December 15. However, the second lawsuit filed against the Blackhawks by a former high school student was dismissed.

Before his resignation, Bowman intended on building a competitive team that could make the playoffs immediately rather than focusing on rebuilding for the future. The team traded veteran defenseman Duncan Keith to the Edmonton Oilers in exchange for a draft pick and Caleb Jones. The Blackhawks traded Brent Seabrook&#x27;s contract to the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for center Tyler Johnson. The team then acquired Seth Jones from the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for two draft picks and prospect Adam Boqvist. The Blackhawks leveraged their open salary cap to acquire reigning Vezina Trophy-winner Marc-Andre Fleury from the Vegas Golden Knights, who were in desperate need of cap relief. The team signed defensemen Jake McCabe and winger Jujhar Khaira in free agency. Blackhawks captain Jonathan Toews, who had missed the previous seasons due to chronic immune response syndrome, also announced he would return for the 2021–22 season.

On November 6, Colliton was fired after leading the team to a 1–9–2 record to start the season, the second-worst in the NHL at the time. Derek King, former Rockford IceHogs head coach, was named his interim replacement. Davidson was formally named the team&#x27;s general manager on March 1, 2022. The Blackhawks were unable to recover from their poor start and fell out of playoff contention by the trade deadline. The team traded Brandon Hagel to Tampa Bay in exchange for two first-round picks, Boris Katchouk and Taylor Raddysh, while also trading Fleury to the Minnesota Wild in exchange for a second-round pick. The team finished sixth place in Central Division with a 28–42–12 record. The 2021–22 season also marked announcer Pat Foley&#x27;s final season with the Blackhawks, who had been with the team for 39 years.

On June 27, 2022, the Blackhawks named Luke Richardson as their 40th head coach in franchise history. General manager Davidson announced the Blackhawks would commit to rebuilding their roster and acquiring draft capital. The team traded Alex DeBrincat to the Ottawa Senators and Kirby Dach to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for the 7th and 13th picks in the 2022 NHL entry draft. Chicago also acquired the 25th overall pick in the draft from the Toronto Maple Leafs by taking on goaltender Petr Mrazek&#x27;s contract. The Blackhawks made modest acquisitions in free agency, signing veteran forwards Andreas Athanasiou, Colin Blackwell and Max Domi. The team fell to the bottom of the Central Division and again emerged as sellers at the 2022–23 trade deadline. Patrick Kane was traded to the Arizona Coyotes in exchange for Vili Saarijarvi and Kane was then later sent to the New York Rangers as part of a three-team trade. The Blackhawks received Andy Welinski, a conditional second-round pick in 2023 and a fourth-round pick in 2025 from the Rangers to complete the trade. The Blackhawks also dealt Jake McCabe, Sam Lafferty and Max Domi, while also taking on Nikita Zaitsev&#x27;s contract from the Ottawa Senators in exchange for additional draft capital. Captain Jonathan Toews missed 29 games while recovering from Long COVID. Before their final regular season game, the team also announced that they would not re-sign Toews. The Blackhawks finished last in their division with the third-worst record in the NHL.

===Danny Wirtz era (2023–present)===

====2023–present: rebuilding and beginning of the Connor Bedard era====
The Blackhawks won the 2023 draft lottery and received the first overall pick in the 2023 NHL entry draft. The team drafted Connor Bedard first overall. The Blackhawks subsequently made trades to acquire veteran forwards Taylor Hall, Nick Foligno and Corey Perry. The team leveraged their excess salary cap space to acquire Josh Bailey and 2026 second-round draft pick from the cap-strapped New York Islanders. Bailey&#x27;s contract was immediately bought out and he was placed on unconditional waivers. The Blackhawks signed forward Ryan Donato to a two-year, $4 million contact on the opening day of free agency.

Rocky Wirtz unexpectedly died on July 25, 2023, at age 70. Danny Wirtz, his son, was named the chairman and president of Wirtz Corporation, the company that owns the Blackhawks, on July 30. Amidst the transitions in ownership, the Blackhawks continued to struggle on the ice by finishing the 2023–24 NHL season with a 23–53–6 record, marking the second-worst in the NHL and the worst in franchise history since 1974. The team was devastated by injuries to several skaters throughout the season, including Bedard, Hall, Andreas Athanasiou, and Colin Blackwell. The Blackhawks also terminated the contract of Corey Perry, who violated the team&#x27;s code of conduct policy. Bedard was recipient of Calder Memorial Trophy, awarded to the NHL&#x27;s top first-year player. 

On December 5, 2024 the Blackhawks fired Luke Richardson after tallying a league-worst 18 points through the first 26 games of the 2024-25 season, naming Anders Sorensen interim head coach.

==Team information==

===Jerseys===
The Blackhawks wear predominantly red jerseys featuring three sets of black and white stripes along the sleeves and waist. The team&#x27;s logo is displayed on the front of each jersey, along with a &quot;C&quot;, representing &quot;Chicago&quot;, on each shoulder with two crossed tomahawks. The Blackhawks debuted this design in 1955, and have since only made minor modifications to the jersey. In 2007, the Blackhawks along with all other NHL teams, made minute changes to their uniforms by adding larger logo, a new collar with the NHL logo and a &quot;baseball-style cut&quot; along the bottom. The team previously donned alternate third jersey that was primarily black with red and white stripes between 1996 and 2007. The Blackhawks brought this design back in 2008, before making their 2009 Winter Classic jerseys their alternates between 2009 and 2011. After the 2019 Winter Classic, the Blackhawks made their jersey from the game their alternate, wearing it for three more games in 2019 and in three games during the 2019–20 season.

The Blackhawks&#x27; uniform was voted 1 of the 25 best in professional sports by Paul Lukas of &quot;GQ&quot; in November 2004. &quot;The Hockey News&quot; voted the team&#x27;s jersey as the best in the NHL. Greg Wyshynski of Yahoo! Sports listed the Blackhawks home jerseys as the second best NHL jersey in the history of the NHL in 2017. The Blackhawks were voted to have the best uniform in the history of the NHL in a fan-vote conducted by the NHL in 2017.
Since 2009, the Blackhawks have worn special camouflage jerseys on Veterans Day during their pregame warm-ups. The jerseys are later sold in auctions to raise money for the USO of Illinois.

The Blackhawks wore jerseys based on the design worn in the 1936–37 season for the 2009 Winter Classic. The jersey is predominantly black with a large beige stripe across the chest (also on the sleeves), with a red border, and an old-style circular Black Hawks logo. The Blackhawks used this Winter Classic design as their third jersey for the 2009–10 season until they retired after the 2010–11 season, with the only change in the design adding the familiar &quot;C&quot; with crossed tomahawks on the shoulders.

For the 2014 Stadium Series, the Blackhawks wore a black uniform similar to the alternates they wore from 1996 to 2009, but the stripes around the waist are no longer straight, they are jagged around the sides in order to follow the shape of the bottom of the jersey. Keeping with stripes, the ones on the arms simply stop halfway round; angled numbers are above these sleeve half-stripes. On one shoulder is the familiar &quot;C&quot; with crossed tomahawks logo and the Chicago 2014 Stadium Series logo on the other. Each 2014 Stadium Series jerseys features chrome-treated logo designs inspired by the NHL shield. The chrome crest was developed using new technology that fuses print and embroidery and allows logos to be displayed as a high-resolution image incorporated into the crest. As a result, the design reduces the weight of the crest, creating in a lighter jersey. Numbering on the back of the jersey is enlarged and sleeve numbers are angled to improve visibility in outdoor venues.

The team wore a uniform which was inspired by their 1957–58 jersey for the 2015 Winter Classic. This uniform is nearly identical to the road uniform that the Blackhawks currently wear. The main differences between this design and the current road design come in the form of the lace-up collar, the name/number block font (which is serifed), and the C-Tomahawk logo, which is mostly red, black, and white (with a tad bit of yellow) instead of being mostly red, yellow, green black and white.

For the 2016 Stadium Series, the Blackhawks wore a unique uniform for their game against the Minnesota Wild. This uniform is primarily white with black/red/black stripes on the sleeves and socks. The current logo is on the chest. Framed between the two black stripes and over the red stripe on the sleeve is the familiar &quot;C&quot; with crossed tomahawks. The collar of the uniform features two different colors. The four, six-pointed red stars from the Flag of Chicago is featured on the white portion of the collar, while the other side of the collar is black. Sleeve numbers have been shifted to the shoulders and enlarged. With the shoulders being black, the numbering is white. But, the numbering and lettering on the back is also enlarged and black in color.

For the 2017 Winter Classic, the Blackhawks wore uniforms very similar to what they wore at the 2015 Winter Classic. These new uniforms however feature a few modifications that were made to them. The most notable changes are to the logo and the cross tomahawks. The logo this time is the appropriate logo that the franchise used in 1957–1965, but they removed the roundel and the lettering so that just the logo itself stands out. The placement of the familiar &quot;C&quot; with crossed tomahawks is featured in the same position with the same striping pattern on the sleeve as the 2015 Winter Classic uniform had. The only differences between the tomahawks from the 2015 Winter Classic uniform and the 2017 Winter Classic uniform are where the colors are placed for the tomahawk. The 2017 Winter Classic patch is featured on the right shoulder.

To honor the NHL&#x27;s centennial year, a special anniversary logo was designed for the remainder of the 2016–17 season, which started on January 1, 2017, for all thirty teams, featuring a banner wrapped around the number 100 with the current NHL shield in the foreground. Both the banner and the number 100 are in same silver color as the NHL shield. The Blackhawks wore this logo patch underneath the numbering on the right-sleeve on both the home and away jerseys. The Blackhawks debuted this patch on their home jerseys on January 5, 2017, and then they debuted the patch on the away jerseys on January 13, 2017. All home and away jerseys for all 30 teams will continue to have patches of the NHL&#x27;s centennial emblem for the 2017–18 season, located above or below the numbers on their right sleeves, for at least up to the playing of the NHL 100 Classic on December 16, 2017.

Adidas signed an agreement with the NHL to be the official outfitter of uniforms and licensed apparel for all teams, starting with the 2017–18 season, replacing Reebok. The Reebok &quot;Edge&quot; template was retired in favor of the Adidas&#x27; &quot;ADIZERO&quot; template. The home and away uniforms that were debuted in the 2007–08 season remain nearly identical with the exception of the new Adidas ADIZERO template and the new collar. With the new collar, the NHL shield remains but is no longer placed on a lower layer with flaps nearby, as it&#x27;s now front and center on a pentagon with a new &quot;Chrome Flex&quot; style. The waist stripes are now curved instead of being straight across. The Adidas logo replaces the Reebok logo on the back collar.

For the entire 2018–19 season, on both the home and away uniforms, the Blackhawks wore memorial patches in remembrance of Stan Mikita, who died on August 7, 2018. The memorial patch featured 21 in white on a black circle that is placed on the upper left corner on the front side of the uniform.

For the 2019 Winter Classic, the Blackhawks wore uniforms similar to what they wore from the 1926–27 season to the 1934–35 season. The black and white uniform features the black and white Native American head logo on a black and white roundel with the wording &quot;Blackhawks&quot; arched on top and &quot;Chicago&quot; arched below. The Native American head logo inside the roundel features the 1999–2000 native American head logo that they currently wear. The uniform has four white stripes on each of the shoulders, and five white stripes of varying thickness on each sleeve and around the waist. Inside the collar, we see several diagonal white lines, which is a nod to the end zone design used at Notre Dame Stadium. Mixed in between these white lines are the six years written in red, the six years the Blackhawks won the Stanley Cup. The Blackhawks won the Stanley Cup in 1934, 1938, 1961, 2010, 2013 and 2015. After the 2019 Winter Classic, the team announced that uniforms from the game would be worn in three home games of the 2018–19 season.

For the 2019–20 season, the home and away uniforms that were unveiled for the 2017–18 season remain nearly identical with the exception of the new collar designs. The new collar on the home uniform transitions from white to a solid red on the front as it comes over the shoulder, leading into the NHL logo with a red background in the center. The new collar on the away uniform transitions from red to a solid white on the front as it comes over the shoulder, leading into the NHL logo with a white background in the center.

Beginning with the 2020–21 season, the NHL allowed for advertising on its gameday uniforms for the first time, starting with helmet ads. The Blackhawks&#x27; first helmet ad sponsor was United Airlines.

For the 2020–21 NHL season, the Blackhawks would wear &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniforms. The design was largely inspired from the team&#x27;s 1940s uniforms save for the &quot;barber-pole&quot; elements. A second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform was released in the 2022–23 season, based on their 1938 uniform. Across the chest is &quot;CHICAGO&quot; in white with red trim, inspired by the 2019 Winter Classic crest and the current Blackhawks primary logo is added as a shoulder patch on the left side.

Starting with the 2021–22 NHL regular season, Adidas introduced new environmentally-friendly uniforms for all teams with its Adidas ADIZERO Primegreen Authentic template. The template is made with a minimum of 50% recycled content while still retaining their high-performance materials. Each team uniform will maintain its classic stripping and logo, while boasting dimensional embroidery that draws attention to their sustainable materials, and a two-layer twill that underscores the product&#x27;s authenticity. For the Blackhawks, the logo on their uniforms now feature raised markings on the face of their logo, the forehead lines, the eyebrow and eye, as well as the facepaint are all now raised rather than flat as it had been before.

For the entire 2021–22 season, on both the home and away uniforms, the Blackhawks wore memorial patches in remembrance of Tony Esposito, who died on August 10, 2021. The memorial patch features 35 in white on a black circle that is placed on the upper left corner on the front side of the uniform.

For the entire 2023–24 season, on both the home and away uniforms, the Blackhawks are wearing memorial patches in remembrance of Rocky Wirtz, who died on July 25, 2023. The memorial patch features &quot;ROCKY&quot; in white on a black circle that is placed on the upper left corner on the front side of the uniform.

Starting with the 2024–25 season, Fanatics debuted the Authentic Pro NHL on-ice uniforms that replaces Adidas. As part of the new uniform design, there will be an additional layer of fabric inside the lower sleeve to reduce wear caused by friction against the boards. The NHL Shield has a new special hologram finish on the front collar, and Fanatics branding is embroidered on the back neck of the uniform. The Blackhawks announced a multi-year partnership with Circa Sports in June 2024, making them the official jersey patch sponsor for the team&#x27;s home red uniforms.

The Blackhawks wore retro-inspired red uniforms for the 2025 Winter Classic, which incorporated a lace-up collar. The crest featured the current Blackhawks logo inside a black roundel, which contained two red six-point stars on each side (a nod to the flag of Chicago), the team name on top and the city name at the bottom. The alternating black and white chest and sleeve striping is based on the current red uniform&#x27;s tail striping, and the back cream numbers featured subtle pinstripes as homage to Wrigley Field&#x27;s main tenants, the Chicago Cubs.

===Logo===
Irene Castle, McLaughlin&#x27;s wife, designed the original version of the team&#x27;s logo, which featured a crudely drawn black and white Native head in a circle. Castle, the original designer, was white. This design went through several significant changes between 1926 and 1955. During this period, seven distinct versions of the primary logo were worn on the team&#x27;s uniforms. At the beginning of the 1955–56 season, the outer circle was removed and the head began to resemble the team&#x27;s current primary logo. This crest and uniform went through subtle changes until the 1964–65 season; the basic logo and jersey design have remained constant ever since. In 2008, &quot;The Hockey News&quot;&#x27; staff voted the team&#x27;s main logo to be the best in the NHL. In 2010, sports columnist Damien Cox called on the franchise to retire the &quot;racially insensitive&quot; logo, saying that, &quot;Clearly, no right-thinking person would name a team after an aboriginal figure these days any more than they would use Muslims or Africans or Chinese or any ethnic group to depict a specific sporting notion.&quot; Furthermore, the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) believes that all Native-themed logos, including that of the Blackhawks, &quot;continue to profit from harmful stereotypes originated during a time when white superiority and segregation were common place.&quot;

In 2019, the American Indian Center of Chicago ended all ties to the Chicago Blackhawks Foundation, stating they will no longer affiliate &quot;with organizations that perpetuate stereotypes through the use of &#x27;Indian&#x27; mascots.&quot; The AIC noted in its statement that they &quot;previously held a relationship with the Chicago Blackhawks Foundation with the intention of educating the general public about American Indians and the use of logos and mascots. The AIC, along with members of the community have since decided to end this relationship&quot; and stated that &quot;going forward, AIC will have no professional ties with the Blackhawks, or any other organization that perpetuates harmful stereotypes.&quot;

On July 7, 2020, the Blackhawks issued a press release to defend their team&#x27;s name and logo. The team stated, &quot;The Chicago Blackhawks name and logo symbolizes an important and historic person, Black Hawk of Illinois&#x27; Sac &amp; Fox Nation, whose leadership and life has inspired generations of Native Americans, veterans and the public.&quot; The Blackhawks further stated they would &quot;expand awareness&quot; of Black Hawk and all Indigenous American contributions. The press release came after other American professional sports teams, including the Washington Redskins and Cleveland Indians, reevaluated their names and logos.

The National Congress of American Indians, The American Indian Center of Chicago, The Chi-Nations Youth Council and over 1,500 Native organizations and advocates from over 150 federally recognized tribes across the country, including members of the Sac and Fox Nation, support changing the team name and logo. Members of Black Hawk&#x27;s family, including April Holder (Sauk and Fox, Wichita, Tonkawa), a direct descendant of Black Hawk, have also spoken out calling on the team to change its name and logo and to stop profiting off Black Hawk&#x27;s name, image, and legacy.

The Chi-Nations Youth Council (CNYC), an Indigenous youth organization in Chicago, has said &quot;The Chicago Blackhawks name and logo symbolizes a legacy of imperialism and genocide.&quot; &quot;As statutes (sic) of invaders, slave holders, and white supremacists fall across the nation so too should the images and language of the savage and dead &#x27;Indians&#x27;.&quot; CNYC also noted &quot;As social consciousness has grown over the past decades so has the Blackhawks performative gestures of buying their reprieve from those willing to sell out the health and humanity of our future generations.&quot;

===Mascot===

The Blackhawks mascot is Tommy Hawk, an anthropomorphic black hawk who wears the Blackhawks&#x27; four feathers on his head, along with a Blackhawks jersey and hockey pants. Tommy Hawk often participates in the T-shirt toss and puck chuck at the United Center. He walks around the concourse greeting fans before and during the game. The team introduced Tommy Hawk in the 2001–02 season. Tommy Hawk was inducted into the Mascot Hall of Fame in 2019.

===Practice facilities===
The Blackhawks practice facility, the Fifth Third Arena (previously named MB Ice Arena prior to May 2019), is located in Chicago&#x27;s Near West Side. The facility opened in 2017 and cost $65 million to construct. The Fifth Third Arena also serves as community center and hosts youth, high school, and adult hockey and ice skating programs.

The Blackhawks had previously used Johnny&#x27;s Ice House West and The Edge Ice Arena in suburban Bensenville as their practice facility.

===Circus trip===
The Blackhawks and their arena mates, the Chicago Bulls, embarked on an annual two-week road trip in mid-November dating back to when both teams inhabited Chicago Stadium. The Wirtz Family, who at one point owned the Blackhawks, Bulls, and Chicago Stadium, would lease the venue to circus acts and ice skating troupes. The Blackhawks played between six and seven games in western Canada and California during this time. In November 2016, the Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus announced they would not return to the United Center in 2017. As a result, Disney on Ice performed its last two week show in 2017 before being condensed to one week in 2018.

==Media and announcers==

For the first time in team history, all 82 games plus playoffs were broadcast on television during the 2008–09 season. At least 20 of them aired on WGN-TV (Channel 9), the first time the Blackhawks had been seen on local over-the-air television in 30 years. Games produced by WGN-TV through its WGN Sports department are not available in its superstation feed WGN America due to league broadcast rights restrictions. Other games not broadcast by WGN-TV are aired on regional sports network NBC Sports Chicago, the first time in at least 35 years that non-nationally broadcast home games were seen locally, either over-the-air or on cable. On February 15, 2011, it was announced that the team had renewed their broadcast contract with WGN-TV for the next five years, starting in the 2011–12 NHL season. The deal was further extended for three more years on May 15, 2014, keeping the team on Channel 9 until the end of the 2018–19 season. On January 2, 2019, the Blackhawks (along with the Chicago Bulls and Chicago White Sox) agreed to an exclusive multi-year deal with NBC Sports Chicago beginning with the 2019–20 season, ending the team&#x27;s broadcasts on WGN-TV. On June 5, 2024, the Blackhawks, Bulls, and White Sox announced they would join the newly established Chicago Sports Network.

Radio broadcasts since the 1970s and into the mid-2000s varied between WBBM (780) and WMAQ/WSCR (670). Both frequencies are 50,000-watt clear channel stations that allowed the Blackhawks to be heard across the country at night, but Blackhawks games often came into conflict with White Sox baseball by the start of April. On April 30, 2008, the team signed a three-year deal with WGN Radio (720 AM), another 50,000-watt station, with games airing alternately instead on WIND (560 AM) in scheduling conflict situations during the baseball season due to the Cubs having contractual preference to air on WGN; these moved to WGWG-LP (Channel 6/87.7 FM, an analog television station carrying an audio-only sports talk format using a quirk in the FM band) in mid-2014 when Tribune began a local marketing agreement with that station&#x27;s owner. During the 2010 Stanley Cup Finals, the Cubs agreed to allow the Blackhawks games to be broadcast on WGN and have the Cubs revert to WIND when there was a conflict. This allowed the Finals games to be heard over a larger area due to WGN&#x27;s clear-channel signal. All Blackhawk games are also streamed live on wgnradio.com, regardless of whether the games are on WGN or WGWG-LP. WLUP-FM (97.9 FM) was also utilized as an alternate station.

As of the 2024–25 season, Rick Ball and John Wiedeman call play-by-play on television and radio, respectively. Darren Pang and Troy Murray serve as the TV and radio color commentator respectively, with Caley Chelios providing occasional game analysis and other content on various media.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Blackhawks. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Chicago Blackhawks seasons&quot;.

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;

==Players and personnel==
===Current roster===
===Retired numbers===
Notes:
* 1 Both players who wore No. 3 were honored.
* The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.

===Hall of Fame===
The Chicago Blackhawks acknowledge an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame, including 42 former players and 10 builders of the sport. The 10 individuals recognized as builders by the Hall of Fame include former Blackhawks executives, general managers, head coaches, and owners. In addition to players and builders, the team recognizes an affiliation with three broadcasters who were awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame. Lloyd Pettit, a sportscaster, was the first Blackhawks broadcaster to receive the award, in 1986. Other Blackhawks broadcasters awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award include Pat Foley (awarded in 2014). In 2016, team historian Bob Verdi was awarded the Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award.

Players
Builders
===Team captains===

* Dick Irvin, 1926–1929
* Duke Dukowski, 1929–1930
* Ty Arbour, 1930–1931
* Marvin Wentworth, 1931–1932
* Helge Bostrom, 1932–1933
* Charlie Gardiner, 1933–1934
* Johnny Gottselig, 1935–1940
* Earl Seibert, 1940–1942
* Doug Bentley, 1942–1944, 1949–1950
* Clint Smith, 1944–1945
* John Mariucci, 1945–1946, 1947–1948
* Red Hamill, 1946–1947
* Gaye Stewart, 1948–1949
* Jack Stewart, 1950–1952
* Bill Gadsby, 1952–1954
* Gus Mortson, 1954–1957
* Ed Litzenberger, 1958–1961
* Pierre Pilote, 1961–1968
* Pat Stapleton, 1969–1970
* Pit Martin, 1975–1976
* Pit Martin; Stan Mikita; Keith Magnuson, 1976–1977
* Keith Magnuson, 1977–1979
* Terry Ruskowski, 1979–1982
* Darryl Sutter, 1982–1987
* Bob Murray, 1985–1986 (interim)
* Denis Savard, 1988–1989
* Dirk Graham, 1989–1995
* Chris Chelios, 1995–1999
* Doug Gilmour, 1999–2000
* Tony Amonte, 2000–2002
* Alexei Zhamnov, 2002–2004
* Adrian Aucoin, 2005–2007
* Martin Lapointe, 2006 (interim)
* Jonathan Toews, 2008–2023
* Nick Foligno, 2024–present
==Scoring leaders==

===Regular season scoring leaders===

These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise regular season history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Blackhawks player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;




===Playoff scoring leaders===
These are the top-ten playoff point-scorers in franchise playoff history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL season.
* – current Blackhawks player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;




==See also==
* List of Chicago Blackhawks award winners
* List of Chicago Blackhawks draft picks
* List of Chicago Blackhawks general managers
* List of Chicago Blackhawks head coaches

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="4" end="22" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="32" end="43" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="86" end="91" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="112" end="122" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="137" end="144" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="176" end="198" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="224" end="240" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="248" end="266" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="296" end="307" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q256308" start="378" end="390" title="Original Six" label="Original Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="423" end="440" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="442" end="460" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="462" end="481" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="483" end="496" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="502" end="518" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="570" end="583" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="611" end="642" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="650" end="663" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703852" start="716" end="731" title="Chicago Stadium" label="Chicago Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087074" start="774" end="793" title="Frederic McLaughlin" label="Frederic McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563449" start="918" end="922" title="1934 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564329" start="927" end="931" title="1938 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q960178" start="1229" end="1239" title="Bill Tobin (ice hockey)" label="Bill Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161306" start="1330" end="1345" title="James E. Norris" label="James E. Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161006" start="1416" end="1431" title="James D. Norris" label="James D. Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570469" start="1583" end="1587" title="1961 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438041" start="1718" end="1729" title="Rocky Wirtz" label="Rocky Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983827" start="1898" end="1902" title="2010 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423220" start="1904" end="1908" title="2013 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863701" start="1913" end="1917" title="2015 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q121075467" start="1957" end="1968" title="Danny Wirtz" label="Danny Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945349" start="2150" end="2169" title="Huntington Hardwick" label="Huntington Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2173" end="2179" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2255" end="2272" title="Portland Rosebuds (ice hockey)#WHL Portland Rosebuds" label="Portland Rosebuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028768" start="2280" end="2301" title="Western Canada Hockey League" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q450302" start="2334" end="2347" title="Frank Patrick (ice hockey)" label="Frank Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="2370" end="2383" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q709186" start="2396" end="2409" title="Charles Adams (ice hockey)" label="Charles Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087074" start="2496" end="2515" title="Frederic McLaughlin" label="Frederic McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644938" start="2594" end="2616" title="86th Infantry Division (United States)" label="86th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2624" end="2635" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q714534" start="2706" end="2716" title="Black Hawk (Sauk leader)" label="Black Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="2743" end="2747" title="Sauk people" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2924" end="2940" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q120467" start="3235" end="3249" title="1926–27 NHL season" label="1926–27 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="3299" end="3314" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="3347" end="3363" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047289" start="3424" end="3441" title="Eddie Livingstone" label="Eddie Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071859" start="3460" end="3477" title="Chicago Cardinals (ice hockey)" label="Chicago Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q960178" start="3619" end="3629" title="Bill Tobin (ice hockey)" label="Bill Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q365972" start="3863" end="3873" title="Doc Romnes" label="Doc Romnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118953" start="3875" end="3885" title="Taffy Abel" label="Taffy Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717364" start="3887" end="3900" title="Alex Levinsky" label="Alex Levinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313389" start="3902" end="3914" title="Mike Karakas" label="Mike Karakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143470" start="3920" end="3935" title="Cully Dahlstrom" label="Cully Dahlstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502569" start="4172" end="4192" title="Toronto St. Patricks" label="Toronto St. Patricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370898" start="4200" end="4216" title="Chicago Coliseum" label="Chicago Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q120467" start="4429" end="4433" title="1926–27 NHL season" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q741292" start="4534" end="4546" title="Pete Muldoon" label="Pete Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20683965" start="4561" end="4572" title="Jim Coleman (journalist)" label="Jim Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="4595" end="4602" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="4615" end="4629" title="The Globe and Mail" label="Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546302" start="4921" end="4927" title="Hoodoo (folk magic)" label="hoodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195262" start="4964" end="4980" title="Curse of Muldoon" label="Curse of Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q939682" start="5409" end="5416" title="1927–28 NHL season" label="1927–28"/>
<link wikidata="Q239929" start="5458" end="5472" title="1928–29 NHL season" label="1928–29 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703852" start="5540" end="5555" title="Chicago Stadium" label="Chicago Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201545" start="5712" end="5727" title="Detroit Olympia" label="Detroit Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157338" start="5737" end="5755" title="Peace Bridge Arena" label="Peace Bridge Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q268103" start="5759" end="5777" title="Fort Erie, Ontario" label="Fort Erie, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q939658" start="5838" end="5842" title="1930–31 NHL season" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182896" start="5861" end="5877" title="Johnny Gottselig" label="Johnny Gottselig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296087" start="5879" end="5891" title="Cy Wentworth" label="Cy Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="5895" end="5902" title="Defenceman" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q860294" start="5908" end="5924" title="Charlie Gardiner (ice hockey)" label="Charlie Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="5928" end="5932" title="Goaltender" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="6031" end="6049" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q676894" start="6086" end="6090" title="1931–32 NHL season" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563449" start="6263" end="6281" title="1934 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q919592" start="6283" end="6293" title="Mush March" label="Mush March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345482" start="6372" end="6376" title="1937–38 NHL season" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543977" start="6479" end="6497" title="New York Americans" label="New York Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="6501" end="6509" title="Overtime (hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564329" start="6582" end="6605" title="1938 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1938 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="6618" end="6637" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313389" start="6662" end="6674" title="Mike Karakas" label="Mike Karakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834793" start="6762" end="6773" title="Alfie Moore" label="Alfie Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150944" start="6907" end="6919" title="Paul Goodman (ice hockey)" label="Paul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889064" start="7293" end="7297" title="1943–44 NHL season" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q711930" start="7305" end="7317" title="Doug Bentley" label="Doug Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362694" start="7364" end="7375" title="Clint Smith" label="Clint Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q960178" start="7669" end="7679" title="Bill Tobin (ice hockey)" label="Bill Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161306" start="7718" end="7733" title="James E. Norris" label="James E. Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889056" start="8164" end="8168" title="1944–45 NHL season" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q585499" start="8173" end="8177" title="1957–58 NHL season" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161006" start="8249" end="8264" title="James D. Norris" label="James D. Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865382" start="8295" end="8307" title="Arthur Wirtz" label="Arthur Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715686" start="8579" end="8589" title="Tommy Ivan" label="Tommy Ivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="8695" end="8705" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q440237" start="8710" end="8721" title="Stan Mikita" label="Stan Mikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q473306" start="8737" end="8750" title="Pierre Pilote" label="Pierre Pilote"/>
<link wikidata="Q648824" start="8788" end="8798" title="Glenn Hall" label="Glenn Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164733" start="8819" end="8830" title="Ted Lindsay" label="Ted Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="9028" end="9047" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960710" start="9134" end="9138" title="1958–59 NHL season" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888011" start="9143" end="9147" title="1959–60 NHL season" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960705" start="9248" end="9252" title="1960–61 NHL season" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960713" start="9531" end="9535" title="1961–62 NHL season" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887864" start="9557" end="9561" title="1964–65 NHL season" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="9764" end="9779" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="Norris Trophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q862179" start="10022" end="10030" title="Bill Hay" label="Bill Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q919811" start="10032" end="10043" title="Ken Wharram" label="Ken Wharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="10045" end="10058" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051576" start="10060" end="10071" title="Moose Vasko" label="Moose Vasko"/>
<link wikidata="Q942663" start="10073" end="10083" title="Doug Mohns" label="Doug Mohns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056579" start="10089" end="10102" title="Pat Stapleton (hockey)" label="Pat Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960750" start="10151" end="10158" title="1966–67 NHL season" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="10763" end="10772" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495282" start="10793" end="10808" title="St. Louis Arena" label="St. Louis Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865382" start="10930" end="10942" title="Arthur Wirtz" label="Arthur Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903401" start="10955" end="10965" title="Bill Wirtz" label="Bill Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="11183" end="11198" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="11222" end="11236" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967–68 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689183" start="11312" end="11322" title="Jim Pappin" label="Jim Pappin"/>
<link wikidata="Q569855" start="11326" end="11330" title="1968–69 NHL season" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="11538" end="11542" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q456779" start="11701" end="11714" title="Phil Esposito" label="Phil Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q362701" start="11716" end="11725" title="Ken Hodge" label="Ken Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q526913" start="11730" end="11744" title="Fred Stanfield" label="Fred Stanfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q369078" start="11771" end="11781" title="Pit Martin" label="Pit Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157282" start="11783" end="11794" title="Jack Norris (ice hockey)" label="Jack Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106393" start="11799" end="11813" title="Gilles Marotte" label="Gilles Marotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="12125" end="12139" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970–71 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="12247" end="12261" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="12266" end="12283" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278162" start="12308" end="12321" title="NHL Eastern Division" label="East Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481337" start="12353" end="12366" title="NHL Western Division" label="West Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q954322" start="12505" end="12518" title="Tony Esposito" label="Tony Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="12566" end="12588" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189210" start="12660" end="12666" title="Dennis Hull" label="Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q963167" start="12711" end="12725" title="Keith Magnuson" label="Keith Magnuson"/>
<link wikidata="Q359072" start="12730" end="12740" title="Bill White (ice hockey)" label="Bill White"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="12873" end="12897" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="13010" end="13023" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–96)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="13062" end="13081" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q520407" start="13087" end="13100" title="André Lacroix (ice hockey)" label="Andre Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="13782" end="13791" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="14113" end="14117" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975393" start="14318" end="14328" title="Cinderella (sports)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187631" start="14365" end="14377" title="Denis Savard" label="Denis Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q719308" start="14413" end="14424" title="Doug Wilson (ice hockey)" label="Doug Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="14464" end="14485" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580623" start="14598" end="14616" title="1982 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="14737" end="14752" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="14775" end="14779" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="14897" end="14901" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204156" start="15165" end="15188" title="1992 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1992 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="15331" end="15355" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="15377" end="15391" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373320" start="16117" end="16123" title="rookie" label="rookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q928110" start="16151" end="16161" title="Ed Belfour" label="Ed Belfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q973444" start="16173" end="16187" title="Jeremy Roenick" label="Jeremy Roenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="16295" end="16309" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q316864" start="16581" end="16598" title="Vladislav Tretiak" label="Vladislav Tretiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="16740" end="16763" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968220" start="16897" end="16915" title="1991 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709653" start="16981" end="16993" title="Steve Larmer" label="Steve Larmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q715377" start="17012" end="17025" title="Chris Chelios" label="Chris Chelios"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="17302" end="17315" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="17356" end="17375" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="17880" end="17897" title="natural hat trick" label="natural hat trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q776011" start="17903" end="17914" title="Dirk Graham" label="Dirk Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q312695" start="17937" end="17950" title="Dominik Hašek" label="Dominik Hasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="18128" end="18141" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390167" start="18333" end="18344" title="Mike Keenan" label="Mike Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195256" start="18416" end="18445" title="Curse of 1940" label="first Stanley Cup in 54 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589739" start="18449" end="18453" title="1994 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="18757" end="18761" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="19138" end="19151" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590028" start="19178" end="19185" title="1994–95 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="19196" end="19210" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q826573" start="19212" end="19227" title="Bernie Nicholls" label="Bernie Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q715083" start="19232" end="19242" title="Joe Murphy (ice hockey)" label="Joe Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976474" start="19406" end="19419" title="Wayne Messmer" label="Wayne Messmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="19644" end="19648" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="19884" end="19888" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="19923" end="19927" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="19932" end="19936" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q288113" start="20006" end="20015" title="Éric Dazé" label="Éric Daze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345810" start="20017" end="20031" title="Alexei Zhamnov" label="Alexei Zhamnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386805" start="20036" end="20047" title="Tony Amonte" label="Tony Amonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="20159" end="20163" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="20342" end="20356" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="20494" end="20509" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="20544" end="20558" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="20783" end="20787" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072030" start="21338" end="21352" title="Chicago Wolves" label="Chicago Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="21357" end="21379" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191401" start="21400" end="21418" title="Rosemont, Illinois" label="Rosemont, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q377382" start="21585" end="21599" title="2004–05 NHL season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q110556" start="21621" end="21632" title="Dale Tallon" label="Dale Tallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="21785" end="21804" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="21812" end="21823" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q553244" start="21843" end="21861" title="Nikolai Khabibulin" label="Nikolai Khabibulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q372618" start="21886" end="21899" title="Adrian Aucoin" label="Adrian Aucoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="22066" end="22084" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186237" start="22237" end="22246" title="Pat Foley" label="Pat Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="22444" end="22464" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q528240" start="22484" end="22498" title="Jonathan Toews" label="Jonathan Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="22512" end="22538" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895963" start="22539" end="22565" title="North Dakota Fighting Hawks men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Fighting Sioux hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="22578" end="22582" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969895" start="22583" end="22594" title="Frozen Four" label="Frozen Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391869" start="22799" end="22813" title="Patrick Lalime" label="Patrick Lalime"/>
<link wikidata="Q949644" start="22818" end="22833" title="Sébastien Caron" label="Sebastien Caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="22933" end="22944" title="Winger (ice hockey)" label="left-winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q948787" start="22945" end="22958" title="Martin Havlát" label="Martin Havlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="22971" end="22977" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q281264" start="22978" end="22993" title="Bryan Smolinski" label="Bryan Smolinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="23003" end="23018" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="23063" end="23078" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899958" start="23104" end="23113" title="Mark Bell (ice hockey)" label="Mark Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399892" start="23129" end="23143" title="Michal Barinka" label="Michal Barinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005136" start="23234" end="23247" title="Tom Preissing" label="Tom Preissing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382610" start="23259" end="23272" title="Josh Hennessy" label="Josh Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383214" start="23476" end="23487" title="Kyle Calder" label="Kyle Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q937057" start="23568" end="23582" title="Michal Handzuš" label="Michal Handzus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145048" start="24061" end="24073" title="Trent Yawney" label="Trent Yawney"/>
<link wikidata="Q335876" start="24653" end="24665" title="Patrick Kane" label="Patrick Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q532549" start="24675" end="24689" title="London Knights" label="London Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q902860" start="24697" end="24718" title="Ontario Hockey League" label="Ontario Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438041" start="24918" end="24923" title="Rocky Wirtz" label="Rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="25008" end="25022" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151010" start="25075" end="25100" title="Comcast SportsNet Chicago" label="Comcast SportsNet Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="25105" end="25111" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247680" start="25283" end="25297" title="John McDonough (sports executive)" label="John McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="25319" end="25340" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="25348" end="25360" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="25923" end="25943" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q708663" start="26749" end="26760" title="Tuomo Ruutu" label="Tuomo Ruutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="26799" end="26818" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q505814" start="26843" end="26854" title="Andrew Ladd" label="Andrew Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373609" start="26923" end="26938" title="Martin Lapointe" label="Martin Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="27010" end="27030" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q523170" start="27100" end="27114" title="Cristobal Huet" label="Cristobal Huet"/>
<link wikidata="Q911986" start="27185" end="27199" title="Brian Campbell" label="Brian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387131" start="27273" end="27289" title="Joel Quenneville" label="Joel Quenneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q920331" start="27294" end="27307" title="Scotty Bowman" label="Scotty Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960991" start="27485" end="27504" title="2009 NHL Winter Classic" label="2009 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="27565" end="27578" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="27582" end="27601" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q256308" start="27623" end="27635" title="Original Six" label="Original Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186237" start="27722" end="27731" title="Pat Foley" label="Pat Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214155" start="27796" end="27805" title="Dan P. Kelly (sportscaster)" label="Dan Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q321947" start="27958" end="27967" title="Ed Olczyk" label="Ed Olczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="28507" end="28526" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="28579" end="28600" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="29707" end="29721" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q312642" start="29786" end="29798" title="Marián Hossa" label="Marian Hossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q723369" start="29862" end="29875" title="Tomáš Kopecký" label="Tomas Kopecky"/>
<link wikidata="Q945652" start="29877" end="29888" title="John Madden (ice hockey)" label="John Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q779309" start="29893" end="29907" title="Richard Petiot" label="Richard Petiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="30007" end="30055" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789081" start="30292" end="30305" title="Kris Versteeg" label="Kris Versteeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q768157" start="30585" end="30596" title="Stan Bowman" label="Stan Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q722101" start="31075" end="31087" title="Duncan Keith" label="Duncan Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="31232" end="31244" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983827" start="31824" end="31842" title="2010 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570469" start="32030" end="32034" title="1961 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591170" start="32059" end="32087" title="List of NHL franchise post-season droughts" label="49-year championship drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="32211" end="32225" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q984271" start="32348" end="32364" title="Dustin Byfuglien" label="Dustin Byfuglien"/>
<link wikidata="Q505814" start="32366" end="32377" title="Andrew Ladd" label="Andrew Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789081" start="32379" end="32392" title="Kris Versteeg" label="Kris Versteeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q909829" start="32394" end="32405" title="Brent Sopel" label="Brent Sopel"/>
<link wikidata="Q816477" start="32407" end="32416" title="Ben Eager" label="Ben Eager"/>
<link wikidata="Q933409" start="32421" end="32433" title="Colin Fraser (ice hockey)" label="Colin Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q609762" start="32503" end="32514" title="Antti Niemi (ice hockey)" label="Antti Niemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="32603" end="32615" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q578738" start="32632" end="32643" title="Marty Turco" label="Marty Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q513068" start="32696" end="32710" title="Corey Crawford" label="Corey Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q201980" start="32787" end="32802" title="Viktor Stålberg" label="Viktor Stalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="32812" end="32831" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985505" start="32851" end="32861" title="Nick Leddy" label="Nick Leddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894251" start="32866" end="32879" title="Marcus Krüger" label="Marcus Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170487" start="32979" end="32993" title="Michael Frolík" label="Michael Frolik"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="33003" end="33019" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q937193" start="33036" end="33047" title="Jack Skille" label="Jack Skille"/>
<link wikidata="Q656833" start="33049" end="33062" title="Hugh Jessiman" label="Hugh Jessiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="33224" end="33240" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="33436" end="33453" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="33539" end="33553" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="33631" end="33644" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2011 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="33671" end="33694" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="33703" end="33720" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q386036" start="34009" end="34021" title="Alex Burrows" label="Alex Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="34101" end="34115" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297198" start="34226" end="34238" title="Troy Brouwer" label="Troy Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="34246" end="34265" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="34311" end="34331" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381073" start="34348" end="34363" title="Phillip Danault" label="Phillip Danault"/>
<link wikidata="Q911986" start="34396" end="34410" title="Brian Campbell" label="Brian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q723369" start="34550" end="34563" title="Tomáš Kopecký" label="Tomas Kopecky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399698" start="34592" end="34603" title="Jake Dowell" label="Jake Dowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160275" start="34739" end="34754" title="Daniel Carcillo" label="Daniel Carcillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387122" start="34756" end="34768" title="Jamal Mayers" label="Jamal Mayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q503954" start="34773" end="34788" title="Andrew Brunette" label="Andrew Brunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q960507" start="34837" end="34846" title="Ray Emery" label="Ray Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q507379" start="34964" end="34975" title="Andrew Shaw (ice hockey)" label="Andrew Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q428105" start="35364" end="35377" title="Bryan Bickell" label="Bryan Bickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q528240" start="35391" end="35405" title="Jonathan Toews" label="Jonathan Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="35567" end="35574" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="35585" end="35599" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="35854" end="35867" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410035" start="35875" end="35889" title="2006–07 Anaheim Ducks season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="36200" end="36218" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="36411" end="36424" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="36682" end="36705" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="36846" end="36860" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="36914" end="36931" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q909824" start="37148" end="37162" title="Brent Seabrook" label="Brent Seabrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="37261" end="37278" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="37385" end="37398" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423220" start="37406" end="37429" title="2013 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2013 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="37746" end="37763" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q428105" start="38001" end="38014" title="Bryan Bickell" label="Bryan Bickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173130" start="38019" end="38031" title="Dave Bolland" label="Dave Bolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="38213" end="38227" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173130" start="38455" end="38467" title="Dave Bolland" label="Dave Bolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160275" start="38469" end="38484" title="Daniel Carcillo" label="Daniel Carcillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170487" start="38489" end="38503" title="Michael Frolik" label="Michael Frolik"/>
<link wikidata="Q960507" start="38583" end="38592" title="Ray Emery" label="Ray Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q201980" start="38612" end="38627" title="Viktor Stålberg" label="Viktor Stalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132413" start="38851" end="38864" title="Soldier Field" label="Soldier Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542190" start="38881" end="38900" title="2014 NHL Stadium Series" label="2014 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387131" start="39041" end="39057" title="Joel Quenneville" label="Joel Quenneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="39276" end="39291" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q722101" start="39592" end="39604" title="Duncan Keith" label="Duncan Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="39613" end="39641" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="James Norris Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528240" start="39689" end="39703" title="Jonathan Toews" label="Jonathan Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="39733" end="39754" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739793" start="40031" end="40044" title="Brad Richards" label="Brad Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380967" start="40067" end="40080" title="Scott Darling" label="Scott Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985505" start="40134" end="40144" title="Nick Leddy" label="Nick Leddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="40152" end="40170" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q335876" start="40238" end="40250" title="Patrick Kane" label="Patrick Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817934" start="40398" end="40411" title="2015 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958908" start="40522" end="40541" title="2015 NHL Winter Classic" label="2015 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517545" start="40545" end="40559" title="Nationals Park" label="Nationals Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="40563" end="40579" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="40608" end="40627" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519286" start="40815" end="40831" title="Teuvo Teräväinen" label="Teuvo Teravainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="40887" end="40907" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q587076" start="40926" end="40942" title="Antoine Vermette" label="Antoine Vermette"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="40952" end="40967" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q957404" start="41017" end="41030" title="Kimmo Timonen" label="Kimmo Timonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="41040" end="41059" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q504446" start="41105" end="41122" title="Andrew Desjardins" label="Andrew Desjardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="41132" end="41147" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895559" start="41164" end="41173" title="Ben Smith (ice hockey, born 1988)" label="Ben Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="41420" end="41439" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="41568" end="41581" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="41714" end="41733" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863701" start="41741" end="41764" title="2015 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2015 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="41950" end="41964" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q389490" start="42027" end="42039" title="Brandon Saad" label="Brandon Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856497" start="42078" end="42082" title="2013 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="42087" end="42091" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212710" start="42194" end="42209" title="Alex Broadhurst" label="Alex Broadhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q20033511" start="42214" end="42230" title="Michael Paliotta" label="Michael Paliotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q713347" start="42277" end="42291" title="Artem Anisimov" label="Artem Anisimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953740" start="42293" end="42303" title="Marko Daňo" label="Marko Dano"/>
<link wikidata="Q552866" start="42305" end="42316" title="Corey Tropp" label="Corey Tropp"/>
<link wikidata="Q784585" start="42318" end="42330" title="Jeremy Morin" label="Jeremy Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18238151" start="42359" end="42375" title="Anatoly Golyshev" label="Anatoly Golyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="42383" end="42403" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702376" start="42513" end="42525" title="Johnny Oduya" label="Johnny Oduya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336130" start="42612" end="42625" title="Patrick Sharp" label="Patrick Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229174" start="42638" end="42651" title="Stephen Johns (ice hockey)" label="Stephen Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="42660" end="42672" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q682629" start="42689" end="42701" title="Trevor Daley" label="Trevor Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588444" start="42714" end="42726" title="Ryan Garbutt" label="Ryan Garbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="42827" end="42841" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="42851" end="42876" title="Kontinental Hockey League" label="Kontinental Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="43042" end="43062" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q784585" start="43327" end="43339" title="Jeremy Morin" label="Jeremy Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119483" start="43383" end="43396" title="Richard Pánik" label="Richard Panik"/>
<link wikidata="Q505814" start="43423" end="43434" title="Andrew Ladd" label="Andrew Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="43444" end="43457" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381073" start="43567" end="43582" title="Phillip Danault" label="Phillip Danault"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="43593" end="43597" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q550873" start="43667" end="43677" title="Dale Weise" label="Dale Weise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389901" start="43682" end="43699" title="Tomáš Fleischmann" label="Tomas Fleischmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054654" start="43929" end="43942" title="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2016 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067889" start="44009" end="44013" title="2012 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="44147" end="44161" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q428105" start="44300" end="44313" title="Bryan Bickell" label="Bryan Bickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519286" start="44318" end="44334" title="Teuvo Teravainen" label="Teuvo Teravainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="44342" end="44361" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q911986" start="44502" end="44516" title="Brian Campbell" label="Brian Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835766" start="44542" end="44555" title="Michal Kempný" label="Michal Kempny"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581452" start="44676" end="44688" title="Ryan Hartman" label="Ryan Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18238939" start="44690" end="44705" title="Gustav Forsling" label="Gustav Forsling"/>
<link wikidata="Q28960320" start="44707" end="44718" title="John Hayden (ice hockey)" label="John Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23799569" start="44720" end="44731" title="Tyler Motte" label="Tyler Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180924" start="44733" end="44746" title="Nick Schmaltz" label="Nick Schmaltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090912" start="44751" end="44768" title="Vinnie Hinostroza" label="Vinnie Hinostroza"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016602" start="45333" end="45346" title="2017 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051437" start="45497" end="45510" title="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2017 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q959915" start="45768" end="45779" title="Pekka Rinne" label="Pekka Rinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="45979" end="45992" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="46028" end="46042" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715164" start="46196" end="46216" title="2017 NHL entry draft" label="2017 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399662" start="46237" end="46255" title="Niklas Hjalmarsson" label="Niklas Hjalmarsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993498" start="46305" end="46318" title="Connor Murphy" label="Connor Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043362" start="46323" end="46338" title="Laurent Dauphin" label="Laurent Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="46677" end="46697" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225498" start="46726" end="46745" title="Trevor van Riemsdyk" label="Trevor van Riemsdyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q24731937" start="46775" end="46799" title="2017 NHL Expansion Draft" label="2017 NHL Expansion Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441127" start="46880" end="46893" title="Tommy Wingels" label="Tommy Wingels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801794" start="46898" end="46909" title="Lance Bouma" label="Lance Bouma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="47039" end="47058" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q707642" start="47809" end="47817" title="Cam Ward (ice hockey)" label="Cam Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077443" start="47819" end="47831" title="Chris Kunitz" label="Chris Kunitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956952" start="47836" end="47851" title="Brandon Manning" label="Brandon Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666575" start="47995" end="48010" title="Jordan Oesterle" label="Jordan Oesterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="48045" end="48055" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q106144372" start="48087" end="48106" title="MacKenzie Entwistle" label="MacKenzie Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29380993" start="48108" end="48122" title="Jordan Maletta" label="Jordan Maletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846578" start="48124" end="48139" title="Andrew Campbell (ice hockey)" label="Andrew Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="48298" end="48312" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387131" start="48503" end="48519" title="Joel Quenneville" label="Joel Quenneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740138" start="48550" end="48562" title="Kevin Dineen" label="Kevin Dineen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390152" start="48567" end="48581" title="Ulf Samuelsson" label="Ulf Samuelsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687588" start="48615" end="48630" title="Jeremy Colliton" label="Jeremy Colliton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848860" start="48701" end="48717" title="Rockford IceHogs" label="Rockford IceHogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180924" start="48814" end="48827" title="Nick Schmaltz" label="Nick Schmaltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17388804" start="48867" end="48879" title="Dylan Strome" label="Dylan Strome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180838" start="48884" end="48899" title="Brendan Perlini" label="Brendan Perlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="48950" end="48965" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053959" start="48982" end="48996" title="Drake Caggiula" label="Drake Caggiula"/>
<link wikidata="Q61755215" start="49466" end="49476" title="Kirby Dach" label="Kirby Dach"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="49492" end="49506" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q21729835" start="49537" end="49551" title="Ryan Carpenter" label="Ryan Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q976044" start="49567" end="49579" title="Robin Lehner" label="Robin Lehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351500" start="49662" end="49673" title="Olli Määttä" label="Olli Maatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q542445" start="49675" end="49689" title="Calvin de Haan" label="Calvin de Haan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622248" start="49694" end="49707" title="Alex Nylander" label="Alex Nylander"/>
<link wikidata="Q507379" start="49742" end="49753" title="Andrew Shaw (ice hockey)" label="Andrew Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11819629" start="49830" end="49845" title="Dominik Kubalík" label="Dominik Kubalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="50077" end="50094" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247680" start="50111" end="50125" title="John McDonough (sports executive)" label="John McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="50224" end="50249" title="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="50587" end="50601" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791770" start="50730" end="50745" title="Mattias Janmark" label="Mattias Janmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233415" start="50747" end="50761" title="Lucas Wallmark" label="Lucas Wallmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939014" start="50766" end="50780" title="Carl Söderberg" label="Carl Soderberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="50866" end="50884" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341513" start="50900" end="50914" title="Nikita Zadorov" label="Nikita Zadorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229499" start="50919" end="50933" title="Anton Lindholm" label="Anton Lindholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q513068" start="51098" end="51112" title="Corey Crawford" label="Corey Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="51134" end="51151" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q507379" start="51409" end="51420" title="Andrew Shaw (ice hockey)" label="Andrew Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q87544687" start="51675" end="51688" title="Brandon Hagel" label="Brandon Hagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60284256" start="51690" end="51706" title="Philipp Kurashev" label="Philipp Kurashev"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305227" start="51711" end="51721" title="Pius Suter" label="Pius Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381882" start="51734" end="51746" title="Ian Mitchell (ice hockey)" label="Ian Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105839770" start="51751" end="51764" title="Wyatt Kalynuk" label="Wyatt Kalynuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982368" start="51780" end="51794" title="Kevin Lankinen" label="Kevin Lankinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121075467" start="52224" end="52235" title="Danny Wirtz" label="Danny Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="52562" end="52576" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621768" start="52605" end="52615" title="Kyle Beach" label="Kyle Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q303395" start="52714" end="52728" title="2010 Chicago Blackhawks sexual assault scandal" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912952" start="52967" end="52987" title="Houghton High School" label="Houghton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177811" start="53200" end="53218" title="Jenner &amp;amp; Block" label="Jenner &amp;amp; Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q637302" start="53480" end="53498" title="Kevin Cheveldayoff" label="Kevin Cheveldayoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983827" start="53570" end="53593" title="2010 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2010 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704328" start="53873" end="53884" title="Al MacIsaac" label="Al MacIsaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q109278320" start="53991" end="54004" title="Kyle Davidson" label="Kyle Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21683921" start="55539" end="55550" title="Caleb Jones (ice hockey)" label="Caleb Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585450" start="55655" end="55668" title="Tyler Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Tyler Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014741" start="55693" end="55703" title="Seth Jones" label="Seth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40592571" start="55780" end="55792" title="Adam Boqvist" label="Adam Boqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="55861" end="55874" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q368554" start="55882" end="55899" title="Marc-André Fleury" label="Marc-Andre Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16054878" start="56000" end="56011" title="Jake McCabe" label="Jake McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598113" start="56023" end="56036" title="Jujhar Khaira" label="Jujhar Khaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q937337" start="56358" end="56368" title="Derek King" label="Derek King"/>
<link wikidata="Q61103575" start="56719" end="56733" title="Boris Katchouk" label="Boris Katchouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28160427" start="56738" end="56752" title="Taylor Raddysh" label="Taylor Raddysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q437846" start="57086" end="57101" title="Luke Richardson" label="Luke Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621150" start="57284" end="57298" title="Alex DeBrincat" label="Alex DeBrincat"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="57409" end="57429" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891283" start="57541" end="57552" title="Petr Mrázek" label="Petr Mrazek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755367" start="57651" end="57669" title="Andreas Athanasiou" label="Andreas Athanasiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q60823259" start="57671" end="57686" title="Colin Blackwell" label="Colin Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581451" start="57691" end="57699" title="Max Domi" label="Max Domi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20250419" start="57876" end="57891" title="Vili Saarijärvi" label="Vili Saarijarvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758875" start="58000" end="58013" title="Andy Welinski" label="Andy Welinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16054878" start="58153" end="58164" title="Jake McCabe" label="Jake McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q70098297" start="58166" end="58178" title="Sam Lafferty" label="Sam Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q968323" start="58214" end="58228" title="Nikita Zaitsev" label="Nikita Zaitsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q100732653" start="58373" end="58383" title="Long COVID" label="Long COVID"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="58767" end="58787" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q102425753" start="58806" end="58819" title="Connor Bedard" label="Connor Bedard"/>
<link wikidata="Q721993" start="58903" end="58914" title="Taylor Hall" label="Taylor Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="58916" end="58928" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="58933" end="58944" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q939608" start="59006" end="59017" title="Josh Bailey" label="Josh Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385847" start="59217" end="59228" title="Ryan Donato" label="Ryan Donato"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228236" start="59420" end="59437" title="Wirtz Corporation" label="Wirtz Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="59591" end="59609" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755367" start="59818" end="59836" title="Andreas Athanasiou" label="Andreas Athanasiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q60823259" start="59842" end="59857" title="Colin Blackwell" label="Colin Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="59906" end="59917" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="59996" end="60018" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q437846" start="60112" end="60127" title="Luke Richardson" label="Luke Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127377546" start="60202" end="60216" title="2024–25 Chicago Blackhawks season" label="2024-25 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q86436" start="60580" end="60589" title="Tomahawk (axe)" label="tomahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="61444" end="61446" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851798" start="61477" end="61492" title="The Hockey News" label="The Hockey News"/>
<link wikidata="Q21601150" start="61552" end="61566" title="Greg Wyshynski" label="Greg Wyshynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151959" start="61570" end="61583" title="Yahoo! Sports" label="Yahoo! Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="61850" end="61860" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="61978" end="61981" title="USO" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="61985" end="61993" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960991" start="62079" end="62098" title="2009 NHL Winter Classic" label="2009 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542190" start="62519" end="62538" title="2014 NHL Stadium Series" label="2014 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958908" start="63583" end="63602" title="2015 NHL Winter Classic" label="2015 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19414416" start="64008" end="64027" title="2016 NHL Stadium Series" label="2016 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402799" start="64457" end="64472" title="Flag of Chicago" label="Flag of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191300" start="64777" end="64796" title="2017 NHL Winter Classic" label="2017 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995876" start="65641" end="65651" title="centennial" label="centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="65723" end="65737" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="66352" end="66366" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966303" start="66465" end="66480" title="NHL 100 Classic" label="NHL 100 Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="66504" end="66510" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="66665" end="66671" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954087" start="66677" end="66700" title="Rbk Edge" label="Reebok &amp;quot;Edge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48841609" start="67573" end="67592" title="2019 NHL Winter Classic" label="2019 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847043" start="68268" end="68286" title="Notre Dame Stadium" label="Notre Dame Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="68628" end="68642" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="69165" end="69179" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="69332" end="69347" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="69628" end="69642" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="69885" end="69911" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 NHL regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="70624" end="70638" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q954322" start="70731" end="70744" title="Tony Esposito" label="Tony Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="70923" end="70937" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q125388817" start="71243" end="71257" title="2024–25 NHL season" label="2024–25 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150640" start="71259" end="71267" title="Fanatics, Inc." label="Fanatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058303" start="71688" end="71700" title="Circa Sports" label="Circa Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q124632175" start="71857" end="71876" title="2025 NHL Winter Classic" label="2025 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402799" start="72053" end="72068" title="flag of Chicago" label="flag of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="72308" end="72321" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="72347" end="72359" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q324348" start="72373" end="72385" title="Irene Castle" label="Irene Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851798" start="73057" end="73072" title="The Hockey News" label="The Hockey News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212406" start="73176" end="73186" title="Damien Cox" label="Damien Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430055" start="73785" end="73807" title="American Indian Center" label="American Indian Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="75069" end="75088" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="75093" end="75110" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967040" start="75152" end="75189" title="National Congress of American Indians" label="National Congress of American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474201" start="75397" end="75415" title="Sac and Fox Nation" label="Sac and Fox Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q714534" start="75469" end="75479" title="Black Hawk (Sauk leader)" label="Black Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267120" start="76408" end="76418" title="Common black hawk" label="black hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q639975" start="76598" end="76611" title="United Center" label="United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782887" start="76772" end="76791" title="Mascot Hall of Fame" label="Mascot Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337593" start="76964" end="76978" title="Near West Side, Chicago" label="Near West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q376655" start="77206" end="77234" title="Johnny&amp;#x27;s Ice House West" label="Johnny&amp;#x27;s Ice House West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337669" start="77239" end="77257" title="The Edge Ice Arena" label="The Edge Ice Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q277017" start="77270" end="77281" title="Bensenville, Illinois" label="Bensenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="77371" end="77384" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703852" start="77484" end="77499" title="Chicago Stadium" label="Chicago Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="77771" end="77816" title="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030504" start="77892" end="77905" title="Disney on Ice" label="Disney on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="78166" end="78172" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949873" start="78313" end="78323" title="WGN Sports" label="WGN Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409747" start="78378" end="78389" title="WGN America" label="WGN America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309239" start="78484" end="78507" title="regional sports network" label="regional sports network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151010" start="78508" end="78526" title="NBC Sports Chicago" label="NBC Sports Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="79006" end="79019" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="79024" end="79041" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q126721291" start="79288" end="79310" title="Chicago Sports Network" label="Chicago Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947006" start="79384" end="79388" title="WBBM (AM)" label="WBBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955545" start="79399" end="79403" title="WMAQ (AM)" label="WMAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955545" start="79404" end="79408" title="WSCR" label="WSCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="79592" end="79601" title="Chicago White Sox" label="White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="79692" end="79701" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950771" start="79782" end="79786" title="WIND (AM)" label="WIND"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951870" start="79933" end="79940" title="WRME-LD" label="WGWG-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644954" start="79952" end="79959" title="87.7 FM" label="87.7 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564721" start="80534" end="80541" title="WCKL (FM)" label="WLUP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331217" start="80622" end="80631" title="Rick Ball" label="Rick Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239006" start="80636" end="80649" title="John Wiedeman" label="John Wiedeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166658" start="80707" end="80718" title="Darren Pang" label="Darren Pang"/>
<link wikidata="Q330319" start="80723" end="80734" title="Troy Murray" label="Troy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q68878660" start="80798" end="80811" title="Caley Chelios" label="Caley Chelios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902752" start="81038" end="81072" title="List of Chicago Blackhawks seasons" label="List of Chicago Blackhawks seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="81363" end="81376" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="81423" end="81445" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="81551" end="81570" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473705" start="81891" end="81919" title="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award" label="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662691" start="81950" end="81962" title="Lloyd Pettit" label="Lloyd Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186237" start="82127" end="82136" title="Pat Foley" label="Pat Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q62609564" start="82180" end="82189" title="Bob Verdi" label="Bob Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366545" start="82206" end="82235" title="Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award" label="Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q937250" start="82278" end="82288" title="Dick Irvin" label="Dick Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041078" start="82302" end="82315" title="Duke Dukowski" label="Duke Dukowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542635" start="82329" end="82338" title="Ty Arbour" label="Ty Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296087" start="82352" end="82368" title="Marvin Wentworth" label="Marvin Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129684" start="82382" end="82395" title="Helge Bostrom" label="Helge Bostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q860294" start="82409" end="82425" title="Charlie Gardiner (ice hockey player)" label="Charlie Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182896" start="82439" end="82455" title="Johnny Gottselig" label="Johnny Gottselig"/>
<link wikidata="Q324379" start="82469" end="82481" title="Earl Seibert" label="Earl Seibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q711930" start="82495" end="82507" title="Doug Bentley" label="Doug Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362694" start="82532" end="82543" title="Clint Smith" label="Clint Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644819" start="82557" end="82570" title="John Mariucci" label="John Mariucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422716" start="82595" end="82605" title="Red Hamill" label="Red Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387200" start="82619" end="82631" title="Gaye Stewart" label="Gaye Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q324452" start="82645" end="82657" title="Jack Stewart (ice hockey)" label="Jack Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q710352" start="82671" end="82682" title="Bill Gadsby" label="Bill Gadsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121004" start="82696" end="82707" title="Gus Mortson" label="Gus Mortson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282408" start="82721" end="82736" title="Ed Litzenberger" label="Ed Litzenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q473306" start="82750" end="82763" title="Pierre Pilote" label="Pierre Pilote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056579" start="82777" end="82790" title="Pat Stapleton (ice hockey)" label="Pat Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q369078" start="82804" end="82814" title="Pit Martin" label="Pit Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q440237" start="82840" end="82851" title="Stan Mikita" label="Stan Mikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q963167" start="82853" end="82867" title="Keith Magnuson" label="Keith Magnuson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518928" start="82909" end="82924" title="Terry Ruskowski" label="Terry Ruskowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q717856" start="82938" end="82951" title="Darryl Sutter" label="Darryl Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q888159" start="82965" end="82975" title="Robert Frederick Murray" label="Bob Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187631" start="82999" end="83011" title="Denis Savard" label="Denis Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q776011" start="83025" end="83036" title="Dirk Graham" label="Dirk Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q715377" start="83050" end="83063" title="Chris Chelios" label="Chris Chelios"/>
<link wikidata="Q955391" start="83077" end="83089" title="Doug Gilmour" label="Doug Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386805" start="83103" end="83114" title="Tony Amonte" label="Tony Amonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345810" start="83128" end="83142" title="Alexei Zhamnov" label="Alexei Zhamnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q372618" start="83156" end="83169" title="Adrian Aucoin" label="Adrian Aucoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373609" start="83183" end="83198" title="Martin Lapointe" label="Martin Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q528240" start="83217" end="83231" title="Jonathan Toews" label="Jonathan Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="83245" end="83257" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566802" start="83931" end="83971" title="List of Chicago Blackhawks award winners" label="List of Chicago Blackhawks award winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q664685" start="83974" end="84012" title="List of Chicago Blackhawks draft picks" label="List of Chicago Blackhawks draft picks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381701" start="84015" end="84058" title="List of Chicago Blackhawks general managers" label="List of Chicago Blackhawks general managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377945" start="84061" end="84100" title="List of Chicago Blackhawks head coaches" label="List of Chicago Blackhawks head coaches"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73128" wikidata="Q207507" url="?curid=73128" title="Columbus Blue Jackets">
<text>The Columbus Blue Jackets (often simply referred to as the Jackets) are a professional ice hockey team based in Columbus, Ohio. The Blue Jackets compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Metropolitan Division in the Eastern Conference. The franchise began play as an expansion team in 2000.

The franchise struggled in their initial years, failing to win 30 games in a season until 2005–06. The team qualified for the Stanley Cup playoffs for the first time in 2009, but were swept by the Detroit Red Wings. Columbus ultimately notched their first playoff game victory in the 2014 playoffs, and won their first playoff series in the 2019 playoffs against the Tampa Bay Lightning, becoming the first team in NHL history to sweep a Presidents&#x27; Trophy winner in the first round. Along with the much newer Seattle Kraken (founded ) and Utah Hockey Club (founded ), the Blue Jackets are one of only three teams in the league who have yet to appear in the conference finals.

The Blue Jackets&#x27; name and logos are inspired by Ohio&#x27;s Civil War history. The Blue Jackets play their home games at Nationwide Arena in downtown Columbus, which opened in 2000. They are affiliated with the Cleveland Monsters of the AHL.

==History==

===Building a new franchise (1997–2000)===
Prior to the establishment of the Blue Jackets, the last NHL team in the state of Ohio was the Cleveland Barons, who played from 1976 to 1978. In Columbus, the Blue Jackets replaced the Columbus Chill of the ECHL, who played in the city from 1991 to 1999. The Chill played at the Ohio Expo Center Coliseum, where they set a minor league hockey record by selling out 83 consecutive games.

In November 1996, five investors formed a partnership called Columbus Hockey Limited, who then submitted an application and a $100,000 fee to the NHL office. The voters of Columbus were considering a referendum to build a publicly financed arena, a major step toward approval of their NHL bid. When League Commissioner Gary Bettman visited Columbus to meet with the community&#x27;s leaders about the franchise proposal, there was concern that the voters might not pass the needed referendum. The civic leaders told Bettman that they would not be willing to foot the bill for the team if the referendum failed. However, just after the meeting adjourned, John H. McConnell (one of those who entered the bid) privately guaranteed Bettman that an arena would be built, referendum or not.

Columbus&#x27; hopes for the bid dimmed when the May referendum failed. However, Nationwide announced on May 31, 1997, that it would finance the $150-million arena. Subsequently, on June 25, 1997, the NHL announced that Columbus would receive a new franchise. Afterwards a &quot;Name the Team&quot; contest was held with the help of Wendy&#x27;s throughout central Ohio during the month of August 1997. The franchise received 14,000 entries and, with help from the NHL, narrowed the list down to 10 names. Then, with the information received from owner McConnell regarding Columbus&#x27; history, the league and the franchise narrowed the list of potential names down to two – Blue Jackets and Justice. The former, which referenced Ohio&#x27;s contributions to the American Civil War, was eventually announced as the team name in November.

On June 23, 2000, the NHL&#x27;s two newest teams, the Blue Jackets and the Minnesota Wild, took part in the 2000 NHL expansion draft in Calgary. Under the draft&#x27;s rules, 26 of the NHL&#x27;s active 28 teams were allowed to protect one goaltender, five defensemen, and nine forwards, or two goaltenders, three defensemen, and seven forwards. The Atlanta Thrashers and Nashville Predators both had their full rosters protected because they were the two newest teams, only being in existence for one and two years, respectively. Both the Blue Jackets and Wild had to use their first 24 selections on three goaltenders, eight defensemen, and thirteen forwards. Their final two picks could be players of any position.

With the first-overall choice, the Blue Jackets selected goaltender Rick Tabaracci from the Colorado Avalanche. Over the course of the draft, Columbus picked up goaltender Dwayne Roloson, defensemen Lyle Odelein and Mathieu Schneider, and forwards Geoff Sanderson, Turner Stevenson and Dallas Drake, among others. Instead of joining Columbus, Roloson signed with the American Hockey League&#x27;s Worcester IceCats, Schneider left for the Los Angeles Kings, and the St. Louis Blues signed Drake. Columbus also traded Stevenson to the New Jersey Devils to complete an earlier transaction.

The Blue Jackets and Wild were granted concessions by some franchises who could not protect their full rosters. The San Jose Sharks traded Jan Caloun, a ninth-round pick in the 2000 NHL entry draft, and a 2001 conditional pick to Columbus; in return, the Blue Jackets agreed not to select the Sharks&#x27; unprotected goaltender Evgeni Nabokov. On June 24, at the 2000 NHL entry draft, Columbus selected Rostislav Klesla fourth overall.

===Early years (2000–2005)===
The Blue Jackets played their first regular season game on October 7, 2000, a 5–3 loss to the Chicago Blackhawks. Bruce Gardiner scored the franchise&#x27;s first goal. Columbus finished with a 28–39–9–6 record for 71 points, last in the Central Division, and failed to qualify for the playoffs. Geoff Sanderson became the first player in team history to score 30 goals. Ron Tugnutt, who was signed in the summer of 2000, supplied solid goaltending with 22 wins, which tied the 74-year-old NHL record for wins by an expansion-team goaltender (New York Rangers&#x27; Lorne Chabot also had 22 wins in 1926–27).
The Blue Jackets finished next-to-last in the NHL in the following season, with only 57 points. Ray Whitney, acquired from the Florida Panthers the previous season, led the team in scoring with 61 points, setting a franchise record. Tragedy struck the Blue Jackets organization in March 2002 when 13-year-old Brittanie Cecil was killed after a deflected puck shot by Espen Knutsen struck her in the head while she was in the stands at Nationwide Arena. As a result of her death, large nylon mesh nets were installed behind the goals in all NHL arenas to shield spectators from pucks going over the glass. The team also wore small red hearts with the initials &quot;BNC&quot; on their helmets.

During the off-season, the Blue Jackets traded a second-round draft pick (32nd overall) and Ron Tugnutt to the Dallas Stars in exchange for Dallas&#x27; first-round pick (20th overall) in the 2002 NHL entry draft. On the morning of the draft, Columbus traded the third-overall pick and the option to flip draft spots in 2003 to the Florida Panthers; in return, Columbus received the first-overall pick, which they used to select Rick Nash.

The 2002–03 season started with Columbus putting up a 7–5–1–1 record after the first 14 games. However, as expectations from their fans grew higher, the team came back to mediocrity, finishing last in the Central Division for the third consecutive season with 69 points and missing the playoffs once again. Dave King, who had been the team&#x27;s head coach since their debut in 2000, was fired mid-season and replaced by general manager Doug MacLean. Marc Denis was named starting goaltender; he played a franchise-record 77 games that season and set a league record with 4,511 minutes played in 2002–03. He tied for second all-time for games played in a season by a goaltender, just two shy of the league record held by St. Louis Blues&#x27; Grant Fuhr in the 1995–96 season.

The 2003–04 season was another losing season for the Blue Jackets despite key additions in the off-season. Checking center Todd Marchant was signed to a five-year contract in July from the Edmonton Oilers. Defenseman Darryl Sydor, known to play strong offense as well, was acquired from the Dallas Stars for Mike Sillinger and a draft pick. MacLean stepped aside as head coach midway through the season, giving way to Gerard Gallant. The Blue Jackets finished with just 62 points (the second-lowest total in their short history), but it was enough to help them break out of last place in the Central Division for the first time, finishing ahead of the Chicago Blackhawks. Nash was one of the few bright spots for the team; his 41 goals tied Jarome Iginla and Ilya Kovalchuk for the Maurice &quot;Rocket&quot; Richard Trophy (as League leader in goals scored).

In the 2004 off-season, the NHL Players&#x27; Association (NHLPA) and NHL administration failed to renew their collective bargaining agreement. September 14, 2004, marked the beginning of the lockout of the 2004–05 season. No games were played and the Stanley Cup was not awarded for the first time since the flu epidemic of 1919. An agreement was made on July 13, 2005, and the lockout officially ended nine days later on July 22, 2005.

===Nash era and rebuilding (2005–2012)===
In the summer of 2005, rugged Colorado Avalanche defenseman Adam Foote agreed to a three-year deal with the team. Heading into the 2005–06 season, it appeared the Blue Jackets would finally take the next step and make the playoffs. Instead, injuries to Rick Nash, Rostislav Klesla and Gilbert Brule, the team&#x27;s 2005 first-round pick, led to the team putting up a dismal 9–25–1 record through its first 35 games. Superstar Sergei Fedorov was acquired from the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim; Anaheim received Tyler Wright and Francois Beauchemin, and later claimed Todd Marchant off waivers. While again failing to make the playoffs, Columbus did manage to improve. They had the best overtime record in the NHL (14–4) and finished the season with franchise records for wins (35) and points (74). For the first time ever, they earned a third-place finish in the Central Division, behind Detroit and Nashville.
The 2006–07 season saw several changes made to the team. In the off-season, Marc Denis was dealt to the Tampa Bay Lightning for forward Fredrik Modin and goaltender Fredrik Norrena, making way for Pascal Leclaire to take the starting job. The Blue Jackets also signed Anson Carter when it looked as if Nikolay Zherdev would be playing the season in Russia; in late September, however, Zherdev and general manager Doug MacLean were able to reach a compromise. Partway through the season, on November 13, 2006, Gerard Gallant was relieved of his duties as head coach. The next day, Gary Agnew was named his interim replacement. On November 22, Ken Hitchcock, former coach of the Dallas Stars and Philadelphia Flyers, was named the new head coach, effective the following day. Under Hitchcock&#x27;s first year, two milestones were set: on December 10, 2006, the Blue Jackets scored a team-record five power-play goals in a 6–2 win over the Ottawa Senators, and on April 3, 2007, the Blue Jackets broke the modern-day record for most times being shut-out in a season (16) with a 3–0 loss to the Detroit Red Wings.

On April 18, 2007, Doug MacLean, the team&#x27;s first general manager and president, was fired after nine years and six seasons at the helm without a playoff berth. Mike Priest, president of Blue Jackets parent company JMAC, Inc., was named president of the club, while Assistant general manager Jim Clark served as general manager until the Blue Jackets named Edmonton Oilers Assistant general manager Scott Howson as the new general manager on June 15, 2007. On October 4, 2007, the Blue Jackets announced their affiliation with the Elmira Jackals, which replaced their former affiliation with the Dayton Bombers as the club&#x27;s ECHL affiliate.

The 2007–08 season, the club&#x27;s first full season under Hitchcock, started off well as the Jackets got off to their best start in franchise history, starting with a 4–0 shutout of the defending Stanley Cup champion Anaheim Ducks. At the trade deadline on February 26, 2008, however, apparently unable to agree on a new contract and amid some controversy, Blue Jackets captain Adam Foote requested a trade to the Colorado Avalanche, which was granted. The Blue Jackets received a pair of conditional picks in return. A few weeks later, on March 12, 2008, former Blue Jackets number-one draft pick Rick Nash was named the new team captain. Despite this, Columbus managed its best season record to date, staying above a .500 game wins average until the final game of the season and finishing fourth in the Central Division with 80 points. After the season, Nash was announced as the cover player for the &quot;NHL 2K9&quot; video game by Take-Two Interactive.

At the 2008 NHL entry draft, the Blue Jackets selected Nikita Filatov with the sixth overall pick. They also traded away the 19th overall pick (acquired from the Colorado Avalanche in exchange for Adam Foote) for R. J. Umberger. The Blue Jackets made many trades in the 2008 off-season. Gilbert Brule was traded to the Edmonton Oilers for Raffi Torres. Enigmatic forward Nikolay Zherdev and Dan Fritsche were traded to the New York Rangers in exchange for defensemen Fedor Tyutin and Christian Backman. The Blue Jackets also signed free agents Kristian Huselius and Mike Commodore to multi-year contracts. On July 9, 2008, the Blue Jackets announced they signed Hitchcock to a three-year extension to remain as head coach.
During the 2008–09 season, the Blue Jackets made two trades which greatly played to their benefit. Forward Jason Williams was acquired from the Atlanta Thrashers in exchange for defenseman Clay Wilson and a sixth-round draft pick. The Blue Jackets were also involved with the first major deal of the 2009 NHL trade deadline, by trading goaltender Pascal Leclaire and a second-round draft pick to the Ottawa Senators for skilled center Antoine Vermette. The changes in scenery benefited both players and the Jackets; Williams scored 28 points in his first 36 games as a Jacket, while Vermette scored 11 points in his first 14 games with the team. Rick Nash scored 79 points throughout the season, setting a franchise record.

On April 8, 2009, the Columbus Blue Jackets secured the first Stanley Cup playoff berth in the franchise&#x27;s eight-year history with a 4–3 shootout win over the Chicago Blackhawks. However, they were swept in the first round by the Detroit Red Wings in four games, and would not qualify for the playoffs for the next four seasons. With 21 games remaining and sitting four points out of eighth in the Western Conference, the Blue Jackets dealt long time defenseman Rostislav Klesla and Dane Byers to the Phoenix Coyotes in exchange for Scottie Upshall and Sami Lepisto at the trade deadline on February 28, 2011.

In the 2011 off-season, in an attempt to make a serious playoff run, the Blue Jackets traded 2007 first-round pick Jakub Voracek, their 2011 first-round pick (Sean Couturier) and a third-round pick (Nick Cousins) to the Philadelphia Flyers for All-Star center Jeff Carter. They also signed several free agents: James Wisniewski, Vaclav Prospal and Radek Martinek. However, after a disastrous start to the 2011–12 season that saw the firing of head coach Scott Arniel, Carter was traded to the Los Angeles Kings for Jack Johnson and a conditional first-round pick after playing just 39 games with the Blue Jackets. The Blue Jackets also traded veteran centers Antoine Vermette and Samuel Pahlsson for goaltender Curtis McElhinney and several draft picks at the trade deadline. There was also heavy speculation that captain Rick Nash would be traded at the deadline. Although Nash was not traded, general manager Scott Howson publicly announced that he had privately requested a trade, a move that has stirred up much controversy. Nash was eventually traded to the New York Rangers on July 23, 2012, for Brandon Dubinsky, Artem Anisimov, prospect Tim Erixon and a 2013 first-round draft pick. At the 2012 NHL entry draft, the Blue Jackets traded their second and fourth round picks to the Philadelphia Flyers for the eventual winner of the Vezina Trophy, goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky (2012–13).

The 2012–13 lockout and season saw changes to the executive and front office of the organization. John Davidson was named as president of hockey operations for the Blue Jackets on October 24. On February 12, Scott Howson was relieved of his duties as general manager. Jarmo Kekalainen, who had previously worked with Davidson in St. Louis, was hired away from Jokerit of the Finnish SM-liiga to be the new general manager becoming the first European born general manager in the NHL. The Blue Jackets then traded for All-Star forward Marian Gaborik. The Blue Jackets just missed the playoffs via a tiebreaker against the Minnesota Wild, who had more regulation and overtime wins (ROW).

===The Kekalainen years (2013–2024)===

====Move into the Eastern Conference====

The Blue Jackets moved into the Metropolitan Division of the Eastern Conference in the 2013–14 season after spending its first 13 seasons in the Central Division of the Western Conference. The other teams in the Metropolitan Division consist of the Carolina Hurricanes, New Jersey Devils, New York Islanders, New York Rangers, Philadelphia Flyers, Pittsburgh Penguins and Washington Capitals, the latter six of which once composed the old Patrick Division. On April 9, 2014, the Blue Jackets clinched their second playoff spot in franchise history by winning a 3–1 game against the Dallas Stars. This game was also noted for being a game resumed after being postponed on March 10, 2014, due to Rich Peverley&#x27;s cardiac event in which the Blue Jackets led 1–0. The NHL decided to keep the goal scored by Nathan Horton and resumed the game with a full 60 minutes. Nathan Horton made history by being credited for scoring a goal while not suiting up for the game.

The Blue Jackets faced the Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round of the 2014 Stanley Cup playoffs. This series had a trend that was noted for making 3–1 leads end up as 4–3 loss. Games 1 and 2 were at the Consol Energy Center in downtown Pittsburgh. The Blue Jackets made a large jump in history when Jack Johnson scored the first goal of the game. This was the first time in franchise history that Columbus ever led a postseason game. The Jackets lead the game 3–1 at one point from goals by Mark Letestu and Derek MacKenzie. However, the Penguins rallied to win it 4–3. Game 2 was the opposite. Pittsburgh led 3–1 at one point, but Columbus rallied to win game 2 4–3 by an overtime goal from Matt Calvert. This was the first playoff victory in franchise history. Pittsburgh won game 3 by a score of 4–3. Game 4 was a memorable night at Nationwide Arena. Columbus was down 3–0, and 3–1 by the end of the first period. Boone Jenner and Ryan Johansen scored to make it 3–2 by the end of the second period. Brandon Dubinsky scored the game-tying goal with 22.5 seconds left in regulation, after a miss-play with the puck by Marc-Andre Fleury. Nick Foligno went on to score the game-winning goal in overtime. In the locker room during intermission, he supposedly told the team that he will score the game-winner. Pittsburgh, however, went on to win the next two games and took the best-of-seven series in six games.

The 2014–15 season was most notable for the number of injuries the Jackets incurred. The Jackets lead the league in man-games lost with 502. At one point, the injured reserve list consisted of 15 players, including stars Sergei Bobrovsky, Brandon Dubinsky, Jack Johnson, and Ryan Murray. When the team&#x27;s injured players began to return in late February, they were able to accumulate wins the way they had the previous two seasons and in the process, set a franchise record earning nine consecutive wins. However, the Blue Jackets still finished fifth in the Metropolitan Division and missed the playoffs by nine points despite a 42–35–5 record. On May 20, 2015, Nick Foligno was named the sixth captain in team history. The position had been vacant since Rick Nash was traded to the New York Rangers in July 2012. On June 30, 2015, the Jackets traded centers Marko Dano and Artem Anisimov, along with wingers Jeremy Morin and Corey Tropp, to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for Brandon Saad. This move was the subject of much controversy in Chicago since Blackhawks general manager Stan Bowman had publicly said that Saad was going to be a part of the organization for many years to come. The Jackets also acquired Michael Paliotta and Alex Broadhurst in the trade. The Jackets signed center Gregory Campbell from the Boston Bruins a few days later.

====Tortorella era (2015–2021)====
The Blue Jackets initially went into the 2015–16 season with high expectations. However, the team got off to an inauspicious start by losing their first eight regular season games in regulation, the second longest losing streak to start a season in NHL history. This prompted the Jackets to fire head coach Todd Richards and hire John Tortorella in his place. On January 6, 2016, the Blue Jackets traded Ryan Johansen to the Nashville Predators in exchange for defenseman Seth Jones. The Blue Jackets record at the end of the season was 34–40–8, and were ranked 27th overall in the NHL. They closed out the season on a high note, however, as they won the season finale against the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Chicago Blackhawks, overcoming a 3–0 deficit after the first period to win 5–4 in overtime.
The Blue Jackets set three franchise records during the 2016–17 season. On November 4, 2016, the Blue Jackets scored a franchise-record ten goals in a 10–0 shutout win against the Montreal Canadiens, becoming the first team to do so since 2011 (when the St. Louis Blues beat the Detroit Red Wings 10–3). In mid-November, the Blue Jackets got a franchise record seventh consecutive win at home. During a franchise-record 16-game win streak that started in late November, Tortorella recorded his 500th career win in a 4–3 Blue Jackets overtime win on the road against the Vancouver Canucks, becoming the first American-born head coach to reach 500 wins. The team had a record of 14–0–0 in December. The team&#x27;s win streak ended in early January when they lost 5–0 to the Washington Capitals. The win streak was the second longest in NHL history behind the 1992–93 Pittsburgh Penguins&#x27; 17 consecutive games. The team finished with a record of 50–24–8 and 108 points, setting a franchise record.

During the first round of the 2017 playoffs, the Blue Jackets were placed in a matchup against the Pittsburgh Penguins. The team lost three straight games to begin the series, but won the fourth game to save themselves from elimination. This game in which they won 5–4 marked the Blue Jackets&#x27; first regulation win in the Stanley Cup Playoffs. Despite this, they would ultimately lose the series in five games. In the following off-season, on June 23, 2017, the Jackets made another deal with the Blackhawks sending Brandon Saad back to Chicago for Artemi Panarin and Tyler Motte.

The Blue Jackets returned to the playoffs in 2018 as a wild card qualifier, going in back-to-back years for the first time. There they faced the Metropolitan Division champion Washington Capitals in the first round, winning the first two games in overtime and their first series lead. However, they lost the next four games and the series in six games.

In 2019, the Blue Jackets, with expiring contracts, went all-in at the trade deadline, acquiring Matt Duchene and Ryan Dzingel, along with several other players. They qualified for the 2019 playoffs as the second wild card, where they swept the Presidents&#x27; Trophy winner Tampa Bay Lightning in the first round to win their first ever playoff series, but lost their second round series in six games to the Boston Bruins. The Blue Jackets would then lose long-time starting goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky, Matt Duchene, and the team&#x27;s leader in points, Artemi Panarin, in free agency during the 2019 off-season.

On March 12, 2020, the 2019–20 season was paused due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with the remainder of the regular season being officially canceled on May 26. On August 1, the season would resume and follow a 24-team playoff format. The Blue Jackets advanced to the playoffs after defeating the Toronto Maple Leafs in five games in the qualifying round. The Blue Jackets then faced the Tampa Bay Lightning in a first round rematch of last season. They lost game 1 in the fifth overtime period, and went on to lose the series in five games.

During the 2020 off-season, star forward Pierre-Luc Dubois signed a two-year extension with the Blue Jackets but would later request a trade from the team. The shortened 56-game 2020–21 season saw the Blue Jackets placed and struggle in the Central Division, under the NHL&#x27;s realigned divisions. After being benched for the second and third periods in what would be his last game with the team on January 21, 2021, Dubois, along with a 2022 third-round pick, was traded to the Winnipeg Jets in exchange for wingers Patrik Laine and Jack Roslovic on January 23. Veteran players David Savard and captain Nick Foligno would also be traded to the Tampa Bay Lightning and the Toronto Maple Leafs, respectively. The team finished last in their division, with a dismal 18–26–12 record, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2016. Tortorella and the Blue Jackets would then part ways after six seasons.

====Rebuilding and the Gaudreau era (2021–2024)====
The departures of Tortorella and several key players in the past few seasons threw the Blue Jackets into another rebuild, starting with the promotion of assistant coach Brad Larsen to head coach on June 10, 2021. Seth Jones would then be traded to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for defenseman Adam Boqvist and a 2021 first-round pick (Cole Sillinger), and Cam Atkinson to the Philadelphia Flyers for former first-round pick Jakub Voracek.

The 2021–22 season saw the Blue Jackets return to the Metropolitan Division as the NHL reverted to its 82-game regular season. In their season-opening game against the Arizona Coyotes, the team honored backup goaltender Matiss Kivlenieks, who had tragically died in a fireworks accident during the off-season, on July 4, 2021. They raised his number to hang inside Nationwide Arena for the duration of the season. His family also performed a ceremonial puck drop and goaltender Elvis Merzlikins was allowed to wear #80 during said game. They had also established the Matiss Kivlenieks Memorial Fund in his memory in order to promote the growth of hockey in Columbus and his homeland of Latvia.
On October 12, 2021, Boone Jenner was named the seventh captain in franchise history. Under his captaincy, the Blue Jackets started their season with a strong 7–3–0 record in their first ten games, even defeating the eventual Stanley Cup champions Colorado Avalanche in back-to-back games. Despite an improved offense and scoring capabilities, issues with defense and special teams caught up with the team as the season progressed, finishing among the top 10 teams with the highest goals against average. On April 16, 2022, they were officially eliminated from playoff contention when the Washington Capitals defeated the Montreal Canadiens. They finished sixth in their division, with a 37–38–7 record and 81 points.

During the 2022 free agency, the Blue Jackets shocked the hockey world by signing Calgary Flames superstar Johnny Gaudreau to a seven-year contract, following the signing of his teammate, defenseman Erik Gudbranson, to a four-year contract on July 13, 2022. The Gaudreau signing stunned hockey fans and media alike as the franchise had gained a reputation of being unable to sign or retain star players. Gaudreau, who had reportedly been linked to other Metro teams like the New Jersey Devils, New York Islanders, and Philadelphia Flyers for weeks, decided to play for less compensation for Columbus, citing their potential as a young team and that he came there &quot;to win hockey games.&quot; Subsequently, in order to re-sign Laine to what would be a four-year contract after the blockbuster signings, the Blue Jackets traded winger Oliver Bjorkstrand to the Seattle Kraken for 2023 late-round picks.

In the 2022–23 season, amid expectations of being a competitive team, the Blue Jackets could not overcome their defensive issues and man games lost due to injuries, especially that of top defenseman Zach Werenski, consistently placing them at the bottom of their division and of the league. The &quot;lost&quot; season would see the Blue Jackets trade forwards Gustav Nyquist to the Minnesota Wild and Jakub Voracek to the Arizona Coyotes; and backup goaltender Joonas Korpisalo and defenseman Vladislav Gavrikov to the Los Angeles Kings for draft picks and prospects. Two-time Stanley Cup-winning goaltender Jonathan Quick, also acquired from the Kings, would be traded to the Vegas Golden Knights in less than two days. On March 17, 2023, the Blue Jackets were eliminated from playoff contention in their 68th game, after a 7–4 loss to the Anaheim Ducks. They finished eighth in their division, with a dismal 25–48–9 record and 59 points, and were 31st in the league. On April 15, 2023, they relieved Brad Larsen of his duties as head coach.

For the 2023–24 season, the Blue Jackets made several changes in the off-season. They looked to improve their blue line by trading for Ivan Provorov from the Philadelphia Flyers on June 6, 2023, and then for Damon Severson from the New Jersey Devils three days later. On July 1, they hired Mike Babcock as their new head coach amid much controversy, as he had a reputation of mistreating players. In the 2023 NHL entry draft, they used their third overall pick to draft center Adam Fantilli from the University of Michigan. Babcock resigned on September 17, after allegations of improper behavior via the &quot;Spittin&#x27; Chiclets&quot; podcast led to an NHLPA investigation into his conduct. He announced his resignation as head coach before the start of the preseason, with Pascal Vincent being named his successor. The team struggled once again, finishing with a 27–43–12 record and last in the Metropolitan division. On February 15, 2024, the Blue Jackets fired general manager Jarmo Kekäläinen. On May 28, 2024, Don Waddell was hired as president of hockey operations and general manager, while John Davidson transitioned to a senior advisor role within the organization. On June 17, 2024, the Blue Jackets fired Vincent, with former Minnesota Wild coach Dean Evason named his successor on July 22, 2024.

On August 29, 2024, ahead of the 2024–25 season, Gaudreau and his younger brother Matthew were both killed by a driver suspected of drunk driving while cycling in Oldmans Township, New Jersey. The tragedy was met with tributes from around the NHL and wider sports world, as well as an impromptu memorial established by fans at Nationwide Arena.

==Team information==

===Team name===

The name &quot;Blue Jackets&quot; was chosen to celebrate &quot;patriotism, pride, and the rich Civil War history in the state of Ohio and city of Columbus.&quot; When President Abraham Lincoln requested that Ohio raise ten regiments at the outbreak of the Civil War, the state responded by raising a total of 23 volunteer infantry regiments for three months of service. Ohio also produced a number of great Civil War figures, including William Tecumseh Sherman, Ulysses S. Grant, Philip Sheridan and George Custer; Sherman himself being a native of Lancaster, Ohio, about a drive from Columbus along U.S. Route 33 and is home to his childhood home and museum. Columbus itself was host to large military bases, Camp Chase and Camp Thomas, which saw hundreds of thousands of Union soldiers and thousands of Confederate prisoners during the Civil War.

===Logos and jerseys===

The team logo is a stylized version of the flag of Ohio, which is a &quot;&quot; (i.e., swallowtail pennant), in the form of a &quot;C&quot; wrapped around a star, representing both patriotism and Columbus&#x27;s status as state capital. Previously used as an alternate logo starting in 2003, it became the primary logo as part of a Reebok-sponsored redesign for the 2007–08 season. The original logo had a red ribbon with 13 stars representing the Thirteen Colonies, unfurled in the shape of the team&#x27;s initials, CBJ, with an electric gold hockey stick cutting through the center to represent the &quot;J.&quot; An additional star atop the stick represented Columbus&#x27;s status as state capital.

Since their inception, the Blue Jackets have worn navy and white jerseys with red pants.

For the 2020–21 season, the Blue Jackets would wear &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniforms designed by Adidas. The uniform resembled the original white &quot;Stinger&quot; uniforms from 2000 to 2007 but with a red base and white sleeve stripes.

Starting with the 2022–23 season, the Blue Jackets&#x27; road white uniform would be paired with blue pants, a combination the team previously wore on May 1, 2021, against the Carolina Hurricanes. The blue pants were also used with the &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform during that season. Also during the season, the Blue Jackets unveiled their second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform, using the 2003–2007 alternate uniform but with a black base and light blue stripes taken from their current alternates.

For the team&#x27;s 2025 NHL Stadium Series game, they wore dark blue uniforms and pants with white, silver and red trim. The main crest featured the &quot;cannon&quot; logo in front, and the shoulders featured a new &quot;CBJ&quot; patch with two crossed hockey sticks as a nod to the unit designation pins found in front of a soldier&#x27;s slouch caps. An outline of Ohio surrounds the captain and alternate captain patches, along with a star on the right leg. Enlarged numbers and letters were used for the uniform.

===&quot;The Cannon&quot;===

Prior to the start of the 2007–08 season, the Blue Jackets organization brought a hand-made replica 1857 Napoleon cannon into Nationwide Arena. The cannon is &quot;fired&quot; at home games whenever:
* the Blue Jackets take the ice at the start of the game
* the Blue Jackets score a goal
* the Blue Jackets win the game

When the Blue Jackets score a goal, the title line of &quot;For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)&quot; by AC/DC is played when the cannon is fired followed by the chorus of &quot;The Whip&quot; by Locksley.

===Broadcast===
On FanDuel Sports Network Ohio, Steve Mears serves as the television play-by-play announcer alongside former Blue Jacket Jody Shelley providing color analysis. Brian Giesenschlag is the host of &quot;Blue Jackets Live&quot;, the televised pre-game, intermission and post-game shows, with former Blue Jacket Jean-Luc Grand-Pierre.

On radio stations WBNS-FM (flagship), WBNS (flagship), WXZX (alternative flagship that airs games that conflict with WBNS&#x27;s and WBNS-FM&#x27;s coverage of Ohio State football or men&#x27;s basketball), and 34 other affiliates in Ohio and West Virginia, Bob McElligott provides play-by-play coverage. McElligott joined the Blue Jackets radio broadcast in July 2009 as a color analyst and became the play-by-play analyst for the 2013–14 season, taking over for George Matthews who had been calling Blue Jackets games since the team&#x27;s inception in 2000. McElligott, along with Dylan Tyrer, hosts the pre-game and post-game radio shows. Fans can interact by e-mail and Twitter with McElligott and Tyrer 
during and after the game.

===Mascot===
Stinger is the official mascot of the Blue Jackets. Stinger is a 6-foot 9-inch Yellow Jacket that walks amongst the crowd during the games and skates on the ice between periods while wearing a Blue Jackets jersey and a blue hat. Stingers eyebrows are black hockey sticks. Stinger was originally yellow, but was changed to green, eventually mixing with the team&#x27;s blue. The image of Stinger was on the original Blue Jackets jerseys, eventually being removed in 2003. The team also had another mascot, an anthropomorphic cannon named Boomer, for half of the 2010–11 season.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Blue Jackets. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Columbus Blue Jackets seasons&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players and personnel==
===Current roster===
===Team captains===

* Lyle Odelein, 2000–2002
* Ray Whitney, 2002–2003
* Luke Richardson, 2003–2005
* Adam Foote, 2005–2008
* Rick Nash, 2008–2012
* Nick Foligno, 2015–2021
* Boone Jenner, 2021–present
===First-round draft picks===
* 2000: Rostislav Klesla (4th overall)
* 2001: Pascal Leclaire (8th overall)
* 2002: Rick Nash (1st overall)
* 2003: Nikolay Zherdev (4th overall)
* 2004: Alexandre Picard (8th overall)
* 2005: Gilbert Brule (6th overall)
* 2006: Derick Brassard (6th overall)
* 2007: Jakub Voracek (7th overall)
* 2008: Nikita Filatov (6th overall)
* 2009: John Moore (21st overall)
* 2010: Ryan Johansen (4th overall)
* 2012: Ryan Murray (2nd overall)
* 2013: Alexander Wennberg (14th overall), Kerby Rychel (19th overall), and Marko Dano (27th overall)
* 2014: Sonny Milano (16th overall)
* 2015: Zach Werenski (8th overall) and Gabriel Carlsson (29th overall)
* 2016: Pierre-Luc Dubois (3rd overall)
* 2018: Liam Foudy (18th overall)
* 2020: Yegor Chinakhov (21st overall)
* 2021: Kent Johnson (5th overall), Cole Sillinger (12th overall), and Corson Ceulemans (25th overall)
* 2022: David Jiricek (6th overall) and Denton Mateychuk (12th overall)
* 2023: Adam Fantilli (3rd overall)
* 2024: Cayden Lindstrom (4th overall)
===Retired numbers===
The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.
===Honored members===
* Johnny Gaudreau (#13)
* John H. McConnell

===Hall of Famers===
* Sergei Fedorov, C, 2005–2008
* Ken Hitchcock, coach, 2006–2010

==Awards and trophies==
Maurice &quot;Rocket&quot; Richard Trophy
* Rick Nash: 2003–04

Vezina Trophy
* Sergei Bobrovsky: 2012–13, 2016–17

Calder Memorial Trophy
* Steve Mason: 2008–09

King Clancy Memorial Trophy
* Nick Foligno: 2016–17

Jack Adams Award
* John Tortorella: 2016–17

Mark Messier Leadership Award
* Nick Foligno: 2016–17

NHL Foundation Player Award
* Rick Nash: 2008–09

NHL first All-Star team
* Sergei Bobrovsky: 2012–13, 2016–17

NHL second All-Star team
* Steve Mason: 2008–09
* Seth Jones: 2017–18

NHL All-Rookie Team
* Rostislav Klesla: 2001–02
* Rick Nash: 2002–03
* Steve Mason: 2008–09
* Zach Werenski: 2016–17
* Elvis Merzlikins: 2019–20
==Records==

===Franchise scoring leaders===
These are the top ten-point-scorers in franchise history as of the 2023–24 season. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Blue Jackets player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;


===Single-season records===
Single-season records include:

* Points: Artemi Panarin (2018–19) – 87
* Goals: Rick Nash (2003–04) and Cam Atkinson (2018–19) – 41
* Assists: Artemi Panarin (2018–19) – 59
* Game-winning goals: Cam Atkinson (2016–17) – 9
* Penalty minutes: Jody Shelley (2002–03) – 249
* Plus/Minus: David Savard (2016–17) – +33
* Points by a defenseman: Zach Werenski (2024-25)— 62
* Goals by a defenseman: Zach Werenski (2019–20) – 20
* Assists by a defenseman: Zach Werenski (2023—24)- 46
* Points by a rookie: Pierre-Luc Dubois (2017–18) – 48
* Wins: Sergei Bobrovsky (2016–17) – 41
* Shutouts in a season: Steve Mason (2008–09) – 10
* Goals against average: Sergei Bobrovsky (2012–13) – 2.00
* Save percentage: Sergei Bobrovsky (2012–13) – .932
* Saves: Marc Denis (2002–03) – 2,172
* Longest shutout streak (time without allowing a goal): Steve Mason (2008–09) – 199:19
* Team winning streak – 16 games (November 29, 2016 – January 3, 2017)
==See also==
* Columbus Chill
* Columbus Owls
* List of Columbus Blue Jackets general managers
* List of Columbus Blue Jackets head coaches

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="4" end="25" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="59" end="66" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="87" end="97" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="112" end="126" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="160" end="182" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116323" start="208" end="229" title="Metropolitan Division" label="Metropolitan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="237" end="255" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="306" end="310" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="403" end="410" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="439" end="459" title="Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008308" start="482" end="486" title="2009 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="510" end="527" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="597" end="610" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q62004249" start="654" end="667" title="2019 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2019 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="680" end="699" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="751" end="774" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422166" start="828" end="842" title="Seattle Kraken" label="Seattle Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q125520712" start="858" end="874" title="Utah Hockey Club" label="Utah Hockey Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081054" start="1050" end="1079" title="Ohio in the American Civil War" label="Ohio&amp;#x27;s Civil War history"/>
<link wikidata="Q166503" start="1123" end="1139" title="Nationwide Arena" label="Nationwide Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q992056" start="1213" end="1231" title="Cleveland Monsters" label="Cleveland Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="1239" end="1242" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q546839" start="1396" end="1412" title="Cleveland Barons (NHL)" label="Cleveland Barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112747" start="1487" end="1501" title="Columbus Chill" label="Columbus Chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="1509" end="1513" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080813" start="1581" end="1606" title="Ohio Expo Center Coliseum" label="Ohio Expo Center Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="1625" end="1644" title="minor league hockey" label="minor league hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q383983" start="2009" end="2021" title="Gary Bettman" label="Gary Bettman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236967" start="2344" end="2361" title="John H. McConnell" label="John H. McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979886" start="2557" end="2567" title="Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company" label="Nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q550258" start="2809" end="2821" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3241" end="3259" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="3393" end="3407" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q500116" start="3426" end="3450" title="2000 NHL expansion draft" label="2000 NHL expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="3454" end="3461" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="3558" end="3568" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="3575" end="3585" title="Defenceman" label="defensemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q543457" start="3596" end="3604" title="Forward (ice hockey)" label="forwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="3668" end="3685" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="3690" end="3709" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q426845" start="4105" end="4119" title="Rick Tabaracci" label="Rick Tabaracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="4129" end="4147" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q608304" start="4209" end="4223" title="Dwayne Roloson" label="Dwayne Roloson"/>
<link wikidata="Q977018" start="4236" end="4248" title="Lyle Odelein" label="Lyle Odelein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344150" start="4253" end="4270" title="Mathieu Schneider" label="Mathieu Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q720297" start="4285" end="4300" title="Geoff Sanderson" label="Geoff Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461361" start="4302" end="4318" title="Turner Stevenson" label="Turner Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157996" start="4323" end="4335" title="Dallas Drake" label="Dallas Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="4404" end="4426" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q371928" start="4434" end="4451" title="Worcester IceCats" label="Worcester IceCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="4476" end="4493" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="4503" end="4518" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="4571" end="4588" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="4742" end="4757" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682461" start="4765" end="4775" title="Jan Čaloun" label="Jan Caloun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="4803" end="4823" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="4831" end="4835" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="4944" end="4954" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q390913" start="4955" end="4969" title="Evgeni Nabokov" label="Evgeni Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q727106" start="5030" end="5046" title="Rostislav Klesla" label="Rostislav Klesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="5188" end="5206" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977531" start="5208" end="5222" title="Bruce Gardiner" label="Bruce Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599125" start="5380" end="5388" title="2001 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q720297" start="5390" end="5405" title="Geoff Sanderson" label="Geoff Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q328994" start="5465" end="5476" title="Ron Tugnutt" label="Ron Tugnutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="5637" end="5653" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q712164" start="5660" end="5672" title="Lorne Chabot" label="Lorne Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q120467" start="5693" end="5700" title="1926–27 NHL season" label="1926–27"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="5760" end="5776" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342855" start="5799" end="5810" title="Ray Whitney (ice hockey)" label="Ray Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="5830" end="5846" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247406" start="6012" end="6027" title="Death of Brittanie Cecil" label="Brittanie Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q555830" start="6070" end="6083" title="Espen Knutsen" label="Espen Knutsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166503" start="6138" end="6154" title="Nationwide Arena" label="Nationwide Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="6508" end="6520" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="6589" end="6609" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854869" start="6717" end="6721" title="2003 NHL entry draft" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="6729" end="6745" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="6826" end="6835" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="6842" end="6856" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q729093" start="7145" end="7154" title="Dave King (hockey)" label="Dave King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251804" start="7276" end="7288" title="Doug MacLean" label="Doug MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q715472" start="7290" end="7300" title="Marc Denis" label="Marc Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="7560" end="7575" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354283" start="7582" end="7592" title="Grant Fuhr" label="Grant Fuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="7600" end="7614" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="7621" end="7635" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342380" start="7740" end="7753" title="Todd Marchant" label="Todd Marchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="7806" end="7821" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q743807" start="7834" end="7846" title="Darryl Sydor" label="Darryl Sydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381799" start="7925" end="7939" title="Mike Sillinger" label="Mike Sillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q371327" start="8035" end="8049" title="Gerard Gallant" label="Gerard Gallant"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="8269" end="8287" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q456708" start="8358" end="8371" title="Jarome Iginla" label="Jarome Iginla"/>
<link wikidata="Q434859" start="8376" end="8390" title="Ilya Kovalchuk" label="Ilya Kovalchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="8399" end="8440" title="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy" label="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="8506" end="8535" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="NHL Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q961806" start="8589" end="8620" title="NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement" label="collective bargaining agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="8670" end="8677" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q377382" start="8685" end="8699" title="2004–05 NHL season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="8730" end="8741" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="8787" end="8807" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="flu epidemic of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="8989" end="9007" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q349347" start="9019" end="9029" title="Adam Foote" label="Adam Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="9090" end="9104" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523935" start="9244" end="9257" title="Gilbert Brulé" label="Gilbert Brule"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="9275" end="9279" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q368501" start="9386" end="9400" title="Sergei Fedorov" label="Sergei Fedorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="9423" end="9446" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q346098" start="9465" end="9477" title="Tyler Wright" label="Tyler Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383345" start="9482" end="9501" title="Francois Beauchemin" label="Francois Beauchemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342380" start="9521" end="9534" title="Todd Marchant" label="Todd Marchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="9869" end="9883" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q715472" start="9941" end="9951" title="Marc Denis" label="Marc Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="9969" end="9988" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q605511" start="10001" end="10014" title="Fredrik Modin" label="Fredrik Modin"/>
<link wikidata="Q613467" start="10030" end="10045" title="Fredrik Norrena" label="Fredrik Norrena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261834" start="10062" end="10077" title="Pascal Leclaire" label="Pascal Leclaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q569963" start="10133" end="10145" title="Anson Carter" label="Anson Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342208" start="10167" end="10182" title="Nikolay Zherdev" label="Nikolay Zherdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251804" start="10278" end="10290" title="Doug MacLean" label="Doug MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q371327" start="10374" end="10388" title="Gerard Gallant" label="Gerard Gallant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524581" start="10445" end="10455" title="Gary Agnew" label="Gary Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="10507" end="10520" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="10542" end="10554" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="10559" end="10578" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="10803" end="10818" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="10957" end="10974" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="11339" end="11354" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260889" start="11381" end="11393" title="Scott Howson" label="Scott Howson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128735" start="11513" end="11527" title="Elmira Jackals" label="Elmira Jackals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179204" start="11578" end="11592" title="Dayton Bombers" label="Dayton Bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="11612" end="11616" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="11633" end="11647" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="11827" end="11838" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="11848" end="11861" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q349347" start="12009" end="12019" title="Adam Foote" label="Adam Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="12045" end="12063" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="12436" end="12452" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144517" start="12540" end="12547" title="NHL 2K series" label="NHL 2K9"/>
<link wikidata="Q94933" start="12568" end="12588" title="Take-Two Interactive" label="Take-Two Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="12598" end="12618" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q248990" start="12646" end="12660" title="Nikita Filatov" label="Nikita Filatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378285" start="12804" end="12818" title="R. J. Umberger" label="R. J. Umberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="12910" end="12925" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389027" start="12930" end="12942" title="Raffi Torres" label="Raffi Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159068" start="12982" end="12994" title="Dan Fritsche" label="Dan Fritsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="13014" end="13030" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129202" start="13058" end="13070" title="Fedor Tyutin" label="Fedor Tyutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079118" start="13075" end="13092" title="Christian Bäckman" label="Christian Backman"/>
<link wikidata="Q650355" start="13135" end="13152" title="Kristian Huselius" label="Kristian Huselius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368078" start="13157" end="13171" title="Mike Commodore" label="Mike Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="13325" end="13339" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364841" start="13421" end="13435" title="Jason Williams (ice hockey)" label="Jason Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="13458" end="13475" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q282624" start="13503" end="13514" title="Clay Wilson" label="Clay Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246603" start="13619" end="13637" title="NHL trade deadline" label="NHL trade deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="13714" end="13729" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q587076" start="13749" end="13765" title="Antoine Vermette" label="Antoine Vermette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="14101" end="14120" title="Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Stanley Cup playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="14203" end="14221" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="14274" end="14291" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159451" start="14527" end="14537" title="Dane Byers" label="Dane Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="14545" end="14560" title="Phoenix Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004843" start="14577" end="14592" title="Scottie Upshall" label="Scottie Upshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q944069" start="14597" end="14609" title="Sami Lepistö" label="Sami Lepisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341638" start="14770" end="14783" title="Jakub Voráček" label="Jakub Voracek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860056" start="14814" end="14828" title="Sean Couturier" label="Sean Couturier"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="14875" end="14894" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q943565" start="14915" end="14926" title="Jeff Carter" label="Jeff Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271921" start="14966" end="14982" title="James Wisniewski" label="James Wisniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q678896" start="14984" end="14998" title="Václav Prospal" label="Vaclav Prospal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373096" start="15003" end="15017" title="Radek Martínek" label="Radek Martinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476170" start="15109" end="15121" title="Scott Arniel" label="Scott Arniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="15148" end="15165" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390184" start="15170" end="15182" title="Jack Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Jack Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001168" start="15335" end="15350" title="Samuel Påhlsson" label="Samuel Pahlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q382160" start="15366" end="15383" title="Curtis McElhinney" label="Curtis McElhinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260889" start="15566" end="15578" title="Scott Howson" label="Scott Howson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="15718" end="15734" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q898139" start="15757" end="15773" title="Brandon Dubinsky" label="Brandon Dubinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q713347" start="15775" end="15789" title="Artem Anisimov" label="Artem Anisimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859540" start="15800" end="15810" title="Tim Erixon" label="Tim Erixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="15853" end="15873" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="15993" end="16006" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="16019" end="16035" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="16037" end="16044" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="16052" end="16067" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="2012–13 lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228719" start="16146" end="16159" title="John Davidson (ice hockey)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683539" start="16316" end="16332" title="Jarmo Kekäläinen" label="Jarmo Kekalainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="16377" end="16386" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357204" start="16408" end="16415" title="Jokerit" label="Jokerit"/>
<link wikidata="Q456107" start="16431" end="16439" title="SM-liiga" label="SM-liiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="16581" end="16595" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="16668" end="16682" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116323" start="16848" end="16869" title="Metropolitan Division" label="Metropolitan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="16903" end="16917" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="17065" end="17084" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="17086" end="17103" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="17105" end="17123" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="17125" end="17141" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="17143" end="17162" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="17164" end="17183" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="17188" end="17207" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q250601" start="17255" end="17271" title="Patrick Division" label="Patrick Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="17398" end="17410" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530074" start="17510" end="17523" title="Rich Peverley" label="Rich Peverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336921" start="17623" end="17636" title="Nathan Horton" label="Nathan Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="17809" end="17828" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="17855" end="17880" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q595460" start="17988" end="18008" title="Consol Energy Center" label="Consol Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="18021" end="18031" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390184" start="18084" end="18096" title="Jack Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Jack Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442498" start="18276" end="18288" title="Mark Letestu" label="Mark Letestu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200059" start="18293" end="18308" title="Derek MacKenzie" label="Derek MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q427223" start="18477" end="18489" title="Matt Calvert" label="Matt Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q166503" start="18621" end="18637" title="Nationwide Arena" label="Nationwide Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943642" start="18702" end="18714" title="Boone Jenner" label="Boone Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q984230" start="18719" end="18732" title="Ryan Johansen" label="Ryan Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898139" start="18788" end="18804" title="Brandon Dubinsky" label="Brandon Dubinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q368554" start="18905" end="18922" title="Marc-André Fleury" label="Marc-Andre Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="18924" end="18936" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="19201" end="19215" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="19418" end="19434" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q898139" start="19436" end="19452" title="Brandon Dubinsky" label="Brandon Dubinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390184" start="19454" end="19466" title="Jack Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Jack Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899364" start="19472" end="19483" title="Ryan Murray" label="Ryan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="19864" end="19876" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953740" start="20061" end="20071" title="Marko Daňo" label="Marko Dano"/>
<link wikidata="Q713347" start="20076" end="20090" title="Artem Anisimov" label="Artem Anisimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q784585" start="20111" end="20123" title="Jeremy Morin" label="Jeremy Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q552866" start="20128" end="20139" title="Corey Tropp" label="Corey Tropp"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="20148" end="20166" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q389490" start="20183" end="20195" title="Brandon Saad" label="Brandon Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20033511" start="20420" end="20436" title="Michael Paliotta" label="Michael Paliotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212710" start="20441" end="20456" title="Alex Broadhurst" label="Alex Broadhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367303" start="20497" end="20513" title="Gregory Campbell (ice hockey)" label="Gregory Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="20523" end="20536" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="20632" end="20646" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378237" start="20921" end="20936" title="John Tortorella" label="John Tortorella"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="21016" end="21035" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014741" start="21063" end="21073" title="Seth Jones" label="Seth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="21457" end="21471" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="21581" end="21599" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="21655" end="21670" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="21971" end="21988" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="22174" end="22193" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051437" start="22433" end="22446" title="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2017 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="22957" end="22971" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23799569" start="22976" end="22987" title="Tyler Motte" label="Tyler Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q50912481" start="23035" end="23039" title="2018 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q717078" start="23441" end="23453" title="Matt Duchene" label="Matt Duchene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228634" start="23458" end="23470" title="Ryan Dzingel" label="Ryan Dzingel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62004249" start="23529" end="23542" title="2019 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2019 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q74108195" start="23579" end="23584" title="2019 Tampa Bay Lightning–Columbus Blue Jackets playoff series" label="swept"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="23589" end="23612" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="23620" end="23639" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="23754" end="23767" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24022" end="24039" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="24255" end="24274" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621212" start="24542" end="24559" title="Pierre-Luc Dubois" label="Pierre-Luc Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="24679" end="24693" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="24742" end="24758" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="24942" end="24946" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="24983" end="24996" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17382085" start="25021" end="25033" title="Patrik Laine" label="Patrik Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20727776" start="25038" end="25051" title="Jack Roslovic" label="Jack Roslovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018760" start="25083" end="25095" title="David Savard" label="David Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="25108" end="25120" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q377033" start="25631" end="25642" title="Brad Larsen" label="Brad Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014741" start="25675" end="25685" title="Seth Jones" label="Seth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40592571" start="25760" end="25772" title="Adam Boqvist" label="Adam Boqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="25779" end="25783" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q102077303" start="25802" end="25816" title="Cole Sillinger" label="Cole Sillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027900" start="25823" end="25835" title="Cam Atkinson" label="Cam Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="26075" end="26090" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42270654" start="26127" end="26144" title="Matīss Kivlenieks" label="Matiss Kivlenieks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238428" start="26385" end="26401" title="Elvis Merzļikins" label="Elvis Merzlikins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604309" start="27083" end="27104" title="goals against average" label="goals against average"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="27402" end="27416" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q94064" start="27427" end="27442" title="Johnny Gaudreau" label="Johnny Gaudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353957" start="27519" end="27534" title="Erik Gudbranson" label="Erik Gudbranson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439741" start="28157" end="28175" title="Oliver Bjorkstrand" label="Oliver Bjorkstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422166" start="28183" end="28197" title="Seattle Kraken" label="Seattle Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="28202" end="28206" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662630" start="28425" end="28438" title="Zach Werenski" label="Zach Werenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q128328" start="28587" end="28601" title="Gustav Nyquist" label="Gustav Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276024" start="28688" end="28704" title="Joonas Korpisalo" label="Joonas Korpisalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20066382" start="28720" end="28738" title="Vladislav Gavrikov" label="Vladislav Gavrikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="28835" end="28849" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="29068" end="29081" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19972647" start="29406" end="29419" title="Ivan Provorov" label="Ivan Provorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18247523" start="29479" end="29493" title="Damon Severson" label="Damon Severson"/>
<link wikidata="Q646123" start="29561" end="29573" title="Mike Babcock" label="Mike Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="29675" end="29695" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q114924131" start="29748" end="29761" title="Adam Fantilli" label="Adam Fantilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837801" start="29771" end="29793" title="Michigan Wolverines men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q114494867" start="29882" end="29904" title="Spittin&amp;#x27; Chiclets" label="Spittin&amp;#x27; Chiclets"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="29929" end="29934" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="NHLPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378275" start="30050" end="30064" title="Pascal Vincent" label="Pascal Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239566" start="30291" end="30302" title="Don Waddell" label="Don Waddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="30513" end="30527" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181066" start="30534" end="30545" title="Dean Evason" label="Dean Evason"/>
<link wikidata="Q125388817" start="30618" end="30632" title="2024–25 NHL season" label="2024–25 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309330" start="30717" end="30730" title="drunk driving" label="drunk driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074464" start="30748" end="30776" title="Oldmans Township, New Jersey" label="Oldmans Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q166503" start="30912" end="30928" title="Nationwide Arena" label="Nationwide Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="31066" end="31075" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="31148" end="31163" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="31407" end="31431" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="31433" end="31449" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="31451" end="31466" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="31471" end="31484" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q986005" start="31520" end="31535" title="Lancaster, Ohio" label="Lancaster, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004793" start="31571" end="31584" title="U.S. Route 33 in Ohio" label="U.S. Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257637" start="31600" end="31629" title="John Sherman Birthplace" label="his childhood home and museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027060" start="31681" end="31691" title="Camp Chase" label="Camp Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090042" start="31696" end="31707" title="Camp Thomas (Ohio)" label="Camp Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q752559" start="31889" end="31901" title="flag of Ohio" label="flag of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="32179" end="32185" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="32213" end="32227" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="32295" end="32312" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="32751" end="32757" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124735163" start="33423" end="33446" title="2025 NHL Stadium Series" label="2025 NHL Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="33980" end="33994" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34054" end="34067" title="Field artillery in the American Civil War#12-pounder Napoleon" label="1857 Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="34068" end="34074" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166503" start="34080" end="34096" title="Nationwide Arena" label="Nationwide Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393681" start="34336" end="34375" title="For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)" label="For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="34385" end="34390" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665828" start="34476" end="34484" title="Locksley (band)" label="Locksley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080191" start="34506" end="34533" title="FanDuel Sports Network Ohio" label="FanDuel Sports Network Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684765" start="34535" end="34546" title="Steve Mears" label="Steve Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q360233" start="34624" end="34636" title="Jody Shelley" label="Jody Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q710396" start="34810" end="34831" title="Jean-Luc Grand-Pierre" label="Jean-Luc Grand-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947321" start="34852" end="34859" title="WBNS-FM" label="WBNS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947323" start="34872" end="34876" title="WBNS (AM)" label="WBNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947516" start="34889" end="34893" title="WXZX" label="WXZX"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="34994" end="35004" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="35005" end="35013" title="Ohio State Buckeyes Football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080912" start="35017" end="35038" title="Ohio State Buckeyes men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150007" start="35048" end="35064" title="Columbus Blue Jackets Radio Network" label="other affiliates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="35068" end="35072" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="35077" end="35090" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542246" start="35298" end="35313" title="George Matthews (broadcaster)" label="George Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="35509" end="35516" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q435873" start="36319" end="36356" title="List of Columbus Blue Jackets seasons" label="List of Columbus Blue Jackets seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q977018" start="36575" end="36587" title="Lyle Odelein" label="Lyle Odelein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342855" start="36601" end="36612" title="Ray Whitney (ice hockey)" label="Ray Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q437846" start="36626" end="36641" title="Luke Richardson" label="Luke Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q349347" start="36655" end="36665" title="Adam Foote" label="Adam Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="36679" end="36688" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="36702" end="36714" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943642" start="36728" end="36740" title="Boone Jenner" label="Boone Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="36787" end="36791" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q727106" start="36793" end="36809" title="Rostislav Klesla" label="Rostislav Klesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="36826" end="36830" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261834" start="36832" end="36847" title="Pascal Leclaire" label="Pascal Leclaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="36864" end="36868" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="36870" end="36879" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854869" start="36896" end="36900" title="2003 NHL entry draft" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342208" start="36902" end="36917" title="Nikolay Zherdev" label="Nikolay Zherdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="36934" end="36938" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q549125" start="36940" end="36956" title="Alexandre Picard (ice hockey)" label="Alexandre Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="36973" end="36977" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523935" start="36979" end="36992" title="Gilbert Brulé" label="Gilbert Brule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="37009" end="37013" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200180" start="37015" end="37030" title="Derick Brassard" label="Derick Brassard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="37047" end="37051" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341638" start="37053" end="37066" title="Jakub Voráček" label="Jakub Voracek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="37083" end="37087" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q248990" start="37089" end="37103" title="Nikita Filatov" label="Nikita Filatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="37120" end="37124" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q527195" start="37126" end="37136" title="John Moore (ice hockey)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="37154" end="37158" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q984230" start="37160" end="37173" title="Ryan Johansen" label="Ryan Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="37190" end="37194" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899364" start="37196" end="37207" title="Ryan Murray" label="Ryan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="37224" end="37228" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720354" start="37230" end="37248" title="Alexander Wennberg" label="Alexander Wennberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581455" start="37265" end="37277" title="Kerby Rychel" label="Kerby Rychel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953740" start="37298" end="37308" title="Marko Daňo" label="Marko Dano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="37326" end="37330" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229770" start="37332" end="37344" title="Sonny Milano" label="Sonny Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="37362" end="37366" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662630" start="37368" end="37381" title="Zach Werenski" label="Zach Werenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518796" start="37400" end="37416" title="Gabriel Carlsson" label="Gabriel Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="37434" end="37438" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621212" start="37440" end="37457" title="Pierre-Luc Dubois" label="Pierre-Luc Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="37474" end="37478" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q55183447" start="37480" end="37490" title="Liam Foudy" label="Liam Foudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="37508" end="37512" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q100150011" start="37514" end="37529" title="Yegor Chinakhov" label="Yegor Chinakhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="37547" end="37551" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980587" start="37553" end="37565" title="Kent Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Kent Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q102077303" start="37581" end="37595" title="Cole Sillinger" label="Cole Sillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107677623" start="37616" end="37632" title="Corson Ceulemans" label="Corson Ceulemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="37650" end="37654" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q101429563" start="37656" end="37669" title="David Jiříček" label="David Jiricek"/>
<link wikidata="Q81905280" start="37688" end="37704" title="Denton Mateychuk" label="Denton Mateychuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="37722" end="37726" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q114924131" start="37728" end="37741" title="Adam Fantilli" label="Adam Fantilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127690" start="37758" end="37762" title="2024 NHL entry draft" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q124382615" start="37764" end="37780" title="Cayden Lindstrom" label="Cayden Lindstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="37833" end="37846" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="37893" end="37915" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q94064" start="37941" end="37956" title="Johnny Gaudreau" label="Johnny Gaudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236967" start="37965" end="37982" title="John H. McConnell" label="John H. McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q368501" start="38007" end="38021" title="Sergei Fedorov" label="Sergei Fedorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="38038" end="38051" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="38095" end="38136" title="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy" label="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="38139" end="38148" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="38150" end="38157" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="38159" end="38172" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="38175" end="38191" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="38193" end="38200" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38202" end="38209" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="38211" end="38233" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033859" start="38236" end="38247" title="Steve Mason (ice hockey)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="38249" end="38256" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q250753" start="38258" end="38285" title="King Clancy Memorial Trophy" label="King Clancy Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="38288" end="38300" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38302" end="38309" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="38311" end="38327" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378237" start="38330" end="38345" title="John Tortorella" label="John Tortorella"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38347" end="38354" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550433" start="38356" end="38385" title="Mark Messier Leadership Award" label="Mark Messier Leadership Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q943363" start="38388" end="38400" title="Nick Foligno" label="Nick Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38402" end="38409" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789265" start="38411" end="38438" title="NHL Foundation Player Award" label="NHL Foundation Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="38441" end="38450" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="38452" end="38459" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="38461" end="38484" title="NHL All-Star team" label="NHL first All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="38487" end="38503" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="38505" end="38512" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38514" end="38521" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="38523" end="38547" title="NHL All-Star team" label="NHL second All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033859" start="38550" end="38561" title="Steve Mason (ice hockey)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="38563" end="38570" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014741" start="38573" end="38583" title="Seth Jones" label="Seth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="38585" end="38592" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960831" start="38594" end="38613" title="NHL All-Rookie Team" label="NHL All-Rookie Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q727106" start="38616" end="38632" title="Rostislav Klesla" label="Rostislav Klesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="38634" end="38641" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="38644" end="38653" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="38655" end="38662" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033859" start="38665" end="38676" title="Steve Mason (ice hockey)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="38678" end="38685" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662630" start="38688" end="38701" title="Zach Werenski" label="Zach Werenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38703" end="38710" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238428" start="38713" end="38729" title="Elvis Merzļikins" label="Elvis Merzlikins"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="38731" end="38738" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="39145" end="39159" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456741" start="39184" end="39193" title="Rick Nash" label="Rick Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027900" start="39208" end="39220" title="Cam Atkinson" label="Cam Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q593699" start="39247" end="39261" title="Artemi Panarin" label="Artemi Panarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027900" start="39299" end="39311" title="Cam Atkinson" label="Cam Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q360233" start="39345" end="39357" title="Jody Shelley" label="Jody Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018760" start="39388" end="39400" title="David Savard" label="David Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662630" start="39443" end="39456" title="Zach Werenski" label="Zach Werenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662630" start="39496" end="39509" title="Zach Werenski" label="Zach Werenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662630" start="39552" end="39565" title="Zach Werenski" label="Zach Werenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621212" start="39602" end="39619" title="Pierre-Luc Dubois" label="Pierre-Luc Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="39643" end="39659" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033859" start="39699" end="39710" title="Steve Mason (ice hockey)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="39751" end="39767" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365299" start="39804" end="39820" title="Sergei Bobrovsky" label="Sergei Bobrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q715472" start="39847" end="39857" title="Marc Denis" label="Marc Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033859" start="39933" end="39944" title="Steve Mason (ice hockey)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112747" start="40050" end="40064" title="Columbus Chill" label="Columbus Chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112813" start="40067" end="40080" title="Columbus Owls" label="Columbus Owls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381706" start="40083" end="40129" title="List of Columbus Blue Jackets general managers" label="List of Columbus Blue Jackets general managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377991" start="40132" end="40174" title="List of Columbus Blue Jackets head coaches" label="List of Columbus Blue Jackets head coaches"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73129" wikidata="Q205973" url="?curid=73129" title="Edmonton Oilers">
<text>The Edmonton Oilers are a professional ice hockey team based in Edmonton. The Oilers compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Pacific Division in the Western Conference. They play their home games at Rogers Place, which opened in 2016. Kris Knoblauch is the head coach , and Stan Bowman was named general manager on July 24, 2024. The Oilers are one of two NHL franchises based in Alberta, the other being the Calgary Flames. Their proximity has led to a fierce rivalry known as the &quot;Battle of Alberta&quot;.

The Oilers were founded in 1971 by W. D. &quot;Wild Bill&quot; Hunter and Dr. Chuck Allard and played its first season in 1972–73 as one of the twelve founding franchises of the major professional World Hockey Association (WHA). They were intended to be one of two WHA Alberta teams along with the Calgary Broncos. However, when the Broncos relocated and became the Cleveland Crusaders before the WHA&#x27;s first season began, the team was named the Alberta Oilers. They were renamed the Edmonton Oilers the following year and subsequently joined the NHL in 1979 as one of four franchises absorbed through the NHL–WHA merger.

After joining the NHL, the Oilers went on to win the Stanley Cup on five occasions: 1983–84, 1984–85, 1986–87, 1987–88 and 1989–90. Along with the Pittsburgh Penguins, they are tied for the most championships won by any team since the NHL–WHA merger, as well as the most won by any team that joined the league in or after 1967. Among all NHL teams, only the Montreal Canadiens have won the Stanley Cup more times since the league&#x27;s 1967 expansion. The Oilers also won six straight division titles from 1981–82 through 1986–87. Notably, however, the Oilers have not won a division title since 1987, a drought that includes their most recent two Stanley Cup wins and is the longest division title drought in all of the North American major professional sports. For their overall success in the 1980s and early 1990s, the Oilers team of this era has been honoured with dynasty status by the Hockey Hall of Fame.

The Oilers began to struggle after coming up short in the 2006 Stanley Cup Finals, missing the playoffs for the subsequent ten seasons. The Oilers have made nineteen first-round selections in the NHL entry draft since 2007: ten within the first ten picks overall, six within the first four picks, and four the first overall selections. With those first overall picks, Edmonton selected Taylor Hall, Ryan Nugent-Hopkins, Nail Yakupov and Connor McDavid; of these, Nugent-Hopkins and McDavid remained with the team, helping them reach the 2024 Stanley Cup Finals where they lost to the Florida Panthers in seven games.

==History==
===WHA years (1972–1979)===
On November 1, 1971, the Edmonton Oilers became 1 of the 12 founding WHA franchises. The original owners were &quot;Wild Bill&quot; Hunter (1920–2002) and partner, Dr. Charles A. &quot;Chuck&quot; Allard (1919–1991) (father of Vancouver lawyer Peter Allard) who, a decade later, also brought the &quot;SCTV&quot; sketch comedy TV series to Edmonton. Hunter also owned the Edmonton Oil Kings, a junior hockey franchise, and founded the Canadian Major Junior Hockey League (now known as the Western Hockey League (WHL)). Hunter&#x27;s efforts to bring major professional hockey to Edmonton via an expansion NHL franchise had been rebuffed by the NHL. So, he looked to the upstart WHA instead. It was Hunter who chose the &quot;Oilers&quot; name for the new WHA franchise. This was a name that had previously been used as a nickname for the Edmonton Oil Kings in the 1950s and 1960s. Hunter also served as head coach during 1972–73, 1974–75 and 1975–76 seasons.

After the newly founded Calgary Broncos folded before the commencement of the inaugural WHA season, the Oilers were renamed the Alberta Oilers as it was planned to split their home games between Edmonton and Calgary. Possibly for financial reasons or to allow for a less complicated return of the WHA to Calgary, though, the team ultimately played all of its home games in the Edmonton Gardens and changed its name back to the Edmonton Oilers the following year. They won the first game in WHA history 7–4 over the Ottawa Nationals.

The Oilers drew fans with players such as defenceman and team captain Al Hamilton, goaltender Dave Dryden and forwards Blair MacDonald and Bill Flett. However, a relatively little-noticed move in 1976 had an important impact on the history of the franchise. That year, journeyman forward Glen Sather was acquired by the Oilers. It turned out to be his final season as a player and he was named player-coach late in the season, moving to the bench full-time after the season. Sather was the coach or general manager of the Oilers for the next 23 years.

Although the Oilers&#x27; on-ice performance for most of the WHA&#x27;s history was mediocre, they remained well-supported and financially stable by WHA standards. In 1976, Hunter and Allard sold the franchise to Vancouver real estate tycoon Nelson Skalbania, who later became notorious for flipping property, both real and franchised. Skalbania soon made local businessman Peter Pocklington a full partner, then sold his shares to him the following year. The team&#x27;s fortunes improved dramatically in 1978 when Pocklington acquired underage player Wayne Gretzky, as well as goaltender Eddie Mio and forward Peter Driscoll, for cash, from Skalbania&#x27;s recently folded Indianapolis Racers.

His first year of WHA experience prevented Gretzky from being an official 1979–80 NHL rookie; his first and only WHA season, 1978–79, saw the Oilers finish first in the WHA standings, posting a league-best 48–30–2 record. However, Edmonton failed to win the championship, as they fell to the Winnipeg Jets in the Avco World Trophy finals. Dave Semenko of the Oilers scored the last goal in WHA history in the third period of the final game, which they lost 7–3.

The Oilers joined the NHL for 1979–80, along with fellow WHA teams Hartford Whalers, Quebec Nordiques and the Jets following a merger agreement between the two leagues. Of these four teams, only Edmonton has avoided relocation and renaming; the Nordiques became the Colorado Avalanche in 1995, the Jets became the Phoenix Coyotes in 1996 and the Whalers became the Carolina Hurricanes in 1997.

===Entry into the NHL (1979–1983)===

The Oilers lost most of the players from 1978–79 when the NHL held a reclamation draft of players who had bolted to the upstart league as they were allowed to protect two goaltenders and two skaters. Originally, Gretzky was not eligible to be protected; under the rules of the time, he normally would have been placed in the entry draft pool. However, Pocklington had signed him to a 21-year personal services contract in 1979 and Pocklington used the contract to force the NHL to admit the Oilers and allow the Oilers to keep Gretzky.

Upon joining the NHL, the Oilers were placed in the Campbell Conference&#x27;s Smythe Division. They were mediocre during the regular season in their first two seasons, finishing sixteenth and fourteenth respectively. However, because 16 of the 21 NHL teams made the playoffs at the time, the Oilers were still able to get their young players experience in the playoffs (they made the playoffs for their first 13 years in the NHL). They won only one playoff series in their first three NHL seasons, though, upsetting the Montreal Canadiens in 1980–81. Gretzky set new NHL records in 1980–81 for assists (109) and points (164). Also, they still had great draft positions. This allowed the Oilers to put together a young, talented, experienced team quickly. Within three years, Sather and chief scout Barry Fraser had drafted several players who would have an important role in the team&#x27;s success, including Mark Messier, Glenn Anderson, Jari Kurri, Paul Coffey, Kevin Lowe, Grant Fuhr and Andy Moog.

The Oilers improved in 1981–82, finishing second overall. Grant Fuhr emerged as the starting goaltender and he set a rookie record by going undefeated in 23 straight games. However, Gretzky stole the show by setting the single-season record for goals with 92 and becoming the first player in NHL history to score 200 points (with 212). Gretzky&#x27;s accomplishments helped the Oilers become the first team to score 400 goals in a season, a feat they accomplished for five straight years. However, they were upset by the Los Angeles Kings in five games (Game 3 of this series, the Miracle on Manchester, saw the Oilers take a 5–0 lead into the third period, only to lose 6–5 in overtime).

In 1982–83, the Oilers finished third overall in the NHL. They advanced all the way to the Stanley Cup Finals (losing only once in the process) before getting swept by defending Stanley Cup champion New York Islanders. During this season, Gretzky, Messier, Anderson and Kurri all topped 100 points, with Coffey not far behind at 96. After the season, Lee Fogolin resigned as captain of the Oilers, picking Gretzky as his successor.

===Dynasty years (1983–1990)===

In 1983–84, the Oilers finished first overall in the NHL, winning a franchise record 57 games and earning 119 points (15 points ahead of the second-place Islanders). They were the first team to feature three players with 50 goals (Gretzky, Kurri, and Anderson). Gretzky started strong by scoring at least a point in the first 51 games of the season. Paul Coffey became the second defenceman ever to score forty goals in a season (with forty exactly). The team scored a total of 446 goals as a team, an NHL record. The Oilers were so determined to win the Stanley Cup that they hired Roger Neilson as a video analyst. They started the playoffs strongly by sweeping the Winnipeg Jets in the Smythe Division semifinals. They faced a tougher test in the Calgary Flames, but they defeated them in seven games in the division finals. They then swept the Minnesota North Stars in the conference finals to earn a rematch with the Islanders in the Stanley Cup Finals. The Oilers split the first two games in Long Island but then won three in a row in Edmonton to become the first former WHA team to win the Stanley Cup. After the series, Mark Messier was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoff MVP.

The following season, the Oilers finished second overall in the NHL with 49 wins and 109 points. Gretzky led the NHL in goals with 73, and Kurri was close behind with a career-high 71. Gretzky also became the youngest player in NHL history to score one thousand points. In the playoffs, the Oilers swept the Kings in the opening round and Jets in round two. They won the first two games of the conference finals against the Chicago Blackhawks but lost the next two before winning the final two and returning to the Stanley Cup Finals. Edmonton lost the first game to Philadelphia but won the next four to win the Stanley Cup for the second year in a row. Paul Coffey had a playoff performance to remember, setting records for most goals (12), assists (25), and points (37) ever by a defenceman in a playoff year. In addition, Jari Kurri tied Reggie Leach&#x27;s record for most goals in a playoff year, with 19. However, Gretzky won the Conn Smythe Trophy after setting the record for most points in a playoff year (47). The 1984–85 Oilers were voted as the greatest NHL team of all-time during the league&#x27;s centennial celebrations in 2017.
Despite off-season legal issues, the Oilers were again the top team in the NHL during the 1985–86 season, with 56 wins and 119 points. They won the inaugural Presidents&#x27; Trophy, the trophy given to the team with the best regular season record. Gretzky, Kurri, and Anderson each scored 50 goals again. Kurri led the NHL in goals with 68, finishing with 131 points. Paul Coffey set a new record for most goals in a season by a defenceman (48) and just missed setting a new record for points by a defenceman with 138 (Bobby Orr scored 139 in 1970–71). Gretzky also set records for assists (163) and points (215). However, the Oilers failed to win their third-straight Stanley Cup, as the Calgary Flames defeated them in seven games in the second round. In the third period of a 2–2 tie during Game 7, Steve Smith, a rookie for the Oilers, accidentally sent the puck into his own net on his birthday. This goal stood as the series-winning goal.

The 1986–87 season saw the Oilers capture their second straight Presidents&#x27; Trophy with 50 wins and 106 points. Gretzky and Kurri were first and second in the NHL point-scoring race, while Messier was fourth. Edmonton returned to the Stanley Cup Finals and faced the same opponent as they had in 1985, the Philadelphia Flyers. The Oilers took a three-games-to-one lead in the series. However, strong goaltending by Flyers&#x27; rookie Ron Hextall forced a Game 7, which the Oilers won, 3–1. In the post-game celebration, Gretzky immediately passed the Stanley Cup to Steve Smith, vindicated after his costly blunder the previous season. Hextall won the Conn Smythe Trophy.

The Oilers began losing star players in 1987–88. Paul Coffey sat out the first 21 games of the season before getting traded to the Pittsburgh Penguins. Andy Moog also failed to report; he was tired of being the backup goalie. Moog played for the Canadian Olympic team in the 1988 Winter Olympics before getting traded to the Boston Bruins for Bill Ranford. Despite the changes, the Oilers placed third overall in the NHL. Grant Fuhr started a league-record 75 games (which has now been broken) and posted a team-record 40 wins. In the first round of the playoffs, the Oilers dispatched the third-place Winnipeg Jets in five games. The Oilers then defeated first-overall Calgary in a sweep. In the conference finals against the Detroit Red Wings, the Oilers prevailed in five games. The Oilers then swept the Boston Bruins in four games. The fourth game had to be re-played because of a cancellation. With the score tied 3–3 with 3:23 to play in the second period, a power outage hit the Boston Garden, forcing cancellation of the entire game. The Oilers won the next game (originally scheduled as game five) back in Edmonton 6–3 to complete the series sweep. However, all player statistics for the aborted game four in Boston are counted in the NHL record books. Gretzky won the Conn Smythe Trophy after leading the playoffs in scoring with 43 points. After the Cup-clinching game, Gretzky implored his teammates, coaches, trainers, and others from the Oilers organization to join at centre ice for an impromptu team photo with the Stanley Cup. This started a tradition since continued by every subsequent Stanley Cup champion. After the season, Fuhr was awarded the Vezina Trophy as the NHL&#x27;s top goaltender.

====After Gretzky (1988–1990)====

In a surprising and shocking trade, Gretzky, along with enforcer Marty McSorley and centre Mike Krushelnyski, were traded to the Los Angeles Kings on August 9, 1988. In exchange, the Oilers received US$15 million, young star Jimmy Carson, 1988 first-round draft choice Martin Gelinas, and the Kings&#x27; first-round draft picks in 1989, 1991, and 1993. The trade occurred because Pocklington did not want to risk Gretzky leaving Edmonton without getting anything in return. Gretzky had converted his chance at free agency and refused, which ultimately led to the trade. None of this was public knowledge at the time. However, the Oilers and their fans were still upset. Nelson Riis, the New Democratic Party leader in Canada&#x27;s House of Commons, went so far as to ask the government to block the trade. Several of the Oilers considered launching a team-wide strike and even considered demanding that Pocklington sell the team.

The loss of Gretzky had an immediate impact in 1988–89, as the Oilers were only able to finish in third place in their division. Mark Messier was chosen to succeed Gretzky as captain. Coincidentally, the Oilers&#x27; first-round playoff opponent was Gretzky&#x27;s Los Angeles Kings. Edmonton took a commanding 3–1 series lead, but Gretzky and the Kings fought back to win the series, winning Game 7 6–3 in Los Angeles. It was the first time since 1982 that the Oilers had been eliminated from the playoffs in the first round.

The Oilers underwent more changes during the 1989–90 season. John Muckler replaced Sather, who remained general manager and became the Oilers&#x27; president, as head coach of the team. During training camp, Grant Fuhr came down with a severe case of appendicitis. He missed the first ten games of the season and when he returned he suffered a shoulder injury that eventually sidelined him for the remainder of the season. This marked the emergence of Bill Ranford as a starter. Four games into the season, Jimmy Carson decided the pressure of playing in Edmonton was too intense and he was traded to Detroit with Kevin McClelland in exchange for Petr Klima, Adam Graves, Joe Murphy and Jeff Sharples. The Oilers improved on their previous season, finishing with 38 wins and 90 points, good for fifth place overall in the NHL. Messier had 45 goals and 84 assists for 129 points, good for second in the NHL scoring race (behind only Gretzky).

In the first round, the Oilers faced the Winnipeg Jets. Trailing the series 3–1 and trailing Game 5 by an identical score, the Oilers rallied to win the next three and take the series. In the division final, the Oilers met Los Angeles for the second straight season. Edmonton swept the series 4–0, outscoring the Kings 22–10. The Oilers then met the Chicago Blackhawks in the conference finals and fell behind 2–1 in the series. However, the Oilers won the next three games to earn a rematch of the 1988 Stanley Cup Finals with Boston. The series is remembered for Game 1, still the longest Stanley Cup Finals game played in the modern NHL. Despite being soundly outshot by the Bruins, the Oilers won the game 3–2 when Klima—benched for much of the game and thus the only player on either team who was not exhausted—scored at 15:13 of the third overtime. The Oilers defeated the Bruins in five games and won their first Cup without Gretzky. For his superlative goaltending, Bill Ranford won the Conn Smythe Trophy.

===Decline in success (1990–1996)===
The Oilers lost another important player before the 1990–91 season, as Jari Kurri chose to play the entire season with Devils Milano. Grant Fuhr was suspended for 60 games for drug abuse. The season itself was not great for the Oilers, who finished with 37 wins and 80 points, in third place in the Smythe Division. In the playoffs, the Oilers met the Flames in the opening round, winning a thrilling series in seven games, led by seven goals by Esa Tikkanen. Despite injuries suffered in the series with Calgary, they next defeated the Los Angeles Kings in six games. However, their success did not continue into the conference finals, as they lost in five games to the Minnesota North Stars.

The final star players from the Oilers left before the 1991–92 season. Fuhr and Glenn Anderson were traded to Toronto, Steve Smith was traded to Chicago, and Kurri was traded to Philadelphia. Charlie Huddy was claimed by Minnesota in the expansion draft, and Mark Messier was traded to the New York Rangers a day after the season began. The Oilers even lost their head coach, as John Muckler left to become head coach and general manager of the Buffalo Sabres. Ted Green replaced Muckler as head coach, and Kevin Lowe succeeded Messier as captain.

Despite the number of changes, the Oilers produced a comparable season to 1990–91, finishing third in the Smythe Division with 36 wins and 82 points. In the first round of the playoffs, the Oilers again met the Los Angeles Kings. Again, for the third time since the Gretzky trade, the Oilers defeated the Kings. In the next round, the Oilers defeated the Vancouver Canucks in six games to return to the conference finals for the third straight season, this time facing the Chicago Blackhawks. However, the Oilers&#x27; unexpected run in the playoffs came to a crashing halt, as the Blackhawks dominated every game and swept the series.

The departures of the stars from the 1980s exposed serious deficiencies in the Oilers&#x27; development system. They had done a poor job of drafting during the dynasty years, and the younger players had not had enough time to develop before the core of the 1980s dynasty left the team. This did not become apparent for a few years; as noted above, the Oilers still had enough heft to make the conference finals two years in a row. However, it was obvious that they were nowhere near being the powerhouse that had dominated the league in the previous half-decade. In 1992–93, they missed the playoffs for the first time as an NHL team. They did not return to the postseason for four years, despite the emergence of young centremen Doug Weight and Jason Arnott. In the 1993–94 season, the Oilers were placed into the Western Conference&#x27;s Pacific Division.

===Return to the playoffs and seventh Cup Finals appearance (1996–2006)===
In 1996–97, the Oilers made the playoffs for the first time in five years, thanks to stellar goaltending by Curtis Joseph. In the first round, they upset the Dallas Stars, who had compiled the league&#x27;s second-best record, in a seven-game series. The Oilers won game seven on a goal by Todd Marchant in overtime. However, the Oilers&#x27; surprise playoff run failed to continue, as the Colorado Avalanche defeated them in the next round. In 1997–98, Joseph led the Oilers to another first-round upset. After Colorado took a 3–1 series lead, the Oilers held them scoreless for eight straight periods en route to winning the series in seven games. Dallas and Edmonton met again in the second round, but this time, the Stars were the victors. The Oilers made the playoffs in four of the next six years, but they were defeated after the first round every time.
Despite their success over the past two seasons, the Oilers were in trouble off the ice. Owner Peter Pocklington had explored moving the Oilers to Minnesota during the 1990s. In 1998, Pocklington almost made a deal to sell the team to Leslie Alexander, the owner of the Houston Rockets of the National Basketball Association (NBA), who would have moved the team to Houston, Texas. On March 14, 1998, hours before the deadline to keep the team in Edmonton, the Edmonton Investors Group agreed to pay $70 million to buy the club. The EIG were spearheaded by Cal Nichols, who committed to retaining NHL hockey in Edmonton. The deal was finalized on May 5, and thus prevented them from being the third Canadian team to move in the 1990s and the fourth former WHA team to move in successive years (Quebec had moved in 1995, Winnipeg in 1996 and Hartford in 1997). The Oilers received support from the NHL for this very reason. In the 1998–99 season, the Oilers joined the Western Conference&#x27;s Northwest Division.

On November 22, 2003, the Oilers hosted the 2003 Heritage Classic, the first regular season outdoor hockey game in the NHL&#x27;s history and part of the celebrations of the Oilers&#x27; 25th season in the NHL. They were defeated by the Montreal Canadiens 4–3 in front of more than 55,000 fans, an NHL attendance record, at Commonwealth Stadium in Edmonton. The Oilers failed to make the playoffs in the 2003–04 season.

The Oilers struggled with their small-market status for several years, but after the wiped-out 2004–05 season, they were aided by a Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the NHL owners and players. This included a league-wide salary cap that essentially forced all teams to conform to a budget, as the Oilers had been doing for years. A more reasonable conversion rate of Canadian dollar revenues to US dollar payroll in the new millennium also helped the Oilers to return to profitability. Because of this, Edmonton was able to acquire Chris Pronger (former winner of the Hart and Norris Trophies) and Michael Peca (two-time Frank J. Selke Trophy winner) before the 2005–06 season.
The team suffered from inconsistency during the first few months of the regular season, especially in goal and offence. Goaltenders Ty Conklin and Jussi Markkanen were unreliable in net and Peca also struggled with offence. However, in-season acquisitions, such as defencemen Jaroslav Spacek and Dick Tarnstrom, goaltender Dwayne Roloson and left winger Sergei Samsonov, helped Edmonton finish the season with 95 points and clinch the final playoff spot in the Western Conference over Vancouver.

In the first round of the playoffs, the Oilers played the Detroit Red Wings (winners of the Presidents&#x27; Trophy). Despite Detroit&#x27;s much better regular season record, the Oilers pulled off a six-game upset for their first playoff series win since 1998. Edmonton then met the San Jose Sharks in the conference semifinals. After trailing the series two games to none, the team won the next four and became the first eighth-seeded team to reach a conference final since the NHL changed the playoff format in 1994. There, the Oilers beat the sixth-seeded Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in five games, claiming the Clarence S. Campbell Bowl for a seventh time.

In the 2006 Stanley Cup Finals, Edmonton met the Carolina Hurricanes. During Game 1, the Oilers blew a 3–0 lead, lost Dwayne Roloson for the series after he suffered a knee injury, and ultimately lost 5–4 when Carolina&#x27;s captain Rod Brind&#x27;Amour scored the winning goal in the final minute after backup goalie Ty Conklin misplayed the puck. From that game forward, the Oilers used Jussi Markkanen in net. Despite trailing the series 2–0 and 3–1, the Oilers forced a Game 7 with a 2–1 win in Game 3, a Fernando Pisani short-handed overtime winner in Game 5 and a 4–0 shutout for Markkanen in Game 6. However, the Oilers could not complete the comeback as the Hurricanes won Game 7 3–1 to capture their first-ever Stanley Cup.

===Collapse and 10-year playoff drought (2006–2015)===

In the 2006 off-season, many Oilers left the team. Four days after their loss to the Hurricanes, Chris Pronger surprisingly issued a trade request for personal reasons. Pronger was subsequently traded to the Anaheim Ducks in exchange for Joffrey Lupul, Ladislav Smid, and three draft picks. Several Oilers left via free agency and during the season, long-time Oiler Ryan Smyth was traded to the New York Islanders for Ryan O&#x27;Marra, Robert Nilsson and a first-round pick in the 2007 NHL entry draft (used to select Alex Plante). However, the Oilers were able to re-sign Dwayne Roloson and Fernando Pisani. Having lost so many players, the Oilers posted a 32–43–7 record in 2006–07, their worst record since the 1995–96 season, and eventually finished in 11th place in the Western Conference. Throughout the season, the Oilers lost various players to injury and illness; at one point, they had 11 players out of the lineup and had to rely on emergency call-ups to fill their roster.

In 2007–08, the Oilers had a 16–21–4 record after the first half of the season. They improved in the second half of the year, however, going 25–14–2 in 41 games for a final record of 41–35–6. Nonetheless, this was not enough to qualify for the playoffs, as the Oilers finished three points out in ninth place. During the season, Daryl Katz, owner of the Rexall pharmaceutical company, purchased the team from the Edmonton Investors Group. The Oilers announced a restructuring of their hockey operations on July 30, 2008, which saw the promotion of Kevin Lowe to the role of president of hockey operations and was replaced by Steve Tambellini.

The 2008–09 season saw the Oilers finish with a record of 38–35–9, but that was only good enough for 11th in the West. However, one bright spot during the season was Oilers goaltender Dwayne Roloson, as he became the oldest goaltender to play 60 NHL games in one season. After the season, the Oilers fired head coach Craig MacTavish and hired Pat Quinn as his replacement.

Roloson left via free agency at the end of the season, and the Oilers replaced him in goal with Nikolai Khabibulin. The Oilers also worked out a trade with the Ottawa Senators for star right wing Dany Heatley, which would have seen Dustin Penner, Ladislav Smid and Andrew Cogliano go the other way, but Heatley refused a trade to Edmonton and was later acquired by San Jose. 
Following the season, Tom Renney replaced Quinn as the Oilers head coach. The one advantage to such a bad season was that the Oilers were able to make the first pick in the 2010 NHL entry draft. The Oilers selected two-time Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy winner Taylor Hall from the Windsor Spitfires with their pick. They used the off-season to begin the rebuild of the club around their young talent. Patrick O&#x27;Sullivan was traded to the Phoenix Coyotes in exchange for Jim Vandermeer, Robert Nilsson was bought out of his contract and Oilers captain Ethan Moreau was placed on waivers and claimed by the Columbus Blue Jackets. Along with these players, several others were allowed to enter free agency, including Mike Comrie, Marc-Antoine Pouliot and Ryan Potulny. Also during the off-season, radio announcer Rod Phillips announced his retirement. Phillips had been the Oilers&#x27; play-by-play announcer since 1973–74. Phillips called ten specific games in 2010–11 before calling it quits. The 2010–11 Edmonton Oilers season is documented in the series &quot;Oil Change&quot;.
The 2010–11 season brought a new look to the Edmonton Oilers line-up, when Shawn Horcoff was selected to succeed Ethan Moreau as team captain. Horcoff had become the Oilers&#x27; longest-serving player by this point. Taylor Hall, Jordan Eberle and Magnus Paajarvi-Svensson all made their NHL debuts for the team. Despite the influx of their young talent, Edmonton still found themselves at the bottom of the standings. In an attempt to gain valuable prospects and draft picks, Dustin Penner was traded from the Oilers to Los Angeles on February 28, 2011, in exchange for Colten Teubert, a first-round draft pick in 2011 (used to select Oscar Klefbom) and a conditional third-round pick in 2012. At the end of the season, the Oilers were at the bottom of the standings and received the right to choose first overall in the upcoming 2011 NHL entry draft. The Oilers selected Ryan Nugent-Hopkins with the first overall selection, along with several other &quot;blue chip&quot; prospects. During the 2011 off-season, the team again made several moves to bolster the offence and defence, re-acquiring fan favourite Ryan Smyth from Los Angeles for Colin Fraser and a seventh-round draft pick. The team also traded with the Anaheim Ducks to acquire Andy Sutton for Kurtis Foster. Sheldon Souray, who played the entire 2010–11 season in the American Hockey League (AHL) with the Hershey Bears, was bought out of the last year of his contract. These moves, coupled with the signings of Eric Belanger, Cam Barker, Ben Eager and Darcy Hordichuk, changed the complexion of the team, to add &quot;grit and toughness&quot;. However, the Oilers were again unable to qualify for the playoffs for the sixth-straight season, as they finished 14th in the Western Conference.

On May 17, 2012, a month after the ending of the 2011–12 season, the Oilers announced they would not renew the contract of head coach Tom Renney. The following month, Edmonton selected Nail Yakupov as the first overall pick at the 2012 NHL entry draft. A week later, Ralph Krueger was named as the Oilers&#x27; new head coach on June 27, being promoted from his role as associate coach the season previous. Three days later, Edmonton announced they had agreed to terms with sought-after free agent defenceman Justin Schultz.

The 2012–13 season start was delayed from its original date of October 11, 2012, due to a labour lock-out imposed by the NHL franchise owners after the expiration of the NHL&#x27;s CBA. After a new labour agreement was reached between the owners and the National Hockey League Players&#x27; Association (NHLPA), training camps opened on January 13, 2013, and a 48-game season (reduced from 82 games) commenced on January 19. The Oilers played their first game of the shortened season a day later, on January 20.

On January 23, to ensure the health of the Edmonton Oilers in Edmonton and for the planned revitalization of downtown Edmonton, the City of Edmonton council voted 10–3 to approval a deal that saw a new $480 million arena built in Edmonton&#x27;s downtown core for the start of the 2016–17 season. Rogers Communications announced it had the naming rights to the new arena on December 3, 2013; the new 18,641-seat arena was called Rogers Place.
After 41 games into the shortened season and with the Oilers mathematically eliminated from the playoffs for a seventh successive time, Edmonton terminated Steve Tambellini&#x27;s contract as general manager, where he was replaced with former head coach Craig MacTavish. Following the end of the season, on June 8, MacTavish fired Ralph Krueger after just one season as head coach. Two days later, it was announced Krueger was to be replaced by former Toronto Marlies head coach Dallas Eakins. One of MacTavish&#x27;s first player moves as Oilers&#x27; general manager came at the 2013 NHL entry draft, as Edmonton used their seventh overall selection to draft defenceman Darnell Nurse. More moves came on July 5, during free agency, which saw MacTavish trade captain Shawn Horcoff to the Dallas Stars in exchange for Philip Larsen. MacTavish also signed Andrew Ference, Boyd Gordon, Jason LaBarbera, Will Acton, Ryan Hamilton and Jesse Joensuu. Ference was later announced as the 14th captain in Oilers NHL franchise history on September 29. Ales Hemsky and Ryan Smyth, who after the Horcoff trade became the last remaining members of the Oilers&#x27; 2006 Stanley Cup finalists still with the team, departed the Oilers franchise, as Hemsky was traded to the Ottawa Senators on March 5, 2014. Smyth (who had previously left the Oilers in 2007, but had returned in 2011) announced his retirement on April 11, playing his final NHL game on April 13, where he was ceremoniously named team captain.

On December 15, 2014, after 31 games of the 2014–15 season, MacTavish announced Dallas Eakins had been terminated as head coach. MacTavish assumed the role of interim coach while Todd Nelson transitioned into the role for the remainder of the season. Nelson was previously serving as the head coach of the Oklahoma City Barons, the Oilers&#x27; then-AHL affiliate. Three days later, the Oilers released a statement that their affiliation with the Barons would cease at the end of the season.

Following Edmonton&#x27;s decision not to renew affiliation with the Barons, the Oilers relocated their AHL franchise from Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, to Bakersfield, California. This move was announced on January 29, 2015, as part of the AHL&#x27;s new Pacific Division, which included the Oilers&#x27; affiliation in Bakersfield. The following month, on February 25, the team was given its new identity, the Bakersfield Condors. On April 2, the Condors released their new logo. Off-season moves failed to help the Oilers as they finished behind Arizona in the NHL during 2014–15. It was also easily their worst season as an NHL team.

===McDavid–Draisaitl era (2015–present)===

The Oilers won the 2015 draft lottery on April 18, moving them from the third-overall pick to first, marking their fourth lottery win in six seasons. The Oilers selected Connor McDavid first overall in the 2015 NHL entry draft held in Sunrise, Florida, on June 26.

On April 24, Craig MacTavish was removed from his position as general manager and was replaced by former Boston Bruins general manager Peter Chiarelli, who was also appointed president of hockey operations as part of other related changes. In Chiarelli&#x27;s first transactions as Oilers general manager, he traded a first and a second-round pick during the first day of the 2015 NHL entry draft to the New York Islanders, in exchange for defenceman Griffin Reinhart. Chiarelli again made trades the following day and traded another second-, a third- and a seventh-round draft pick to the New York Rangers, to acquire goaltender Cam Talbot and the Rangers&#x27; seventh-round draft pick. On May 19, Todd McLellan was named the new head coach of the Oilers. He and his former team, the San Jose Sharks, mutually agreed to part ways on April 20 after the Sharks failed to qualify for the 2015 playoffs. More coaching changes came on June 4 when Keith Acton and Craig Ramsay were relieved of their duties.

In addition to these coaching changes, the Oilers also made some changes to their scouting staff on June 22, which saw both head amateur and professional scouts Stu MacGregor and Morey Gare relieved of their duties. Amateur scouts Brad Davis and Kent Hawley, and professional scouts Dave Semenko and Billy Moores, who served as director of coaching and special projects, were also relieved of their duties. Further changes came on October 7, when the Oilers elected to begin the 2015–16 season without a team captain; this marked the first time they had done so since entering the NHL, in 1979. Taylor Hall, Jordan Eberle, Ryan Nugent-Hopkins, and Andrew Ference, who had served as team captain the previous two seasons, were all named as alternate captains.

On February 27, 2016, mathematically eliminated from playoff contention, the Oilers traded defenceman Justin Schultz to the Pittsburgh Penguins, in exchange for a third-round pick in the 2016 NHL entry draft. Before his trade, Schultz endured the worst season of his professional career, with just 10 points in 45 games.

After the 2015–16 season, the Oilers prepared to move from Rexall Place, their home since 1974, to newly built Rogers Place. On April 6, in their final home game at Rexall, the Oilers defeated the Vancouver Canucks 6–2. Before the game, the Oilers held a ceremony honouring the history of the arena. Oilers&#x27; alumni, including Mark Messier and Wayne Gretzky, skated around the rink one more time.

In a one-for-one trade on June 29, Edmonton dealt all-star winger Taylor Hall to the New Jersey Devils, in exchange for defenceman Adam Larsson. Following the Hall trade, Chiarelli also pursued impending free agent Milan Lucic, signing him to a seven-year contract, in a bid to make the playoffs for the first time since 2006. Chiarelli and Lucic were already familiar with each other, during their time together with the Boston Bruins. On October 5, 19-year-old Connor McDavid was named the 15th captain of the Oilers; McDavid was the youngest team captain in NHL history, having broken the record previously held by Colorado Avalanche captain Gabriel Landeskog. The Oilers made further moves to their roster a few days later, when they traded Nail Yakupov to the St. Louis Blues, and signed free-agent defenceman Kris Russell.

The 2016–17 season was a great success for the team. After defeating the Los Angeles Kings 2–1 on March 28, 2017, the Oilers qualified for the 2017 Stanley Cup playoffs, ending their 11-year drought. The Oilers finished with a 47–26–9 record, thanks largely to a 100-point season from McDavid and breakout performances from fellow forwards Leon Draisaitl and Patrick Maroon, whilst backstopped with strong play from netminder Cam Talbot. McDavid led the entire league with 70 assists and 100 points, earning himself both the Art Ross Trophy and Hart Memorial Trophy, as his team&#x27;s most valuable player. Talbot also set a new franchise record, with a total of 42 games won by a goaltender, surpassing the 40 games won by Grant Fuhr, during the 1987–88 season.
In the first round of the playoffs, the Oilers eliminated the San Jose Sharks, following a 3–1 win in Game 6, to secure their first playoff series win since 2006. Their playoff run was stopped on May 10, losing to the Anaheim Ducks in Game 7 with a 2–1 loss, ending the second-round series.

In the 2017 off-season, the Oilers traded Jordan Eberle to the New York Islanders, in exchange for forward Ryan Strome, to gain salary relief. The Oilers signed both McDavid and Draisaitl to 8-year contracts worth $100 million and $68 million, carrying annual cap hits of $12.5 million and $8.5 million, respectively. The Oilers had high expectations coming into the 2017–18 season, as many expected to make progress off of their surprising year in 2016–17. However, the Oilers regressed, posting a 36–40–6 record and missing the playoffs for the 11th time in 12 seasons.

On January 22, 2019, the Oilers terminated Chiarelli&#x27;s employment as president and general manager. Keith Gretzky was appointed interim general manager the following day. The Oilers again missed the playoffs, posting a 35–38–9 record and having only qualified for the playoffs once in 13 seasons.

====After COVID and playoff appearances (2020–present)====
On May 7, 2019, the Oilers announced the appointment of Ken Holland as general manager. Three weeks later, the Oilers named Dave Tippett as the team&#x27;s new head coach, on May 28. In the 2019–20 season, the Oilers showed some hope; the team had a record of 37–25–9 on March 12, 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic suspended the season. Edmonton was chosen as one of the two host cities of the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs and qualified for the playoffs as the fifth seed in the Western Conference; however, the team was upset by the Chicago Blackhawks in four games in the preliminary round.

In the 2020–21 season, the Oilers finished second in the North Division with a 35–19–2 record, largely due to a 105-point season from Connor McDavid, only the ninth player to reach the mark in 53 games. Additionally, Leon Draisaitl had an excellent season, as the runner-up in NHL league scoring, with 84 points. McDavid&#x27;s 105-point season earned him a unanimous second Hart Trophy win as the most valuable player in the NHL, becoming the second unanimous winner in league history (along with Wayne Gretzky in 1981–82). The Oilers faced the third place team in the North Division the Winnipeg Jets in the First Round of the playoffs. The Oilers were swept in four games by the Jets, and three of the Oilers&#x27; losses came in overtime, including the final game, which went to triple overtime. Darnell Nurse logged 62 minutes and 7 seconds of ice time in the final game, third-most in NHL history.
In the 2021–22 season, the Oilers finished with 49–27–6, their first 40-win season since 2017. McDavid had a career-high 123 points and the Oilers clinched second place in the Pacific Division. The Oilers faced the Los Angeles Kings in the First Round of the 2022 Stanley Cup playoffs. After struggling at first, the Oilers managed to cling on and win an extremely close series with a shutout in Game 7 to advance to the Second Round. There, they faced their provincial rival Calgary Flames for the first since 1991. The series was a tight battle, leading to the Oilers triumphing over the Flames in five games. The series was a part of the iconic Battle of Alberta which is known for its excessive amount of high-scoring games and brutality. The Oilers advanced to the conference finals for the first time since 2006 where they were swept in four games by the eventual Stanley Cup champion Colorado Avalanche.

In the 2022–23 season, the Oilers had three players Connor McDavid, Leon Draisaitl, and Ryan Nugent-Hopkins each reach the 100-point milestone. This milestone from the trio marks the first NHL season since 1995–96 where one team had three players score 100 points. The Oilers finished 50–23–9 with their first 50-win season since the 1986–87 season, recording 109 points and clinched the second seed in the Pacific Division, earning an opening round playoff matchup with the Los Angeles Kings for the second consecutive year. Connor McDavid had a career-high scoring 153 points, recording the highest single season point total in the salary cap era. After defeating the Kings in six games, they were eliminated in the Second Round by the eventual Stanley Cup champion Vegas Golden Knights, also in six games.

In the 2023–24 season, the Oilers started with a disappointing 3–9–1 record which led to the dismissals of head coach Jay Woodcroft and assistant coach Dave Manson on November 12, 2023. But by the end of the season, the Oilers finished with a 49–27–6 record, being 46–18–5 under new head coach Kris Knoblauch and clinched the second seed in the Pacific Division, earning an opening round playoff matchup with the Los Angeles Kings for the third consecutive year. During the season, the Oilers went on a 16-game win streak which began on December 21, 2023, against the New Jersey Devils and ended on February 6, 2024, against the Vegas Golden Knights. Zach Hyman scored a personal high 54 goals to finish as the team leader in goals scored and Connor McDavid became the fourth player since 1990–91 to record 100 assists in a single NHL season, joining former Oilers captain Wayne Gretzky and Hockey Hall of Famers, Mario Lemieux and Bobby Orr. After beating the Los Angeles Kings for the third consecutive year in the first round, the Vancouver Canucks in the second round, and the Dallas Stars in the conference finals, the Oilers won their eighth Clarence S. Campbell Bowl and made it to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 2006. They faced the Florida Panthers losing in seven games after trailing 3–0 in the Stanley Cup Finals. Connor McDavid, however, won the Conn Smythe Trophy.

On June 27, 2024, three days after the Oilers&#x27; loss in the Finals, and with his contract expiring, the Oilers and general manager Holland announced that they had mutually decided to part ways. CEO of hockey operations Jeff Jackson subsequently assumed the role of interim general manager. On July 24, 2024, the Oilers hired former Chicago Blackhawks general manager Stan Bowman as their new general manager, three weeks after being reinstated from his suspension relating to the Blackhawks sexual abuse scandal.

==Team information==
===Jerseys===
The original 1972 logo was designed by James Harvey, a graphic designer working for an Albertan public relations firm called Francis, Williams, Johnson and Payne LTD. The design featured the now-traditional colours of blue and orange, but reversed from their more familiar appearance in later seasons, orange being the dominant colour and blue used for the trimming. For the first few games of the 1972 season, player names were not displayed on the uniform; rather the word &quot;ALBERTA&quot; was written in that space. About halfway through the season, though, the player names made their appearance, since the Oilers had played exclusively in Edmonton. These jerseys also featured the player numbers high on the shoulders, rather than on the upper sleeve as is standard.

In the 1974–75 season, the jersey was changed to a blue base with orange trim. The logo that appeared on programs and promotional material remained the same. However, the logo that appeared on the home jersey had a white oil drop, on a dark orange field, with the team name written in deep blue. The away jersey featured an orange-printed logo with a blue oil drop.

When the team joined the NHL in 1979, the alternate logos were discarded, giving the jersey its most famous form. However, the logo appeared slightly differently on a few vintages of the jersey. Minor changes were also made to the numbering, lettering, and collar in their first few NHL campaigns. From 1982 to 1989, Nike provided the Oilers&#x27; sweaters.
The essential design remained untouched until 1996 when the team colours were changed to midnight blue and copper with red trim. Other changes made to the jersey at that point were the removal of the shoulder bar and cuffs from the away jersey and the addition of the &quot;Rigger&quot; alternate logo to the jersey&#x27;s shoulders. A year later, the shoulder bars were removed from the home jersey as well and the Oilers&#x27; sweater design then remained stable until 2007.

In 2001, the Oilers introduced their first alternate third sweater. Designed by then-minority owner Todd McFarlane and his production studio, the new uniforms were a radical departure from previous Oilers designs. The original Oilers logo was completely absent, along with copper and red; midnight blue was complemented with two shades of silver/grey and the primary logo was a flying set of gears with an oil drop on top. Elements of the logo paid tribute to the five Stanley Cup titles and 10 team captains to that point. A silver shield bearing &quot;OILERS&quot; above a variation of the oil-drop gear adorned the shoulders. The jersey&#x27;s sleeve numbers are located inside the white sleeve stripe.

During the 2003 Heritage Classic, the Oilers donned their 1980s white uniform, albeit paired with the then-current navy pants.

In 2007, with the NHL&#x27;s switch to Reebok Edge jerseys, the Oilers kept their team colours but changed the style of their jerseys. Most notable about the Edge jerseys were the removal of the waistline stripes in favour of vertical piping and the sleeve stripes only appearing on the inside of the elbow panels. The &quot;Rigger&quot; was retired, along with the McFarlane third jersey and its associated logos. In 2008, the Oilers introduced a new alternate jersey that closely resembled the blue-and-orange away jersey of the dynasty era. For the 2009–10 season, this jersey became the Oilers&#x27; main home jersey as blue and orange became the primary team colours once again. The old midnight blue-and-copper jersey became their alternate. On June 24, 2011, the Oilers presented their new white road jerseys at the 2011 NHL entry draft, when they selected Ryan Nugent-Hopkins first overall. The midnight blue jersey remained as the third jersey before being dropped altogether in 2012.

For the 2015–16 season, the team introduced a new alternate jersey inspired by their original WHA design, with orange as a primary colour. This design immediately became popular with the fanbase and Oilers home games were soon flooded with fans wearing the orange jerseys, calling it the &quot;Surge of Orange&quot; in response to the Calgary Flames&#x27; &quot;C of Red&quot; and Winnipeg Jets&#x27; &quot;Whiteout&quot; traditions. The Oilers also wore the alternate orange jerseys in the 2016 Heritage Classic.

With the switch to Adidas jerseys in the 2017–18 season, the orange jersey became the Oilers&#x27; home design, but with a few alterations: the 1980s-era template was retained while midnight blue returned as an accent colour.

To commemorate the franchise&#x27;s 40th anniversary in the NHL, the Oilers wore their classic 1980s blue jerseys for four home games in 2018–19 against original Smythe Division rivals Los Angeles Kings, Calgary Flames, Winnipeg Jets and Vancouver Canucks. Before the 2019–20 season, the Oilers unveiled a new midnight blue alternate jersey with minimal striping and lack of white elements. The Oilers wore their midnight blue alternates at home playoff games during the and Stanley Cup playoffs.

In the 2020–21 season, the Oilers released a &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniform, reviving the 1980s white jersey but with the orange and blue switching places, save for the team&#x27;s crest.

Beginning with the 2022–23 season, the Oilers brought back the 1980s blue and white jerseys, while retaining the alternate midnight blue jerseys. The Oilers also unveiled a second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform during the season, using the 2001–2007 alternate but with orange replacing silver in the trim, as well as making the oil drop orange to match the drop in the standard logo.

For the team&#x27;s appearance in the 2023 Heritage Classic, the Oilers wore specially designed uniforms. The blue-based design featured an enlarged oil drop surrounding a blue number, the full team name in blue letters at the bottom in a white ribbon, and orange and cream stripes. The back of the uniform featured cream letters with orange accents. Brown pants and gloves were worn to evoke hockey equipment of the early 20th century. The design was inspired by Team Canada&#x27;s 1952 Winter Olympics gold medal-winning team represented by the Edmonton Mercurys.

===Anthem singer===
From 1981 to 2011, Paul Lorieau was the Oilers anthem singer. Since 2013, the Oilers&#x27; anthem singer has been Robert Clark, an opera singer from Sherwood Park. When the Oilers compete in the playoffs and the Stanley Cup Finals, Clark has sung the anthems from within the crowd. Before singing the anthems, public address announcer Al Stafford introduces him as &quot;The singing voice of your Edmonton Oilers&quot;.

===Mascot===

The Oilers mascot is a Canadian lynx named Hunter who was unveiled on September 26, 2016. The choice of the Canadian lynx was because their largest place of habitat, in terms of population, is Alberta. It was also because it was the largest vote overall. The name gives tribute to the original Oilers owner, William &quot;Wild Bill&quot; Hunter. Hunter wears the number 72 on his jersey, referencing the year the Oilers were established, which was in 1972. Hunter has a portable drum, in which he uses to entertain the crowds and make them chant &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Oilers!&quot;, along with a rhythmic beat.

===Oilers Octane===

The Oilers Octane was the cheerleading team for the Edmonton Oilers. The team was the first cheer squad for a Canadian NHL franchise. The debut of the cheer-leading team received a mixed reaction from the Edmonton community, including petitions to keep cheerleading out of the sport of hockey in Canada.

The Octane performed for the first time on December 14, 2010, at a home game against the Toronto Maple Leafs. The first team had 19 cheerleaders, women aged 18 to 29, dressed in uniforms that resembled the original Edmonton Oilers jerseys, albeit with skirts and knee-high boots.

In August 2016 the Oilers Entertainment Group (OEG), which owns the Oilers, announced it was discontinuing the Octane, saying the franchise was &quot;looking for a new direction related to the fan experience&quot; as the team prepared to move from Rexall Place to Rogers Place for the 2016–17 season. The Group also announced auditions for a newly formed, co-ed group of &quot;brand ambassadors&quot; named the Oilers Orange and Blue Ice Crew for the upcoming season.

===Rivalries===
The Oilers have two well-known rivalries in the NHL, which are against the Calgary Flames and Los Angeles Kings.

====Calgary Flames====
The Oilers&#x27; rivalry with the Flames, also dubbed the Battle of Alberta, stems from several playoff matchups between the two franchises during the 1980s, which coincidentally was the dynasty era of the Oilers; Edmonton usually won these matchups. However, the Flames did defeat the Oilers in the 1986 division round.

====Los Angeles Kings====
The Oilers had a vicious rivaly with the Kings from the early 1980s to the early 1990s, which stemmed from numerous playoff duels, though the rivalry saw new life in the early 2020s. The rivalry also included the infamous Wayne Gretzky and Marty McSorley.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Oilers. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Edmonton Oilers seasons&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses/Shootout Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against, PIM = Penalties in minutes&quot;
==Players and personnel==

===Current roster===
===Team captains===
&quot;Note: This list includes the Oilers&#x27; captains from both the NHL and WHA.&quot;

* Al Hamilton, 1972–1976
* Glen Sather, 1976–1977
* Paul Shmyr, 1977–1979
* Ron Chipperfield, 1979–1980
* Blair MacDonald, 1980–1981
* Lee Fogolin, 1981–1983
* Wayne Gretzky, 1983–1988
* Mark Messier, 1988–1991
* Kevin Lowe, 1991–1992
* Craig MacTavish, 1992–1994
* Shayne Corson, 1995
* Kelly Buchberger, 1995–1999
* Doug Weight, 1999–2001
* Jason Smith, 2001–2007
* Ethan Moreau, 2007–2010
* Shawn Horcoff, 2010–2013
* Andrew Ference, 2013–2015
* Ryan Smyth*, 2014 (one game)
* Connor McDavid, 2016–present

===Head coaches===
&quot;Note: This list includes the Oilers&#x27; head coaches from both the NHL and WHA.&quot;

* Ray Kinasewich, 1972–1973
* Bill Hunter, 1972–1973
* Brian Shaw, 1973–1975
* Bill Hunter, 1974–1975
* Clare Drake, 1975–1976
* Bill Hunter, 1975–1976
* Bep Guidolin, 1976–1977
* Glen Sather, 1977–1980
* Bryan Watson, 1980
* Glen Sather, 1980–1989
* John Muckler, 1989–1991
* Ted Green, 1991–1993
* Glen Sather, 1993–1994
* George Burnett, 1994–1995
* Ron Low, 1994–1999
* Kevin Lowe, 1999–2000
* Craig MacTavish, 2000–2009
* Pat Quinn, 2009–2010
* Tom Renney, 2010–2012
* Ralph Krueger, 2012–2013
* Dallas Eakins, 2013–2014
* Todd Nelson (interim), 2014–2015
* Todd McLellan, 2015–2018
* Ken Hitchcock, 2018–2019
* Dave Tippett, 2019–2022
* Jay Woodcroft, 2022–2023
* Kris Knoblauch, 2023–present
===General managers===
&quot;Note: This list includes the Oilers&#x27; general managers from both the NHL and WHA.&quot;
* Bill Hunter, 1972–1976
* Bep Guidolin, 1976–1977
* Brian Conacher, 1977–1978
* Larry Gordon, 1978–1980
* Glen Sather, 1980–2000
* Kevin Lowe, 2000–2008
* Steve Tambellini, 2008–2013
* Craig McTavish, 2013–2015
* Peter Chiarelli, 2015–2019
* Keith Gretzky (interim), 2019
* Ken Holland, 2019–2024
* Jeff Jackson (interim), 2024
* Stan Bowman, 2024–present
===Honoured members===
====Retired numbers====
The Oilers have retired eight numbers.
Notes:
* 1 &quot;Jersey ceremony held April 4, 2001.&quot;
* 2 &quot;Gretzky&#x27;s no. 99 was retired League-wide by the NHL on February 6, 2000.

====Edmonton Oilers Hall of Fame====
On September 7, 2022, the Oilers announced the establishment of their own club Hall of Fame. Inductees are selected based on their contributions or services to the team since its founding in 1972. The inaugural Class of 2022 members included Al Hamilton, Wayne Gretzky, Jari Kurri, Grant Fuhr, Paul Coffey, Mark Messier, Glenn Anderson, Kevin Lowe, Glen Sather and Rod Phillips, all of whom had already seen their respective banners raised to the rafters. In addition, it was revealed that there would be another two further members seeing induction. On September 20, it was revealed that Lee Fogolin and Ryan Smyth would also join the enshrined banner honourees. On November 3, Fogolin and Smyth officially took their places in the 2022 Hall of Fame, during a pre-game ceremony before the Oilers played the New Jersey Devils at Rogers Place.

Beginning in 2023, Oilers fans will be able to participate in the selection process for nominees into future Oilers Hall of Fame Classes. The 2023 Oilers of Fame Class had their induction ceremony during the 2023 Heritage Classic weekend event, which took place on October 26–29. On September 20, 2023, the Oilers announced that Charlie Huddy and former team captain Doug Weight would be the two members of the 2023 Hall of Fame class. Both Huddy and Weight were officially inducted before the Oilers game against the visiting New York Rangers, on October 26.

On August 1, 2024, the Oilers announced Craig MacTavish and Randy Gregg would be inducted into the Oilers Hall of Fame, ahead of their home game against the Pittsburgh Penguins on October 25.

====Hockey Hall of Fame honourees====

The Oilers are affiliated with several inductees in the Hockey Hall of Fame.

Eleven Oilers players have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. Jacques Plante, who briefly played for the Oilers in the WHA was inducted in 1978. Regarded as one of the greatest goalies of all time, Plante led the Montreal Canadiens to six Stanley Cups through the 1950s and early 1960s. Norm Ullman, who played for the Oilers in the WHA was inducted in 1982. Ullman played twenty years for the Detroit Red Wings and Toronto Maple Leafs putting up 1,229 points. Ullman is among the top scoring forwards ever to play in the NHL. Wayne Gretzky was immediately inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1999, after retiring the same year. Gretzky played ten seasons with the Oilers and captained them to their first four Stanley Cup championships. Known as &quot;The Great One&quot;, Gretzky is considered the greatest hockey player ever and holds the NHL record with most goals, assists and points. In 2001, Jari Kurri became the first Finnish player to be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. An Oilers selection from the 1980 NHL entry draft, Kurri played ten seasons with the Oilers, winning all five of their Stanley Cups. Goaltender Grant Fuhr, who was present during the &quot;dynasty era&quot; was inducted in 2003. In 2004, Paul Coffey was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility. Mark Messier was inducted in 2007, also in his first year of eligibility. Messier is often considered the Greatest Leader in professional sports and is to date, the only person in NHL history to ever captain two different Stanley Cup championship-winning teams, as a member of both the 1990 Edmonton Oilers and the 1994 New York Rangers. In 2008, Glenn Anderson became the final Oilers player to be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame during the 2000s. Adam Oates was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2012. Oates played sixty games with the Oilers after signing a one-year contract in 2003. Considered an elite playmaker, Oates totaled 1,079 assists which at the time of his retirement made him the fifth most assisted player in NHL history. Chris Pronger, who played defence for the Oilers was inducted in 2015. Pronger helped lead the Oilers to their 2006 Stanley Cup run. The most recent inductee who played for the Oilers is Kevin Lowe. Lowe played with the Oilers from 1979 to 1992 and from 1996 to 1998. After retiring, Lowe became head coach of the Oilers and soon after became their general manager.

Six Oilers builders have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. The first was Glen Sather, who was inducted in 1997. Sather was a head coach for the Oilers from 1976 to 2000, leading them to four Stanley Cups. Roger Neilson who was inducted in 2002, briefly worked for the Oilers as a video analyst during the 1984 Stanley Cup Playoffs. Broadcaster Rod Phillips was awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award by the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2003. Pat Quinn, who coached the Oilers for one year in 2009 was posthumously inducted in 2016. In his first and only season as head coach of the Oilers, the team finished in last place in the league with a record of 27–47–8. Clare Drake was inducted in 2017. During the 1975–76 WHA season, Drake served as the head coach of the Edmonton Oilers. Ken Holland, Oilers general manager and president of hockey operations from 2019 to 2024 was inducted in 2020. Ken Hitchcock, who coached the Oilers during the 2018–19 NHL season was inducted in 2023.
==Franchise records==
===Scoring leaders===

These are the top-ten point, goal, and assist scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.

&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;
* – current Oilers player
&quot;Note: This list includes WHA statistics.&quot;




===Single-season leaders===
Items marked in bold are NHL records.

* Most goals in a season: Wayne Gretzky, 92 (1981–82)
* Most assists in a season: Wayne Gretzky, 163 (1985–86)
* Most points in a season: Wayne Gretzky, 215 (1985–86)
* Most penalty minutes in a season: Steve Smith, 286 (1987–88)
* Most goals in a season, defenceman: Paul Coffey, 48 (1985–86)
* Most points in a season, defenceman: Paul Coffey, 138 (1985–86)
* Most goals in a season, rookie: Jason Arnott, 33 (1993–94)
* Most assists in a season, rookie: Jari Kurri, 43 (1980–81)
* Most points in a season, rookie: Jari Kurri, 75 (1980–81)
* Most wins in a season: Cam Talbot, 42 (2016–17)
* Most shutouts in a season: Curtis Joseph; Tommy Salo, 8 (1997–98; 2000–01)
==NHL awards and trophies==
Stanley Cup
*1983–84, 1984–85, 1986–87, 1987–88, 1989–90

NHL League Championship*
*1983–84
Presidents&#x27; Trophy
*1985–86, 1986–87

Clarence S. Campbell Bowl
*1982–83, 1983–84, 1984–85, 1986–87, 1987–88, 1989–90, 2005–06, 2023–24

Art Ross Trophy
*Wayne Gretzky: 1980–81, 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1984–85, 1985–86, 1986–87
*Connor McDavid: 2016–17, 2017–18, 2020–21, 2021–22, 2022–23
*Leon Draisaitl: 2019–20

Conn Smythe Trophy
*Mark Messier: 1983–84
*Wayne Gretzky: 1984–85, 1987–88
*Bill Ranford: 1989–90
*Connor McDavid: 2023–24

Hart Memorial Trophy
*Wayne Gretzky: 1979–80, 1980–81, 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1984–85, 1985–86, 1986–87
*Mark Messier: 1989–90
*Connor McDavid: 2016–17, 2020–21, 2022–23
*Leon Draisaitl: 2019–20

Jack Adams Award
*Glen Sather: 1985–86

James Norris Memorial Trophy
*Paul Coffey: 1984–85, 1985–86

King Clancy Memorial Trophy
*Kevin Lowe: 1989–90
*Ethan Moreau: 2008–09
*Andrew Ference: 2013–14

Lady Byng Memorial Trophy
*Wayne Gretzky: 1979–80
*Jari Kurri: 1984–85

Lester B. Pearson Award/Ted Lindsay Award
*Wayne Gretzky: 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1984–85, 1986–87
*Mark Messier: 1989–90
*Connor McDavid: 2016–17, 2017–18, 2020–21, 2022–23
*Leon Draisaitl: 2019–20

NHL Plus/Minus Award
*Charlie Huddy: 1982–83
*Wayne Gretzky: 1983–84, 1984–85, 1986–87

Vezina Trophy
*Grant Fuhr: 1987–88
==Home arenas==

* Edmonton Gardens (1972–1974)
* Northlands Coliseum (1974–2016)
* Commonwealth Stadium (2003 Heritage Classic, 2023 Heritage Classic)
* Rogers Place (2016–present)

==Broadcasters==
Television rights to most Edmonton Oilers games are held by Rogers Media. This includes all regional telecasts, which are carried by Sportsnet West and the overflow channel Sportsnet Oilers, as well as nationally televised games on Sportsnet or &quot;Hockey Night in Canada&quot;—which may either be broadcast by CBC Television, Citytv, or Sportsnet. The team&#x27;s broadcast region is shared with the Calgary Flames and includes all of Alberta, Saskatchewan, Northwest Territories and Nunavut. As of 2021, Jack Michaels calls play-by-play on most Oilers TV broadcasts alongside Louie DeBrusk and reporter Gene Principe. Beginning in the 2024–25 season, Rogers will sublicense Monday night NHL games, including those involving the Oilers, exclusively to Prime Video, with no regional broadcast available for these streaming broadcasts.

On radio, the games are aired on CHED called by either Cam Moon or Jack Michaels and Bob Stauffer. Bryn Griffiths will serve as new reporter for the 2024–25 season onwards, replacing Reid Wilkins as of September 18, 2024. Rob Brown serves as an analyst during intermissions and post-game. Moon calls the games that are scheduled as regional broadcasts. As for the nationally broadcast games, Michaels moves from TV to radio.

==See also==
* World Hockey Association
* List of Stanley Cup champions
* List of ice hockey teams in Alberta
* List of Edmonton Oilers head coaches
* Oilogosphere

==Notes==
==References==

===General===
* 
* 

===Specific===
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Historical farm team affiliates</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="4" end="19" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="39" end="49" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="64" end="72" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="100" end="122" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="148" end="164" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="172" end="190" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339036" start="222" end="234" title="Rogers Place" label="Rogers Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q65970855" start="258" end="272" title="Kris Knoblauch" label="Kris Knoblauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q768157" start="297" end="308" title="Stan Bowman" label="Stan Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="403" end="410" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="432" end="446" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q124758910" start="511" end="528" title="Battle of Alberta (NHL)" label="Battle of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909535" start="572" end="606" title="Bill Hunter (ice hockey)" label="W. D. &amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505344" start="659" end="666" title="1972–73 WHA season" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="734" end="758" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019638" start="835" end="850" title="Calgary Broncos" label="Calgary Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q752493" start="903" end="922" title="Cleveland Crusaders" label="Cleveland Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="988" end="1002" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Alberta Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="1026" end="1041" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q746354" start="1046" end="1060" title="1973–74 WHA season" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="1096" end="1100" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="1148" end="1162" title="NHL–WHA merger" label="NHL–WHA merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="1218" end="1229" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581880" start="1249" end="1256" title="1984 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582539" start="1258" end="1265" title="1985 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583919" start="1267" end="1274" title="1987 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584712" start="1276" end="1283" title="1988 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586297" start="1288" end="1295" title="1990 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="1312" end="1331" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="1360" end="1373" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1523" end="1541" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295677" start="1651" end="1659" title="Smythe Division" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="1672" end="1679" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="1688" end="1695" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2036" end="2043" title="Dynasty (sports)#Ice hockey" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="2058" end="2077" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968223" start="2138" end="2161" title="2006 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2006 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130251" start="2276" end="2291" title="NHL entry draft" label="NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q721993" start="2466" end="2477" title="Taylor Hall" label="Taylor Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q715578" start="2479" end="2498" title="Ryan Nugent-Hopkins" label="Ryan Nugent-Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q559162" start="2500" end="2512" title="Nail Yakupov" label="Nail Yakupov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="2517" end="2531" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325279" start="2617" end="2640" title="2024 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2024 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="2664" end="2680" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909535" start="2848" end="2876" title="Bill Hunter (ice hockey)" label="&amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q56653824" start="2902" end="2941" title="Charles Allard" label="Dr. Charles A. &amp;quot;Chuck&amp;quot; Allard"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="2965" end="2974" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895139" start="2982" end="2994" title="Peter A. Allard School of Law" label="Peter Allard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767756" start="3034" end="3050" title="Second City Television" label="&amp;quot;SCTV&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285869" start="3110" end="3128" title="Edmonton Oil Kings (WCHL)" label="Edmonton Oil Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q849096" start="3227" end="3248" title="Western Hockey League" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="3317" end="3325" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019638" start="3722" end="3737" title="Calgary Broncos" label="Calgary Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="3906" end="3913" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339055" start="4075" end="4091" title="Edmonton Gardens" label="Edmonton Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q746379" start="4213" end="4229" title="Ottawa Nationals" label="Ottawa Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="4274" end="4284" title="defenceman" label="defenceman"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="4294" end="4301" title="captain (hockey)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q660440" start="4302" end="4313" title="Al Hamilton" label="Al Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="4315" end="4325" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017159" start="4326" end="4337" title="Dave Dryden" label="Dave Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q543457" start="4342" end="4350" title="forward (hockey)" label="forwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924134" start="4351" end="4366" title="Blair MacDonald" label="Blair MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903208" start="4371" end="4381" title="Bill Flett" label="Bill Flett"/>
<link wikidata="Q825049" start="4428" end="4432" title="1976–77 WHA season" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="4520" end="4531" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381712" start="4731" end="4746" title="List of Edmonton Oilers general managers" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="4998" end="5007" title="Vancouver, Canada" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381666" start="5027" end="5043" title="Nelson Skalbania" label="Nelson Skalbania"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="5100" end="5104" title="real estate" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991290" start="5109" end="5119" title="Professional sports league organization" label="franchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381653" start="5159" end="5176" title="Peter Pocklington" label="Peter Pocklington"/>
<link wikidata="Q838314" start="5291" end="5295" title="1978–79 WHA season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="5338" end="5351" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047292" start="5375" end="5384" title="Eddie Mio" label="Eddie Mio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381315" start="5397" end="5411" title="Peter Driscoll" label="Peter Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q503739" start="5461" end="5480" title="Indianapolis Racers" label="Indianapolis Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="5557" end="5564" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q838314" start="5608" end="5615" title="1978–79 WHA season" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="5775" end="5788" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–96)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q260036" start="5796" end="5813" title="Avco World Trophy" label="Avco World Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q962628" start="5822" end="5834" title="Dave Semenko" label="Dave Semenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="5976" end="5983" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q830968" start="6013" end="6029" title="Hartford Whalers" label="Hartford Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="6031" end="6047" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="6073" end="6089" title="NHL–WHA merger" label="merger agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="6212" end="6230" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="6260" end="6275" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="6311" end="6330" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q747206" start="6704" end="6715" title="1979 NHL entry draft" label="entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="7437" end="7455" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="7459" end="7466" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="7499" end="7506" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228800" start="7715" end="7727" title="Barry Fraser" label="Barry Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="7827" end="7839" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q725700" start="7841" end="7855" title="Glenn Anderson" label="Glenn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="7857" end="7867" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="7869" end="7880" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="7882" end="7892" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354283" start="7894" end="7904" title="Grant Fuhr" label="Grant Fuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q526778" start="7909" end="7918" title="Andy Moog" label="Andy Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="7944" end="7951" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317522" start="8166" end="8171" title="Goal (ice hockey)" label="goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="8442" end="8459" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378376" start="8502" end="8523" title="Miracle on Manchester" label="Miracle on Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="8614" end="8621" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581211" start="8702" end="8720" title="1983 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="8810" end="8828" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228865" start="8962" end="8973" title="Lee Fogolin" label="Lee Fogolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="9080" end="9087" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="9632" end="9643" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="9660" end="9673" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964388" start="9711" end="9719" title="1984 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="9827" end="9841" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="9925" end="9946" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581880" start="10016" end="10034" title="1984 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="10235" end="10253" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="10271" end="10291" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="The following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="10695" end="10713" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q730012" start="11113" end="11125" title="Reggie Leach" label="Reggie Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="11507" end="11521" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="11575" end="11598" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="11937" end="11946" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="11961" end="11968" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499123" start="12220" end="12231" title="Steve Smith (ice hockey, born April 30, 1963)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="12368" end="12382" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345138" start="12804" end="12815" title="Ron Hextall" label="Ron Hextall"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="13083" end="13090" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="13174" end="13193" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="13289" end="13310" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Canadian Olympic team"/>
<link wikidata="Q9658" start="13318" end="13338" title="1988 Winter Olympics" label="1988 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="13368" end="13381" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q862403" start="13386" end="13398" title="Bill Ranford" label="Bill Ranford"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="13770" end="13787" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="13851" end="13864" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="14030" end="14043" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="14710" end="14723" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265800" start="14859" end="14873" title="Marty McSorley" label="Marty McSorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621950" start="14885" end="14902" title="Mike Krushelnyski" label="Mike Krushelnyski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689326" start="15019" end="15031" title="Jimmy Carson" label="Jimmy Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232443" start="15063" end="15077" title="Martin Gélinas" label="Martin Gelinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072433" start="15465" end="15476" title="Nelson Riis" label="Nelson Riis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="15482" end="15502" title="New Democratic Party (Canada)" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="15527" end="15543" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="15774" end="15781" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="16300" end="16314" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701155" start="16316" end="16328" title="John Muckler" label="John Muckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195753" start="16869" end="16885" title="Kevin McClelland" label="Kevin McClelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q939180" start="16902" end="16912" title="Petr Klíma" label="Petr Klima"/>
<link wikidata="Q349569" start="16914" end="16925" title="Adam Graves" label="Adam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q715083" start="16927" end="16937" title="Joe Murphy (ice hockey)" label="Joe Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235248" start="16942" end="16955" title="Jeff Sharples" label="Jeff Sharples"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="18303" end="18317" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059896" start="18370" end="18383" title="HC Devils Milano" label="Devils Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q725787" start="18697" end="18709" title="Esa Tikkanen" label="Esa Tikkanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="19001" end="19015" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="19236" end="19252" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701155" start="19325" end="19337" title="John Muckler" label="John Muckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="19391" end="19405" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517025" start="19407" end="19416" title="Ted Green" label="Ted Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="19850" end="19867" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="20698" end="20705" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q928048" start="20862" end="20873" title="Doug Weight" label="Doug Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q706130" start="20878" end="20890" title="Jason Arnott" label="Jason Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="20899" end="20913" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="21070" end="21077" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145615" start="21175" end="21188" title="Curtis Joseph" label="Curtis Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="21225" end="21237" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342380" start="21357" end="21370" title="Todd Marchant" label="Todd Marchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="21374" end="21382" title="overtime (hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="21513" end="21520" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060849" start="22164" end="22180" title="Leslie Alexander (businessman)" label="Leslie Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="22199" end="22214" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="22222" end="22253" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="22294" end="22308" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339072" start="22389" end="22413" title="Edmonton Investors Group" label="Edmonton Investors Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018175" start="22485" end="22496" title="Cal Nichols" label="Cal Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q627719" start="22987" end="23008" title="2003 Heritage Classic" label="2003 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130381" start="23267" end="23287" title="Commonwealth Stadium (Edmonton)" label="Commonwealth Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="23347" end="23361" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q961806" start="23496" end="23527" title="NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement" label="Collective Bargaining Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="23744" end="23759" title="Canadian dollar" label="Canadian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="23772" end="23781" title="US dollar" label="US dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q553286" start="23909" end="23922" title="Chris Pronger" label="Chris Pronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="23945" end="23949" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="23954" end="23960" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383180" start="23975" end="23987" title="Michael Peca" label="Michael Peca"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="23998" end="24019" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="24039" end="24053" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q948802" start="24187" end="24197" title="Ty Conklin" label="Ty Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q327655" start="24202" end="24217" title="Jussi Markkanen" label="Jussi Markkanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62545" start="24331" end="24346" title="Jaroslav Špaček" label="Jaroslav Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209821" start="24351" end="24365" title="Dick Tärnström" label="Dick Tarnstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q608304" start="24378" end="24392" title="Dwayne Roloson" label="Dwayne Roloson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163589" start="24409" end="24424" title="Sergei Samsonov" label="Sergei Samsonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="24836" end="24851" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="25066" end="25070" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="25112" end="25135" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q922116" start="25164" end="25189" title="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl" label="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968223" start="25218" end="25241" title="2006 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2006 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="25260" end="25279" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q949869" start="25445" end="25465" title="Rod Brind&amp;#x27;Amour" label="Rod Brind&amp;#x27;Amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399213" start="25721" end="25736" title="Fernando Pisani" label="Fernando Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q36886" start="26240" end="26253" title="Joffrey Lupul" label="Joffrey Lupul"/>
<link wikidata="Q719298" start="26255" end="26268" title="Ladislav Šmíd" label="Ladislav Smid"/>
<link wikidata="Q739756" start="26368" end="26378" title="Ryan Smyth" label="Ryan Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41063" start="26420" end="26437" title="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Marra" label="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Marra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390137" start="26439" end="26453" title="Robert Nilsson" label="Robert Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="26484" end="26504" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833014" start="26521" end="26532" title="Alex Plante" label="Alex Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="26679" end="26686" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="26992" end="26999" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226199" start="27318" end="27328" title="Daryl Katz" label="Daryl Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319360" start="27343" end="27372" title="Rexall" label="Rexall pharmaceutical company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344497" start="27614" end="27630" title="Steve Tambellini" label="Steve Tambellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="27637" end="27651" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138597" start="27950" end="27965" title="Craig MacTavish" label="Craig MacTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="27976" end="27985" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q553244" start="28103" end="28121" title="Nikolai Khabibulin" label="Nikolai Khabibulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="28167" end="28182" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q440283" start="28203" end="28215" title="Dany Heatley" label="Dany Heatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267736" start="28239" end="28252" title="Dustin Penner" label="Dustin Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q504116" start="28272" end="28287" title="Andrew Cogliano" label="Andrew Cogliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q358613" start="28405" end="28415" title="Tom Renney" label="Tom Renney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="28556" end="28576" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q902988" start="28607" end="28638" title="Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy" label="Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721993" start="28646" end="28657" title="Taylor Hall" label="Taylor Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785035" start="28667" end="28684" title="Windsor Spitfires" label="Windsor Spitfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q942970" start="28787" end="28810" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Sullivan (ice hockey)" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618955" start="28861" end="28875" title="Jim Vandermeer" label="Jim Vandermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390137" start="28877" end="28891" title="Robert Nilsson" label="Robert Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371110" start="28942" end="28954" title="Ethan Moreau" label="Ethan Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="28996" end="29017" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q706869" start="29105" end="29116" title="Mike Comrie" label="Mike Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892506" start="29118" end="29138" title="Marc-Antoine Pouliot" label="Marc-Antoine Pouliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q503670" start="29143" end="29155" title="Ryan Potulny" label="Ryan Potulny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356332" start="29201" end="29213" title="Rod Phillips (broadcaster)" label="Rod Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q746354" start="29304" end="29311" title="1973–74 WHA season" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="29351" end="29358" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619412" start="29388" end="29418" title="2010–11 Edmonton Oilers season" label="2010–11 Edmonton Oilers season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081298" start="29453" end="29463" title="Oil Change (TV series)" label="Oil Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342293" start="29546" end="29559" title="Shawn Horcoff" label="Shawn Horcoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q975074" start="29701" end="29714" title="Jordan Eberle" label="Jordan Eberle"/>
<link wikidata="Q933273" start="29719" end="29743" title="Magnus Pääjärvi" label="Magnus Paajarvi-Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q464126" start="30042" end="30056" title="Colten Teubert" label="Colten Teubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="30086" end="30090" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886806" start="30107" end="30120" title="Oscar Klefbom" label="Oscar Klefbom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="30160" end="30164" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="30302" end="30322" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q715578" start="30344" end="30363" title="Ryan Nugent-Hopkins" label="Ryan Nugent-Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q933409" start="30613" end="30625" title="Colin Fraser (ice hockey)" label="Colin Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q527802" start="30713" end="30724" title="Andy Sutton" label="Andy Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390356" start="30729" end="30742" title="Kurtis Foster" label="Kurtis Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003440" start="30744" end="30758" title="Sheldon Souray" label="Sheldon Souray"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="30804" end="30826" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q569225" start="30842" end="30855" title="Hershey Bears" label="Hershey Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q188311" start="30948" end="30961" title="Éric Bélanger" label="Eric Belanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q937177" start="30963" end="30973" title="Cam Barker" label="Cam Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q816477" start="30975" end="30984" title="Ben Eager" label="Ben Eager"/>
<link wikidata="Q331168" start="30989" end="31004" title="Darcy Hordichuk" label="Darcy Hordichuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="31277" end="31291" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q559162" start="31413" end="31425" title="Nail Yakupov" label="Nail Yakupov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="31459" end="31479" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q320003" start="31495" end="31508" title="Ralph Krueger" label="Ralph Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q557451" start="31737" end="31751" title="Justin Schultz" label="Justin Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="31758" end="31772" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="31844" end="31859" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="labour lock-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="32008" end="32056" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303426" start="32376" end="32393" title="downtown Edmonton" label="downtown Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="32564" end="32585" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339036" start="32696" end="32708" title="Rogers Place" label="Rogers Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q278957" start="33162" end="33177" title="Toronto Marlies" label="Toronto Marlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012442" start="33189" end="33202" title="Dallas Eakins" label="Dallas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="33291" end="33311" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486477" start="33382" end="33395" title="Darnell Nurse" label="Darnell Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q475645" start="33528" end="33541" title="Philip Larsen" label="Philip Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q895925" start="33581" end="33592" title="Boyd Gordon" label="Boyd Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364111" start="33594" end="33609" title="Jason LaBarbera" label="Jason LaBarbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039626" start="33611" end="33621" title="Will Acton" label="Will Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378830" start="33623" end="33636" title="Ryan Hamilton (ice hockey)" label="Ryan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688162" start="33641" end="33654" title="Jesse Joensuu" label="Jesse Joensuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q737730" start="33753" end="33764" title="Aleš Hemský" label="Ales Hemsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="34251" end="34265" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530266" start="34386" end="34397" title="Todd Nelson (ice hockey)" label="Todd Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518434" start="34513" end="34533" title="Oklahoma City Barons" label="Oklahoma City Barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="34823" end="34836" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="34838" end="34846" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="34851" end="34874" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q606290" start="35107" end="35126" title="Bakersfield Condors (AHL)" label="Bakersfield Condors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="35270" end="35277" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="35548" end="35562" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="35584" end="35604" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q457150" start="35779" end="35794" title="Peter Chiarelli (ice hockey)" label="Peter Chiarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="36020" end="36040" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116624" start="36095" end="36111" title="Griffin Reinhart" label="Griffin Reinhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026393" start="36274" end="36284" title="Cam Talbot" label="Cam Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382365" start="36344" end="36357" title="Todd McLellan" label="Todd McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="36531" end="36544" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q724161" start="36588" end="36599" title="Keith Acton" label="Keith Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q718620" start="36604" end="36616" title="Craig Ramsay" label="Craig Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913057" start="36949" end="36961" title="Billy Moores" label="Billy Moores"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="37128" end="37142" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="37533" end="37552" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="37596" end="37616" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139489" start="37790" end="37802" title="Rexall Place" label="Rexall Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="38218" end="38235" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q350284" start="38264" end="38276" title="Adam Larsson" label="Adam Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q722592" start="38348" end="38359" title="Milan Lucic" label="Milan Lucic"/>
<link wikidata="Q715421" start="38778" end="38795" title="Gabriel Landeskog" label="Gabriel Landeskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="38898" end="38913" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q922846" start="38948" end="38960" title="Kris Russell" label="Kris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="38967" end="38981" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051437" start="39106" end="39131" title="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2017 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15012236" start="39303" end="39317" title="Leon Draisaitl" label="Leon Draisaitl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575172" start="39322" end="39336" title="Patrick Maroon" label="Patrick Maroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="39488" end="39503" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="39508" end="39528" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="39549" end="39569" title="most valuable player" label="most valuable player"/>
<link wikidata="Q984027" start="40126" end="40137" title="Ryan Strome" label="Ryan Strome"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="40386" end="40400" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194739" start="40697" end="40710" title="Keith Gretzky" label="Keith Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365746" start="41010" end="41021" title="Ken Holland" label="Ken Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q726452" start="41078" end="41090" title="Dave Tippett" label="Dave Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="41144" end="41158" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q87901408" start="41250" end="41267" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Alberta" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="41347" end="41372" title="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="41551" end="41565" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q104471978" start="41601" end="41615" title="North Division (NHL)" label="North Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="41919" end="41930" title="Hart Trophy" label="Hart Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="42133" end="42146" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486477" start="42344" end="42357" title="Darnell Nurse" label="Darnell Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="42663" end="42680" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q111476467" start="42707" end="42732" title="2022 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2022 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="42833" end="42840" title="shutout" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="42924" end="42938" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870247" start="43096" end="43113" title="Battle of Alberta" label="Battle of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43261" end="43265" title="2006 Stanley Cup playoffs#(6) Mighty Ducks of Anaheim vs. (8) Edmonton Oilers" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="43339" end="43357" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="44128" end="44148" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684381" start="44288" end="44301" title="Jay Woodcroft" label="Jay Woodcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173279" start="44322" end="44333" title="Dave Manson" label="Dave Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65970855" start="44464" end="44478" title="Kris Knoblauch" label="Kris Knoblauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878924" start="44821" end="44831" title="Zach Hyman" label="Zach Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="44959" end="44966" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="45084" end="45097" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="45102" end="45111" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q922116" start="45318" end="45343" title="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl" label="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="45363" end="45381" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968223" start="45407" end="45411" title="2006 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="45428" end="45444" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325279" start="45493" end="45511" title="2024 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="45546" end="45564" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174142" start="45790" end="45802" title="Jeff Jackson (ice hockey, born 1965)" label="Jeff Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="45903" end="45921" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q768157" start="45938" end="45949" title="Stan Bowman" label="Stan Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46051" end="46082" title="2009–10 Chicago Blackhawks season#Sexual abuse scandal" label="Blackhawks sexual abuse scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q750065" start="46903" end="46917" title="1974–75 WHA season" label="1974–75 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="47580" end="47584" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785065" start="48152" end="48165" title="third jersey" label="third sweater"/>
<link wikidata="Q352460" start="48199" end="48213" title="Todd McFarlane" label="Todd McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q627719" start="48817" end="48838" title="2003 Heritage Classic" label="2003 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48973" end="48984" title="NHL uniform#Since 2007: Reebok Edge" label="Reebok Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="49486" end="49500" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091270" start="50420" end="50441" title="2016 Heritage Classic" label="2016 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="50463" end="50469" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295677" start="50833" end="50848" title="Smythe Division" label="Smythe Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="51146" end="51166" title="Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q115866771" start="51797" end="51818" title="2023 Heritage Classic" label="2023 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="52223" end="52234" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Team Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q842882" start="52242" end="52262" title="ice hockey at the 1952 Winter Olympics" label="1952 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285853" start="52306" end="52323" title="Edmonton Mercurys" label="Edmonton Mercurys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152073" start="52365" end="52377" title="Paul Lorieau" label="Paul Lorieau"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="52804" end="52817" title="Canada lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909535" start="53089" end="53125" title="Bill Hunter (ice hockey)" label="William &amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="53806" end="53825" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408085" start="53980" end="53995" title="knee-high boots" label="knee-high boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139489" start="54246" end="54258" title="Rexall Place" label="Rexall Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339036" start="54262" end="54274" title="Rogers Place" label="Rogers Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="54283" end="54297" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="54558" end="54572" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="54577" end="54594" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q124758910" start="54678" end="54695" title="Battle of Alberta (NHL)" label="Battle of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905396" start="54985" end="54999" title="Kings–Oilers rivalry" label="vicious rivaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="55190" end="55203" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265800" start="55208" end="55222" title="Marty McSorley" label="Marty McSorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902815" start="55375" end="55406" title="List of Edmonton Oilers seasons" label="List of Edmonton Oilers seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q660440" start="55760" end="55771" title="Al Hamilton" label="Al Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="55785" end="55796" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153583" start="55810" end="55820" title="Paul Shmyr" label="Paul Shmyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378463" start="55834" end="55850" title="Ron Chipperfield" label="Ron Chipperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924134" start="55864" end="55879" title="Blair MacDonald" label="Blair MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228865" start="55893" end="55904" title="Lee Fogolin" label="Lee Fogolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="55918" end="55931" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="55945" end="55957" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="55971" end="55981" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138597" start="55995" end="56010" title="Craig MacTavish" label="Craig MacTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q472045" start="56024" end="56037" title="Shayne Corson" label="Shayne Corson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937820" start="56046" end="56062" title="Kelly Buchberger" label="Kelly Buchberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q928048" start="56076" end="56087" title="Doug Weight" label="Doug Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399415" start="56101" end="56112" title="Jason Smith (ice hockey)" label="Jason Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371110" start="56126" end="56138" title="Ethan Moreau" label="Ethan Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342293" start="56152" end="56165" title="Shawn Horcoff" label="Shawn Horcoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q504655" start="56179" end="56193" title="Andrew Ference" label="Andrew Ference"/>
<link wikidata="Q739756" start="56207" end="56217" title="Ryan Smyth" label="Ryan Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="56238" end="56252" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378022" start="56384" end="56398" title="Ray Kinasewich" label="Ray Kinasewich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909535" start="56412" end="56423" title="Bill Hunter (ice hockey)" label="Bill Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965267" start="56437" end="56447" title="Brian C. Shaw" label="Brian Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126153" start="56486" end="56497" title="Clare Drake" label="Clare Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q431926" start="56536" end="56548" title="Bep Guidolin" label="Bep Guidolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="56562" end="56573" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927181" start="56587" end="56599" title="Bryan Watson (ice hockey)" label="Bryan Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="56608" end="56619" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701155" start="56633" end="56645" title="John Muckler" label="John Muckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517025" start="56659" end="56668" title="Ted Green" label="Ted Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537442" start="56707" end="56721" title="George Burnett (ice hockey)" label="George Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441433" start="56735" end="56742" title="Ron Low" label="Ron Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="56756" end="56766" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138597" start="56780" end="56795" title="Craig MacTavish" label="Craig MacTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="56809" end="56818" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q358613" start="56832" end="56842" title="Tom Renney" label="Tom Renney"/>
<link wikidata="Q320003" start="56856" end="56869" title="Ralph Krueger" label="Ralph Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012442" start="56883" end="56896" title="Dallas Eakins" label="Dallas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530266" start="56910" end="56921" title="Todd Nelson (ice hockey)" label="Todd Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382365" start="56945" end="56958" title="Todd McLellan" label="Todd McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="56972" end="56985" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q726452" start="56999" end="57011" title="Dave Tippett" label="Dave Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684381" start="57025" end="57038" title="Jay Woodcroft" label="Jay Woodcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q65970855" start="57052" end="57066" title="Kris Knoblauch" label="Kris Knoblauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909535" start="57204" end="57215" title="Bill Hunter (ice hockey)" label="Bill Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q431926" start="57229" end="57241" title="Bep Guidolin" label="Bep Guidolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912015" start="57255" end="57269" title="Brian Conacher" label="Brian Conacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="57283" end="57295" title="Larry Gordon (ice hockey)" label="Larry Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="57309" end="57320" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="57334" end="57344" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344497" start="57358" end="57374" title="Steve Tambellini" label="Steve Tambellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138597" start="57388" end="57402" title="Craig McTavish" label="Craig McTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q457150" start="57416" end="57431" title="Peter Chiarelli (ice hockey)" label="Peter Chiarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194739" start="57445" end="57458" title="Keith Gretzky" label="Keith Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365746" start="57477" end="57488" title="Ken Holland" label="Ken Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174142" start="57502" end="57514" title="Jeff Jackson (ice hockey, born 1965)" label="Jeff Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q768157" start="57533" end="57544" title="Stan Bowman" label="Stan Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="57767" end="57770" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q660440" start="58072" end="58083" title="Al Hamilton" label="Al Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="58085" end="58098" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="58100" end="58110" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354283" start="58112" end="58122" title="Grant Fuhr" label="Grant Fuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="58124" end="58135" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="58137" end="58149" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q725700" start="58151" end="58165" title="Glenn Anderson" label="Glenn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="58167" end="58177" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="58179" end="58190" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356332" start="58195" end="58207" title="Rod Phillips (broadcaster)" label="Rod Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228865" start="58419" end="58430" title="Lee Fogolin" label="Lee Fogolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q739756" start="58435" end="58445" title="Ryan Smyth" label="Ryan Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="58638" end="58655" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339036" start="58659" end="58671" title="Rogers Place" label="Rogers Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q115866771" start="58882" end="58903" title="2023 Heritage Classic" label="2023 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066910" start="59003" end="59016" title="Charlie Huddy" label="Charlie Huddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928048" start="59041" end="59052" title="Doug Weight" label="Doug Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="59201" end="59217" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138597" start="59275" end="59290" title="Craig MacTavish" label="Craig MacTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417311" start="59295" end="59306" title="Randy Gregg (ice hockey)" label="Randy Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="59392" end="59411" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="59523" end="59542" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q538935" start="59616" end="59630" title="Jacques Plante" label="Jacques Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="59767" end="59785" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q710440" start="59841" end="59852" title="Norm Ullman" label="Norm Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="59948" end="59965" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="59970" end="59989" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="60081" end="60094" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="60458" end="60468" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q681852" start="60575" end="60595" title="1980 NHL entry draft" label="1980 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354283" start="60690" end="60700" title="Grant Fuhr" label="Grant Fuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="60784" end="60795" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="60872" end="60884" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="61192" end="61208" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q725700" start="61219" end="61233" title="Glenn Anderson" label="Glenn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q350538" start="61327" end="61337" title="Adam Oates" label="Adam Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q553286" start="61624" end="61637" title="Chris Pronger" label="Chris Pronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="61811" end="61821" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="62074" end="62085" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="62206" end="62219" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964388" start="62306" end="62331" title="1984 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1984 Stanley Cup Playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356332" start="62345" end="62357" title="Rod Phillips (broadcaster)" label="Rod Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473705" start="62374" end="62402" title="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award" label="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="62439" end="62448" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126153" start="62659" end="62670" title="Clare Drake" label="Clare Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q753602" start="62704" end="62722" title="1975–76 WHA season" label="1975–76 WHA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365746" start="62779" end="62790" title="Ken Holland" label="Ken Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="62890" end="62903" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="62939" end="62957" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="63452" end="63465" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="63508" end="63521" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="63564" end="63577" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499123" start="63629" end="63640" title="Steve Smith (ice hockey, born in Scotland)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="63694" end="63705" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="63759" end="63770" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q706130" start="63820" end="63832" title="Jason Arnott" label="Jason Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="63883" end="63893" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="63943" end="63953" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026393" start="63993" end="64003" title="Cam Talbot" label="Cam Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145615" start="64047" end="64060" title="Curtis Joseph" label="Curtis Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q739875" start="64062" end="64072" title="Tommy Salo" label="Tommy Salo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="64123" end="64134" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="64136" end="64143" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="64145" end="64152" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="64154" end="64161" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="64163" end="64170" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="64172" end="64179" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="64207" end="64214" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="64215" end="64238" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="64240" end="64247" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="64249" end="64256" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q922116" start="64258" end="64283" title="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl" label="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="64285" end="64292" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="64294" end="64301" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="64303" end="64310" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="64312" end="64319" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="64321" end="64328" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="64330" end="64337" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="64339" end="64346" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="64348" end="64355" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="64357" end="64372" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="64374" end="64387" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="64389" end="64396" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="64398" end="64405" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="64407" end="64414" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="64416" end="64423" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="64425" end="64432" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="64434" end="64441" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="64443" end="64450" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="64452" end="64466" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="64468" end="64475" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="64477" end="64484" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="64486" end="64493" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="64495" end="64502" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="64504" end="64511" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q15012236" start="64513" end="64527" title="Leon Draisaitl" label="Leon Draisaitl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="64529" end="64536" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="64538" end="64556" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="64558" end="64570" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="64572" end="64579" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="64581" end="64594" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="64596" end="64603" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="64605" end="64612" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q862403" start="64614" end="64626" title="Bill Ranford" label="Bill Ranford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="64628" end="64635" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="64637" end="64651" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="64653" end="64660" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="64662" end="64682" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="64684" end="64697" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="64699" end="64706" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="64708" end="64715" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="64717" end="64724" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="64726" end="64733" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="64735" end="64742" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="64744" end="64751" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="64753" end="64760" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="64762" end="64769" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="64771" end="64783" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="64785" end="64792" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="64794" end="64808" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="64810" end="64817" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="64819" end="64826" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="64828" end="64835" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q15012236" start="64837" end="64851" title="Leon Draisaitl" label="Leon Draisaitl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="64853" end="64860" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="64862" end="64878" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q280813" start="64880" end="64891" title="Glen Sather" label="Glen Sather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="64893" end="64900" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="64902" end="64930" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="James Norris Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q920926" start="64932" end="64943" title="Paul Coffey" label="Paul Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="64945" end="64952" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="64954" end="64961" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q250753" start="64963" end="64990" title="King Clancy Memorial Trophy" label="King Clancy Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740208" start="64992" end="65002" title="Kevin Lowe" label="Kevin Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="65004" end="65011" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371110" start="65013" end="65025" title="Ethan Moreau" label="Ethan Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="65027" end="65034" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q504655" start="65036" end="65050" title="Andrew Ference" label="Andrew Ference"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="65052" end="65059" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q516636" start="65061" end="65086" title="Lady Byng Memorial Trophy" label="Lady Byng Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="65088" end="65101" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q606872" start="65103" end="65110" title="1979–80 NHL season" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="65112" end="65122" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="65124" end="65131" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="65133" end="65174" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Lester B. Pearson Award/Ted Lindsay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="65176" end="65189" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="65191" end="65198" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="65200" end="65207" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="65209" end="65216" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="65218" end="65225" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="65227" end="65234" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="65236" end="65248" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="65250" end="65257" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="65259" end="65273" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="65275" end="65282" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="65284" end="65291" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="65293" end="65300" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="65302" end="65309" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q15012236" start="65311" end="65325" title="Leon Draisaitl" label="Leon Draisaitl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="65327" end="65334" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q686354" start="65336" end="65356" title="NHL Plus/Minus Award" label="NHL Plus/Minus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066910" start="65358" end="65371" title="Charlie Huddy" label="Charlie Huddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571573" start="65373" end="65380" title="1982–83 NHL season" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="65382" end="65395" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="65397" end="65404" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="65406" end="65413" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="65415" end="65422" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="65424" end="65437" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354283" start="65439" end="65449" title="Grant Fuhr" label="Grant Fuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="65451" end="65458" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339055" start="65478" end="65494" title="Edmonton Gardens" label="Edmonton Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139489" start="65509" end="65528" title="Northlands Coliseum" label="Northlands Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130381" start="65543" end="65563" title="Commonwealth Stadium (Edmonton)" label="Commonwealth Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q627719" start="65565" end="65586" title="2003 Heritage Classic" label="2003 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115866771" start="65588" end="65609" title="2023 Heritage Classic" label="2023 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339036" start="65613" end="65625" title="Rogers Place" label="Rogers Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386987" start="65719" end="65731" title="Rogers Media" label="Rogers Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629768" start="65792" end="65806" title="Sportsnet West" label="Sportsnet West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954072" start="65891" end="65900" title="NHL on Sportsnet" label="Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="65910" end="65932" title="Hockey Night in Canada" label="Hockey Night in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="65972" end="65986" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532871" start="65988" end="65994" title="Citytv" label="Citytv"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="66062" end="66076" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="66097" end="66104" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="66106" end="66118" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="66120" end="66141" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="66146" end="66153" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q113378670" start="66167" end="66180" title="Jack Michaels" label="Jack Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380468" start="66239" end="66252" title="Louie DeBrusk" label="Louie DeBrusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531398" start="66266" end="66279" title="Gene Principe" label="Gene Principe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="66414" end="66425" title="Prime Video" label="Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011096" start="66530" end="66534" title="CHED (AM)" label="CHED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249414" start="66719" end="66728" title="Rob Brown (ice hockey)" label="Rob Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="66938" end="66962" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783598" start="66965" end="66994" title="List of Stanley Cup champions" label="List of Stanley Cup champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623853" start="66997" end="67032" title="List of ice hockey teams in Alberta" label="List of ice hockey teams in Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378017" start="67035" end="67071" title="List of Edmonton Oilers head coaches" label="List of Edmonton Oilers head coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081492" start="67074" end="67086" title="Oilogosphere" label="Oilogosphere"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73132" wikidata="Q206357" url="?curid=73132" title="Minnesota Wild">
<text>The Minnesota Wild are a professional ice hockey team based in Saint Paul, Minnesota. The Wild compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Central Division in the Western Conference. The team plays their home games at the Xcel Energy Center, and is owned by Craig Leipold. The Wild are affiliated with the Iowa Wild of the American Hockey League (AHL) and the Iowa Heartlanders of the ECHL.

The Wild were founded on June 25, 1997, and began play in the 2000–01 season. The team was founded following the departure of the Minnesota North Stars, who were based in Minnesota from 1967 to 1993, when they relocated to Dallas, Texas, and became the Dallas Stars. The Wild made their first Stanley Cup playoffs appearance in 2003, making a surprise run to the Western Conference Finals, but ultimately losing to the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. The team have appeared in the playoffs a total of 13 times, and have won one division championship, in 2008.

==History==

===Preparations of a new franchise===
Following the departure of the Minnesota North Stars after the 1992–93 season, the state of Minnesota was without an NHL team for seven seasons. Saint Paul mayor (and future U.S. Senator) Norm Coleman began a campaign to either recruit the relocation of an existing franchise to the city or the award of an expansion franchise to a Minnesota-based ownership group. These efforts came close to success in the mid-1990s when Minnesota interests purchased the original Winnipeg Jets intending to relocate the franchise to Minnesota; however, arena negotiations at the Target Center fell through, and the Jets instead relocated to Phoenix, Arizona.

Following the failed attempt to relocate the Jets, the NHL announced its intention to expand from 26 to 30 teams. Businessman and Minnetonka native Bob Naegele, Jr. became the lead investor for an application to the NHL for an expansion franchise and, ultimately, the first majority owner. On June 25, 1997, the National Hockey League (NHL) announced that Minnesota had been awarded an expansion franchise, to begin play in the 2000–01 season. The six finalist team names for the new NHL franchise (Blue Ox, Freeze, Northern Lights, Voyageurs, White Bears, and Wild), were announced on November 20, 1997. Jac Sperling was named chief executive officer of the Minnesota team, Doug Risebrough was named general manager, Tod Leiweke was named president, and Martha Fuller was named chief financial officer.

The team was officially named the Wild at an unveiling at the Aldrich Arena on January 22, 1998, with the song &quot;Born to Be Wild&quot; by Steppenwolf playing over the arena&#x27;s speaker system. The Minnesota Wild announced its first major sponsorship agreement with MasterCard from First USA. It was the earliest that First USA had ever signed an agreement before a team began play (31 months). The State of Minnesota adopted legislation in April 1998 to loan $65 million to the City of Saint Paul to fund 50% of the estimated $130 million project costs for the Xcel Energy Center in Saint Paul. The legislation also provided that only $48 million of the loan needed to be repaid if the team met the requirements to have an agreement in place during the lease term with the Minnesota Amateur Sports Commission. The City of Saint Paul issued an additional $65 million in bonds, with roughly 90% of the debt service on the bonds and the repayment of the state loan coming from scheduled rent and payment instead of taxes from the Minnesota Wild. Deconstruction of the Saint Paul Civic Center began soon after. Designs were announced for the Xcel Energy Center and a groundbreaking ceremony for the Xcel Energy Center was hosted in Saint Paul.

The Minnesota Wild announced a 26-year partnership agreement with the Minnesota Amateur Sports Commission (MASC). The Minnesota Wild-MASC partnership is the first partnership of its kind between a private professional sports team and a public amateur sports organization. Doug Risebrough was named executive vice president/general manager of Minnesota Wild and the Xcel Energy Center was completed and ready for use.

===Early years (2000–2009)===

====Marian Gaborik era====

The Wild named Jacques Lemaire their first head coach and the team picked Marian Gaborik third overall in the first round of the 2000 NHL entry draft. Gaborik scored the first-ever goal for the Wild in their franchise debut on October 6 at Anaheim. The Wild played their first-ever home game on October 11 against the Philadelphia Flyers and skated to a 3–3 tie. Minnesota native Darby Hendrickson scored the first-ever home goal for the Wild. Before the game, it was announced the team would retire the number 1 jersey, their first number retirement, with no Wild player ever wearing it, to honor all Minnesota fans, who the team claimed were the &quot;true&quot; &quot;number one&quot; to them. The most notable game of the year was the first visit of the Dallas Stars, who had formerly played in Minnesota as the Minnesota North Stars. The Wild rode an emotional sellout crowd of over 18,000 to a 6–0 shutout in Dallas&#x27; first regular season game in Minnesota since a neutral-site game in 1993. The season ended with Scott Pellerin as the leading scorer with 39 points while Wes Walz, Darby Hendrickson and Gaborik paced the team with 18 goals each.

The Wild got off to a strong start in the 2001–02 season by earning at least one point in its first seven games. However, the Wild finished in last place again with a record of 26–35–12–6. En route, there were signs the Wild were improving, as second-year speedster Gaborik had a solid sophomore season with 30 goals, including an invite to the NHL YoungStars Game, and Andrew Brunette led the team in scoring with 69 points.

Gaborik spent much of the 2002–03 season vying for the league scoring crown before slumping in the second half, and the Wild, in their first-ever playoff appearance, made it to the conference finals before being swept 4–0 by the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. Previously, the Wild had beaten the favored and third-seeded Colorado Avalanche in the first round in seven games, coming back from a 3–1 series deficit and winning both game 6 and 7 in overtime. Brunette scored the series-clinching goal, the last on Patrick Roy. In the conference semifinals, the Wild beat the fourth-seeded Vancouver Canucks, again in seven games, and again after being down 3–1 in a series. In the process, the Wild became the first team in playoff history to capture a seven-game series twice after facing elimination during game 5.

When the 2003–04 season started, the Wild were short-handed with both Pascal Dupuis and Gaborik holding out. After struggling in the first month, the Wild finally got their two young star left-wingers signed, but both struggled to get back into game shape as the Wild struggled through much of November. In a deep hole, the Wild did not make it to the playoffs, despite finishing the season strong, with wins in five of their last six games as they finished last in the competitive Northwest Division with a record of 30–29–20–3. Along the way, the Wild began to gear up for the future, trading away several of their older players who were a part of the franchise from the beginning, including Brad Bombardir and Jim Dowd.

The 2004–05 season was canceled due to an NHL lockout. Former Wild player Sergei Zholtok died from a heart condition during a game in Europe. Zholtok died in the arms of Minnesotan and former Wild player Darby Hendrickson.

====After the lockout====
In the 2005–06 season, the first season after the lockout, Minnesota finished in fifth and last place in the Northwest Division, eight points behind fourth-placed Vancouver Canucks. En route, Marian Gaborik set a new franchise record for goals in a season at 38, and Brian Rolston set a new highest point total by a Wild player in a season at 79. The goaltender controversy between Manny Fernandez and Dwayne Roloson ended when Roloson was traded to the Edmonton Oilers for a first-round pick in the 2006 NHL entry draft.

The Wild signed veteran free agents Kim Johnsson, Mark Parrish, Branko Radivojevic and Keith Carney. On the day of the NHL entry draft, it traded the 17th overall pick and prospect Patrick O&#x27;Sullivan to the Los Angeles Kings for veteran Slovak Pavol Demitra. Niklas Backstrom was the starting goalie for the Wild after previous starter Manny Fernandez sprained his knee on January 20. Fernandez played for the first time since the sprain on March 6 and was removed after allowing three goals in two periods in the Wild&#x27;s 3–0 loss to the San Jose Sharks. Josh Harding was brought up from the Wild&#x27;s AHL affiliate, the Houston Aeros, when Fernandez was hurt and remained on Minnesota&#x27;s roster for the rest of the season as the backup goalie. All-Star winger Marian Gaborik returned from a groin injury in January 2007 and made an immediate impact, bringing a new spark to a lacking offense. The Wild made the playoffs in 2007 for the second time in team history, but were eliminated by the eventual Stanley Cup champions Anaheim Ducks in the conference quarterfinals.
The Wild broke numerous franchise records during the 2007–08 season, including most goals and points (Marian Gaborik – 42 goals and 83 points). Also, Jacques Lemaire recorded his 500th career coaching win as the Wild clinched their first-ever Northwest Division title in a 3–1 victory over the Calgary Flames on April 3, 2008. They again faced the Colorado Avalanche in the conference quarterfinals, and the Wild held home-ice advantage. However, Minnesota came up short, being eliminated in six games by the Avalanche.

During the 2008 off-season, the Wild re-acquired Andrew Brunette from Colorado and traded for defenseman Marek Zidlicky. The Wild also signed free agents Antti Miettinen and Owen Nolan to multi-year deals. There seemed to be a stigma about Jacques Lemaire&#x27;s defensive system that caused a number of top free agents to avoid the Wild.

Despite winning the Northwest Division the previous season, the Wild fell to ninth place in the Western Conference in 2008–09, missing the playoffs. Much of this was in part due to a lack of scoring and overall team offense, and the injuries to star forward Marian Gaborik, who only played 17 games. Jacques Lemaire, head coach of the Wild since the team&#x27;s inception in the 2000–01 season, resigned at season&#x27;s end. General manager Doug Risebrough was later fired, leading to a nearly complete turnover in the Wild&#x27;s coaching and hockey management staff.

===Chuck Fletcher era (2009–2018)===

====Mikko Koivu years====
In the 2009 off-season, Marian Gaborik signed with the New York Rangers during the summer as a free agent. Team owner Craig Leipold hired former Pittsburgh Penguins assistant general manager Chuck Fletcher as general manager. Later that summer, Fletcher selected Todd Richards as head coach. Martin Havlat was signed via free agency after playing the previous three seasons for the Chicago Blackhawks in order to lessen the blow of Gaborik&#x27;s departure. During the first month of the 2009–10 season, the team announced their first-ever full-time captain, Mikko Koivu. In 2009, Leipold named Matt Majka as chief operating officer of the team.
The 2009–10 and the 2010–11 seasons ended in disappointment for the Wild as they missed the playoffs in both seasons. In the 2010 NHL entry draft, the Wild held the ninth overall pick and used it to select Finnish forward Mikael Granlund. The Wild opened the 2010–11 season with two games at the Hartwall Areena in Helsinki against the Carolina Hurricanes. Following the 2010–11 season, the team fired head coach Todd Richards due to the team failing to reach the playoffs in his two seasons as head coach with a 77–71–16 record. Mike Yeo, who coached the Wild&#x27;s AHL affiliate Houston Aeros to a Western Conference title in 2011, was named the new head coach.

During the 2011 NHL entry draft (which the team hosted), the Wild used their tenth overall pick to select Jonas Brodin. The club also created a stir when they traded star defenseman Brent Burns and a second-round pick in 2012 to the San Jose Sharks in exchange for Devin Setoguchi, Charlie Coyle and the 28th overall pick in the 2011 draft, which they used to select Zack Phillips. Later in the off-season, the Wild traded Martin Havlat for Dany Heatley in another blockbuster trade with the Sharks. In November, the team set a franchise record for most wins in one month with 11. Despite a hot start to the season that saw them sitting atop the NHL standings in early December, multiple injuries to key players for extended periods effectively eliminated the team from playoff contention for the fourth consecutive year.

====Parise–Suter era====
During the 2012 off-season, the team was able to sign top prospect Mikael Granlund to a three-year, entry-level contract. During the 2012 NHL entry draft, the team selected Matt Dumba with the seventh overall pick. In the same off-season, the Wild also signed unrestricted free agent winger Zach Parise, a Twin Cities native, and defenseman Ryan Suter to identical 13-year, US$98 million contracts. However, the team&#x27;s busy off-season was overshadowed by the 2012–13 NHL lockout, which ended in January 2013.
Prior to the 2013 trade deadline, the Wild acquired Jason Pominville from the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for prospects Johan Larsson and Matt Hackett, as well as draft picks. The team reached the postseason for the fourth time in franchise history after a 3–1 win over the Colorado Avalanche on April 27, 2013. After finishing in eighth place in the Western Conference, the Wild lost in five games to the eventual Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks in the first round of the 2013 playoffs.

The relocation and rebranding of the Atlanta Thrashers as the &quot;new&quot; Winnipeg Jets in 2011 meant Winnipeg was once again Minnesota&#x27;s second-closest geographical rival after Chicago, and led the NHL to reconsider its divisional alignment. Even before the NHL&#x27;s return to Winnipeg, Wild management had lobbied repeatedly for a move out of the Northwest Division, where they were the only Central Time Zone team. Among the alignments considered was having the Jets replace the Avalanche in the Northwest, but Wild management strongly objected to this alignment as it would have left them as the only American team in their division. Following protracted negotiations both amongst the owners and with the National Hockey League Players&#x27; Association, in 2013, the NHL collapsed its six divisions into four and dissolved the Northwest Division. Consequently, the Wild moved into the Central Division along with the Jets and Avalanche; the Canadian teams from the Northwest moved back to the Pacific Division. The Wild now share their division with not only the Blackhawks but also the Dallas Stars, the Wild&#x27;s predecessors in Minnesota, and the St. Louis Blues, another major rival of the North Stars during the Norris Division era. Thus, the 2013 Blackhawks–Wild playoff series was seen as the rebirth of the old Chicago–Minnesota rivalry in the NHL.
The 2013–14 regular season for the Wild was the best the team had since the 2007–08 season, good enough to claim the first Wild Card position. Jason Pominville became the Wild&#x27;s third player in franchise history to reach the 30-goal mark, with Mikko Koivu surpassing Marian Gaborik in all-time points for the club. The Wild battled goaltender problems throughout the entire season. It began with Josh Harding leading the NHL in save percentage, and goals-against average, before being placed on injured reserve for complications with his multiple sclerosis (MS). Backstrom also suffered a season-ending injury with abdominal issues. The Wild started five different goalies during the year and dressed seven. At the trade deadline, general manager Chuck Fletcher acquired Ilya Bryzgalov from the Edmonton Oilers in exchange for a fourth-round pick, as well as Matt Moulson and Cody McCormick from Buffalo in exchange for Torrey Mitchell and two second-round picks in 2014 and 2016. In the playoffs, the team would face Colorado, who won the Central Division. The Wild won the series four games to three with an overtime goal in game 7 by Nino Niederreiter. The team would then face the defending Stanley Cup champions Chicago, where they were eliminated in six games.

During the 2014 off-season, the Wild signed forward Thomas Vanek as a free agent. In 2014–15, the Wild clinched the first wild card spot in the West by defeating the Chicago Blackhawks. It then defeated the Central Division champions, the St. Louis Blues, in the first round of the playoffs in six games. In the second round, the Wild were eliminated in a four-game series sweep by Chicago. Following the loss, forward Matt Cooke said, &quot;Our expectations inside this room were a lot higher than [a] second-round series.&quot;

In 2016, the Wild set a franchise record with the best win record in the first 41 games of the season. Immediately afterward, they went into a skid, losing the next 13 of 14 games, culminating in the firing of head coach Mike Yeo. Under new interim head coach John Torchetti, the team snapped the losing streak but remained streaky throughout the rest of the season, managing to barely make the playoffs with a total of 87 points, the worst record of any playoff team in the shootout era (since 2005–06). In the first round, the Wild fell to the Central Division champion Dallas Stars in six games. During the 2016 off-season, the Wild signed free agent Eric Staal to a three-year contract. The Wild also hired Bruce Boudreau as their new head coach, replacing interim head coach John Torchetti.

In 2017, the Wild set their new franchise record for points (106), wins (49) and goals for (266). The Wild set a franchise-record 12-game win streak that was snapped on New Year&#x27;s Eve 2016 by the Columbus Blue Jackets, a team also on a franchise-record win streak at the time. Nevertheless, Minnesota failed to win more than a game in the playoffs, losing in five games to St. Louis. Mikael Granlund led the team in points with 69, while new addition Eric Staal led the team in goals with 28. Mikko Koivu was a finalist for the Frank J. Selke Trophy for best defensive forward, while Granlund was a finalist for the Lady Byng Trophy.

In the 2017 off-season, the Wild experienced significant roster turnover. Erik Haula was lost to the Vegas Golden Knights in the expansion draft (along with prospect Alex Tuch). Winger Jason Pominville and defenseman Marco Scandella were traded to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for forwards Tyler Ennis and Marcus Foligno. Minnesota native Matt Cullen was signed as a free agent and returned to the Wild to shore up the fourth line (Cullen had previously played in Minnesota from 2010 to 2013). Captain Mikko Koivu signed a two-year extension, ensuring he would remain with the Wild through the 2019–20 season.

Following another 100-point regular season, the Wild matched up with Central Division rival, the Winnipeg Jets, in the first round of the 2018 playoffs. The Jets defeated the Wild in five games, making it three straight seasons in which the Wild failed to advance past the first round. On April 23, 2018, shortly following the Wild&#x27;s exit from the playoffs, owner Leipold announced he had fired general manager Fletcher after nine seasons with the team. Under Fletcher&#x27;s leadership, the Wild qualified for the playoffs six consecutive years, but failed to advance beyond the second round.

===Rebuilding and the Kirill Kaprizov era (2018–present)===
On May 21, 2018, Paul Fenton was hired as the third general manager in franchise history. During the 2018–19 season, the Wild struggled to keep up in the ultra-competitive Central Division as they had in previous seasons. Despite a renaissance year from Parise, many key players like Eric Staal and Jason Zucker regressed offensively from the season prior. Many reported that there was dysfunction in the organization, caused by a rift between Fenton, Boudreau and various players, ultimately leading the trading of several core players, such as Mikael Granlund, Charlie Coyle and Nino Niederreiter. The Wild finished the season with 83-points, finishing last in the division and missing the playoffs for the first time since 2012.

In the 2019 off-season, the Wild signed free agent Mats Zuccarello to a five-year contract. On July 30, 2019, Fenton was fired as general manager, just 14 months after being hired to that position. On August 21, 2019, the Wild hired Bill Guerin as the fourth general manager in franchise history. On February 14, 2020, the Wild fired head coach Bruce Boudreau and named Dean Evason as interim head coach. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, the Wild participated in the best-of-five qualifying round of the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs, but were eliminated in four games at the hands of the Vancouver Canucks.

Kirill Kaprizov played his first NHL game with the Wild in January 2021, scoring the overtime winner against the Los Angeles Kings during his debut.
On September 21, 2021, Kirill Kaprizov signed a five-year, $45 million contract with the Wild. As a result of the contract, Kaprizov became the highest-paid sophomore player in NHL history.

In 2022, the team set franchise season highs in points (113) and wins (53). Kirill Kaprizov set franchise records in points (108), goals (47), and assists (61). They faced the division rival St. Louis Blues in the first round, but despite having home ice advantage and the services of recently acquired goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury, were eliminated in six games. In the following off-season, forward Kevin Fiala was traded to the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for the draft rights to defenseman Brock Faber, while other notable players such as Nick Bjugstad and Nicolas Deslauriers were lost in free agency.

On July 7, 2022, the Wild traded goaltender Cam Talbot to the Ottawa Senators in exchange for Filip Gustavsson, five days after signing Fleury to a new two-year contract. Despite a second consecutive 40-goal season from Kaprizov, the Wild struggled defensively in the early parts of the season before shifting entirely to lackluster offense and low-scoring games at the end. However, thanks to a stellar season from Gustavsson, the team finished with 103 points, earning third place in the Central Division and setting them up for a playoff matchup against the division rival Dallas Stars. The Wild signed Brock Faber to his entry-level contract shortly before the playoffs began and immediately following the loss of the University of Minnesota Golden Gophers to the University of Michigan Wolverines in the Big Ten men&#x27;s ice hockey championship. The Wild were eliminated in six games, marking their eighth consecutive playoff series loss.

The Wild re-signed Gustavsson in the 2023 off-season but did not make any notable trades or acquisitions, opting instead to &quot;run it back&quot; with the previous year&#x27;s squad. However, despite breakout performances from Faber and the 2020 ninth overall pick Marco Rossi, as well as Kaprizov&#x27;s third consecutive 40-goal season, injuries to nearly every player in the starting lineup hindered the team, with key players such as Kaprizov, Joel Eriksson Ek, captain Jared Spurgeon, Marcus Foligno, Mats Zuccarello, and Jonas Brodin all missing substantial time. The Wild finished the season with 87 points, their lowest total since the 2018–19 season, and missed the playoffs for the first time since that year.

==Team information==

===Jerseys===

====2000–2007====
For its first seven years in the NHL, the Wild wore a uniform of either a green or white jersey with red and gold stripes and the primary logo on the front of the jersey. The shoulder patch was a circle with &quot;Minnesota Wild&quot; read in distinctive lettering from both words. The name and numbering on the green jersey would be gold with red outlining while on the white jersey it was red with gold outlining. In 2003–04, with the NHL reversing the convention regarding the home and road jersey colors, the green jersey became the home jersey while the white one became the road jersey.

====2007–2017====
In the 2007–08 season, when all jerseys were converted to the new Reebok Edge uniform system, the white jersey was retained and the home jersey replaced with a new one that has a small imprint of the team&#x27;s primary logo inside a white circle, which is surrounded by the words &quot;Minnesota Wild&quot; in a larger ring against a green background. The rest of the jersey is predominantly red, with additional swatches of green on the sleeves outlined with wheat. The away jersey uses a larger version of the primary logo without the concentric circles on a predominantly white jersey; in 2013, the lettering was updated to match the home and alternate sweaters, at the same time updating the sweater&#x27;s look to a more traditional design. On August 30, 2009, the team unveiled another third/alternate jersey, which is predominantly green with wheat accents. It says &quot;Minnesota Wild&quot; in script writing across the chest.

On April 4, 2017, the Wild honored the Minnesota North Stars by wearing North Stars jerseys for warm-ups, despite the North Stars history belonging to the Dallas Stars. Martin Hanzal warmed up with number 91, as the North Stars retired number 19 in honor of Bill Masterton.

====2017–present====
On June 20, 2017, the Wild introduced a new home uniform, as the NHL switched from Reebok to Adidas – a green jersey with their main logo, and a wheat-colored stripe through the center of the jersey. On the arms is a wheat-colored stripe with a smaller red stripe near the top of it. The Wild kept its away jersey design the same. The Wild, along with the rest of the NHL, did not have an alternate jersey for the 2017–18 season.

On September 23, 2023, the Wild unveiled an alternate green jersey based on the &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; look they wore the previous season (see below). This set added a right shoulder patch featuring a recolored &quot;State of Hockey&quot; alternate logo and captaincy patches shaped after the Minnesota state outline. This was the first time that Wild had an official alternate jersey since 2017.

====Reverse Retro jersey====
In the 2020–21 season, the Wild unveiled a &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; jersey in collaboration with Adidas. The uniform was a callback to the late 1970s Minnesota North Stars white uniform, with the Wild logo recolored to match the team&#x27;s green and gold scheme. This design was reused again in the 2022–23 season, but with green now the base color.

====Winter Classic jersey====
For the 2022 Winter Classic, the Wild unveiled a special edition jersey inspired by various early Minnesota hockey teams. The jersey is primarily green with red shoulder yoke and red and wheat stripes. The front of the uniforms featured the Minneapolis–Saint Paul (MPLS.–ST. PAUL) identifier around three symbols: a red Minnesota state silhouette with &quot;MN&quot; inside, and two wheat stars referencing Gemini, the twin constellation. Brown gloves and pants were used to reflect early 20th century hockey gear.

===Goal horn and songs===
The team has had a goal horn each season since its inception. The Wild are one of the few teams to not blast their goal horn whenever they score in a shootout.
The team&#x27;s first goal songs were &quot;Born to Be Wild&quot; and &quot;Rock and Roll Part 2&quot; that was used in its inaugural season of 2000–01. The following season, the team removed &quot;Born to Be Wild&quot; but kept &quot;Rock and Roll Part 2&quot; through 2004, before the lockout. After the lockout in 2005, the Wild used a cover of &quot;Rock and Roll Part 1&quot; for the 2005–06 season. For the 2006–07 season, the team changed its goal song to &quot;Crowd Chant&quot; by Joe Satriani shortly after its release. After pop legend and Minneapolis native Prince died in April 2016, the team held a tribute to him at game 6 of the 2016 Stanley Cup playoffs game against the Dallas Stars, and adopted &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Crazy&quot; as their goal song. After a fan poll, the team permanently used &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Crazy&quot; with the goal horn starting in the 2016–17 season. The Wild kept &quot;Crowd Chant&quot; as their win song. For the 2018–19 season, the team brought back &quot;Crowd Chant&quot; as its goal song and &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Crazy&quot; became the win song, followed by the singing of the team fight song &quot;The State of Hockey&quot;. For the pandemic-shortened season, the team used &quot;Jump Around&quot; by House of Pain as their goal song. In the 2021-22 Season, the Wild used &quot;Shout&quot; by The Isley Brothers as their goal song. &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Crazy&quot; remains the win song.

===Logo===

The logo depicts both a forest landscape and the silhouette of a wild animal. The &quot;eye&quot; of the &quot;wild animal&quot; is the north star, in tribute to the departed Minnesota North Stars as well as the state&#x27;s motto &quot;L&#x27;Étoile du Nord&quot;, meaning &quot;The Star of the North&quot;. The mouth of the animal represents the Mississippi River, which starts in Minnesota. According to &quot;The Good Point&quot;, questions surrounding the identity of the animal depicted have sparked debate amongst logo enthusiasts, earning accolades for its unique complexity in North American professional sports.

In 2008, &quot;Nordy&quot; was introduced as the official mascot of the team.

===Ownership===
The franchise was originally owned by a limited partnership formed by former majority owner Bob Naegele, Jr. of &quot;Naegele Sports, LLC&quot; in 1997. On January 10, 2008, it was announced the franchise was being sold to former Nashville Predators owner Craig Leipold. The NHL&#x27;s Board of Governors officially approved Leipold&#x27;s purchase of Minnesota Sports &amp; Entertainment (MSE) on April 10, 2008. Leipold, a resident of Racine, Wisconsin, completed the sale of the Nashville Predators to a local ownership group on December 7, 2007, a team he owned since the expansion franchise was awarded to Nashville in 1997.

Leipold is the majority owner and principal investor in MSE, a regional sports and entertainment leader that includes the NHL&#x27;s Minnesota Wild, its AHL affiliate the Iowa Wild of the American Hockey League, Wildside Caterers, 317 on Rice Park and the facility management of Xcel Energy Center and the Saint Paul RiverCentre. He also serves as the team&#x27;s Governor at NHL Board of Governors&#x27; meetings. After purchase of MSE, Mr. Leipold sold the Swarm to John Arlotta. Along with the Wild, the group has year-round management rights of the Xcel Energy Center, and currently has a management contract to manage the adjoining Saint Paul RiverCentre and Roy Wilkins Auditorium; in addition the partnership also owns and operates 317 on Rice Park, which is the former historic Minnesota club.

===Community involvement===
The Minnesota Wild stay involved in the community through the philanthropic activities of the Minnesota Wild Foundation and its operations to support the game of hockey with events such as Hockey Day Minnesota. It has been celebrated every year since 2007. The Wild are 13-2-1 on Hockey Day Minnesota. Started in 2017, the Wild unveiled a new tradition called This Is Our Ice which encourages Wild fans to bring water from local ponds, lakes and rinks and add it to the Xcel Energy Center ice. Fans can bring water to any regular season home game and add it to the collection station which will then be added to the ice for the season.

==Minor league affiliates==
Minnesota currently has two minor league affiliates: the Iowa Wild of the American Hockey League (AHL) and the Iowa Heartlanders of the ECHL. The Iowa Wild is owned by the parent club, who relocated the franchise from Houston in 2013.

===Former minor league affiliates===

* Alaska Aces
* Allen Americans
* Austin Ice Bats
* Bakersfield Condors
* Cleveland Lumberjacks
* Houston Aeros
* Johnstown Chiefs
* Louisiana IceGators
* Mississippi Sea Wolves
* Orlando Solar Bears
* Quad City Mallards
* Rapid City Rush
* Texas Wildcatters
==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Wild. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Minnesota Wild seasons&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players and personnel==

===Current roster===
===Team captains===
&quot;Note: The Wild rotated the captaincy for their first nine seasons on a monthly basis among several of its players each season, with some players serving multiple times under Jacques Lemaire. After Todd Richards became head coach for the start of the 2009–10 season, Mikko Koivu, who was the last rotating captain and has had the captaincy three different times in the 2008–09 season, became the franchise&#x27;s first permanent captain on October 20, 2009.&quot;

Rotating, 2000–2009

*&quot;2000–01&quot;
** Sean O&#x27;Donnell – October 2000
** Scott Pellerin – November 2000
** Wes Walz – December 2000
** Brad Bombardir – January &amp; February 2001
** Darby Hendrickson – March &amp; April 2001
*&quot;2001–02&quot;
** Jim Dowd – October 2001
** Filip Kuba – November 2001
** Brad Brown – December 2001 &amp; January 2002
** Andrew Brunette – February, March &amp; April 2002
*&quot;2002–03&quot;
** Brad Bombardir – October, November 2002, February, March, April &amp; Playoffs 2003
** Matt Johnson – December 2002
** Sergei Zholtok – January 2003
*&quot;2003–04&quot;
** Brad Brown – October 2003
** Andrew Brunette – November 2003, March &amp; April 2004
** Richard Park – December 2003
** Brad Bombardir – January 2004
** Jim Dowd – February 2004

*&quot;2005–06&quot;
** Alex Henry – September 2005
** Filip Kuba – November 2005
** Willie Mitchell – December 2005 &amp; January 2006
** Brian Rolston – February 2006
** Wes Walz – March &amp; April 2006
*&quot;2006–07&quot;
** Brian Rolston – October, November 2006 &amp; January 2007
** Keith Carney – December 2006
** Mark Parrish – February, March, April &amp; Playoffs 2007
*&quot;2007–08&quot;
** Pavol Demitra – October 2007
** Brian Rolston – November 2007
** Mark Parrish – December 2007
** Nick Schultz – January 2008
** Mikko Koivu – February 2008
** Marian Gaborik – March &amp; April 2008
*&quot;2008–09&quot;
** Mikko Koivu – October, November 2008, January 2009, March &amp; April 2009
** Kim Johnsson – December 2008
** Andrew Brunette – February 2009
Permanent, 2009–present
* Mikko Koivu, 2009–2020
* Jared Spurgeon, 2021–present

===Retired numbers===
The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.
===Hall of Famers===
As of 2024, no member of the Minnesota Wild has been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame, although the team has been coached by a member of the Hall with Jacques Lemaire (inducted as a player in 1985).

===First-round draft picks===
* 2000: Marian Gaborik (3rd overall)
* 2001: Mikko Koivu (6th overall)
* 2002: Pierre-Marc Bouchard (8th overall)
* 2003: Brent Burns (20th overall)
* 2004: A. J. Thelen (12th overall)
* 2005: Benoit Pouliot (4th overall)
* 2006: James Sheppard (9th overall)
* 2007: Colton Gillies (16th overall)
* 2008: Tyler Cuma (23rd overall)
* 2009: Nick Leddy (16th overall)
* 2010: Mikael Granlund (9th overall)
* 2011: Jonas Brodin (10th overall) and Zack Phillips (28th overall)
* 2012: Matt Dumba (7th overall)
* 2014: Alex Tuch (18th overall)
* 2015: Joel Eriksson Ek (20th overall)
* 2016: Luke Kunin (15th overall)
* 2018: Filip Johansson (24th overall)
* 2019: Matt Boldy (12th overall)
* 2020: Marco Rossi (9th overall)
* 2021: Jesper Wallstedt (20th overall) and Carson Lambos (26th overall)
* 2022: Liam Ohgren (19th overall) and Danila Yurov (24th overall)
* 2023: Charlie Stramel (21st overall)
* 2024: Zeev Buium (12th overall)
==Awards and trophies==
 Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy
* Josh Harding: 2012–13
* Devan Dubnyk: 2014–15

Calder Memorial Trophy
* Kirill Kaprizov: 2020–21

 Jack Adams Award
* Jacques Lemaire: 2002–03

 Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award
* Niklas Backstrom: 2006–07
* Dwayne Roloson: 2003–04

 King Clancy Memorial Trophy
* Matt Dumba: 2019–20
* Jason Zucker: 2018–19

 William M. Jennings Trophy
* Manny Fernandez and Niklas Backstrom: 2006–07

 NHL first All-Star team
* Ryan Suter: 2012–13

 NHL second All-Star team
* Devan Dubnyk: 2014–15

 NHL All-Rookie Team
* Jonas Brodin: 2012–13
* Kirill Kaprizov: 2020–21
==Franchise records==

===Scoring leaders===

The following are the top-ten franchise point-scorers as of the end of the 2023–24 season. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Wild player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game;&quot;




===Individual records===

* Most games played with franchise: 1,028, Mikko Koivu (2005–20)
* Most goals in a season: 47, Kirill Kaprizov (2021–22)
* Most assists in a season: 61, Kirill Kaprizov (2021–22)
* Most points in a season: 108, Kirill Kaprizov (2021–22)
* Most penalty minutes in a season: 201, Matt Johnson (2002–03)
* Most points in a season, defenseman: 51, Ryan Suter (2015–16)
* Most points in a season, rookie: 51, Kirill Kaprizov (2020–21)
* Most goals in a game: 5, Marian Gaborik (December 20, 2007, vs. New York Rangers)
* Fastest 3 goals: 11:12, Zach Parise (2015–16)
* Most wins: 194, Niklas Backstrom
* Most wins in a season: 40, Devan Dubnyk (2016–17)
* Most shutouts in a season: 8, Niklas Backstrom (2008–09),
* Best +/- in a season: +41, Alex Goligoski (2021–22)
* Most time on ice per game in a season: 29:25, Ryan Suter, (2013–14)
* Most consecutive starts for goalie: 38, Devan Dubnyk, (January 15, 2015 – April 7, 2015)
* Most consecutive shutouts: 3, Devan Dubnyk

==See also==
* List of Minnesota Wild general managers
* List of Minnesota Wild head coaches
* List of Minnesota Wild players
* List of Minnesota Wild broadcasters

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="4" end="18" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="38" end="48" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="63" end="84" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="110" end="132" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="158" end="174" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="182" end="200" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421388" start="241" end="259" title="Xcel Energy Center" label="Xcel Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181152" start="277" end="290" title="Craig Leipold" label="Craig Leipold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753937" start="325" end="334" title="Iowa Wild" label="Iowa Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="342" end="364" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q105333945" start="379" end="396" title="Iowa Heartlanders" label="Iowa Heartlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="404" end="408" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="473" end="487" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="541" end="562" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="597" end="601" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="605" end="609" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="634" end="640" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="642" end="647" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="664" end="676" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="704" end="724" title="Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968226" start="739" end="743" title="2003 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="830" end="853" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968232" start="958" end="962" title="2008 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="1047" end="1068" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="1079" end="1093" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="1108" end="1117" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="1161" end="1171" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q706661" start="1204" end="1216" title="Norm Coleman" label="Norm Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="1473" end="1495" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–96)" label="original Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q282675" start="1581" end="1594" title="Target Center" label="Target Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="1630" end="1659" title="Phoenix Coyotes" label="relocated to Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q923384" start="1792" end="1802" title="Minnetonka, Minnesota" label="Minnetonka"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694077" start="1810" end="1826" title="Bob Naegele, Jr." label="Bob Naegele, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1974" end="1996" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="2018" end="2027" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="2090" end="2104" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="2290" end="2313" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q459346" start="2337" end="2352" title="Doug Risebrough" label="Doug Risebrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381686" start="2380" end="2391" title="Tod Leiweke" label="Tod Leiweke"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="2441" end="2464" title="chief financial officer" label="chief financial officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q893936" start="2584" end="2599" title="Born to Be Wild" label="Born to Be Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q465862" start="2609" end="2620" title="Steppenwolf (band)" label="Steppenwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="2739" end="2749" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882621" start="2755" end="2764" title="First USA" label="First USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802941" start="3539" end="3562" title="Saint Paul Civic Center" label="Saint Paul Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421388" start="3612" end="3630" title="Xcel Energy Center" label="Xcel Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421388" start="4080" end="4098" title="Xcel Energy Center" label="Xcel Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q681705" start="4207" end="4222" title="Jacques Lemaire" label="Jacques Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="4266" end="4280" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="4321" end="4341" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="4510" end="4529" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497227" start="4572" end="4589" title="Darby Hendrickson" label="Darby Hendrickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="4950" end="4962" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="5008" end="5029" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261014" start="5216" end="5230" title="Scott Pellerin" label="Scott Pellerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q330133" start="5274" end="5282" title="Wes Walz" label="Wes Walz"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="5392" end="5406" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377630" start="5695" end="5714" title="NHL YoungStars Game" label="NHL YoungStars Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q503954" start="5720" end="5735" title="Andrew Brunette" label="Andrew Brunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="5803" end="5817" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="6006" end="6029" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="6092" end="6110" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="6282" end="6293" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="6357" end="6374" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q569331" start="6656" end="6669" title="Pascal Dupuis" label="Pascal Dupuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q846353" start="7068" end="7086" title="Northwest Division (NHL)" label="Northwest Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q896747" start="7280" end="7294" title="Brad Bombardir" label="Brad Bombardir"/>
<link wikidata="Q720162" start="7299" end="7307" title="Jim Dowd (hockey player)" label="Jim Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="7352" end="7363" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q715699" start="7384" end="7398" title="Sergejs Žoltoks" label="Sergei Zholtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497227" start="7514" end="7531" title="Darby Hendrickson" label="Darby Hendrickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="7723" end="7740" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q595728" start="7827" end="7840" title="Brian Rolston" label="Brian Rolston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360814" start="7942" end="7957" title="Manny Fernandez (ice hockey)" label="Manny Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q608304" start="7962" end="7976" title="Dwayne Roloson" label="Dwayne Roloson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="8014" end="8029" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="8060" end="8080" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q961870" start="8119" end="8131" title="Kim Johnsson" label="Kim Johnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q358201" start="8133" end="8145" title="Mark Parrish" label="Mark Parrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q722117" start="8147" end="8165" title="Branko Radivojevič" label="Branko Radivojevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311674" start="8170" end="8182" title="Keith Carney" label="Keith Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130251" start="8202" end="8217" title="NHL entry draft" label="NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q942970" start="8264" end="8287" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Sullivan (ice hockey)" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="8295" end="8312" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q363628" start="8332" end="8345" title="Pavol Demitra" label="Pavol Demitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q708093" start="8347" end="8363" title="Niklas Bäckström" label="Niklas Backstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="8630" end="8645" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q942610" start="8647" end="8659" title="Josh Harding" label="Josh Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="8696" end="8699" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474092" start="8715" end="8728" title="Houston Aeros (1994–2013)" label="Houston Aeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968230" start="9022" end="9026" title="2007 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="9100" end="9111" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="9222" end="9236" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q681705" start="9319" end="9334" title="Jacques Lemaire" label="Jacques Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="9463" end="9477" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q706878" start="9795" end="9809" title="Marek Židlický" label="Marek Zidlicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q609738" start="9844" end="9859" title="Antti Miettinen" label="Antti Miettinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342371" start="9864" end="9874" title="Owen Nolan" label="Owen Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459346" start="10472" end="10487" title="Doug Risebrough" label="Doug Risebrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="10720" end="10736" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181152" start="10783" end="10796" title="Craig Leipold" label="Craig Leipold"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="10810" end="10829" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115473" start="10856" end="10870" title="Chuck Fletcher" label="Chuck Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438502" start="10928" end="10941" title="Todd Richards (ice hockey)" label="Todd Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q948787" start="10957" end="10970" title="Martin Havlát" label="Martin Havlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="11047" end="11065" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q715623" start="11224" end="11235" title="Mikko Koivu" label="Mikko Koivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="11436" end="11456" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q520141" start="11533" end="11548" title="Mikael Granlund" label="Mikael Granlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q33176" start="11607" end="11622" title="Hartwall Areena" label="Hartwall Areena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="11626" end="11634" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467871" start="11647" end="11666" title="2010–11 Carolina Hurricanes season" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q521648" start="11841" end="11849" title="Mike Yeo" label="Mike Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="11988" end="12008" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702919" start="12083" end="12095" title="Jonas Brodin" label="Jonas Brodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q909711" start="12159" end="12170" title="Brent Burns" label="Brent Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="12198" end="12202" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="12210" end="12225" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206905" start="12242" end="12257" title="Devin Setoguchi" label="Devin Setoguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q547607" start="12259" end="12272" title="Charlie Coyle" label="Charlie Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q139855" start="12344" end="12357" title="Zack Phillips" label="Zack Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q440283" start="12418" end="12430" title="Dany Heatley" label="Dany Heatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="12958" end="12978" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298541" start="12998" end="13008" title="Matt Dumba" label="Matt Dumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q139368" start="13116" end="13127" title="Zach Parise" label="Zach Parise"/>
<link wikidata="Q722707" start="13166" end="13176" title="Ryan Suter" label="Ryan Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="13289" end="13308" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="2012–13 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246603" start="13357" end="13371" title="NHL trade deadline" label="trade deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338073" start="13391" end="13407" title="Jason Pominville" label="Jason Pominville"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="13417" end="13431" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q122410" start="13458" end="13471" title="Johan Larsson (ice hockey, born 1992)" label="Johan Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128453" start="13476" end="13488" title="Matt Hackett" label="Matt Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856497" start="13819" end="13832" title="2013 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2013 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="13872" end="13889" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="13913" end="13926" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="14555" end="14603" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="14844" end="14860" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="14938" end="14950" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="15003" end="15018" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q115175" start="15070" end="15085" title="Norris Division" label="Norris Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="15214" end="15236" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q942610" start="15611" end="15623" title="Josh Harding" label="Josh Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="15753" end="15771" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129201" start="15986" end="16000" title="Ilya Bryzgalov" label="Ilya Bryzgalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q949932" start="16074" end="16086" title="Matt Moulson" label="Matt Moulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q932021" start="16091" end="16105" title="Cody McCormick" label="Cody McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q725838" start="16135" end="16150" title="Torrey Mitchell" label="Torrey Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="16181" end="16185" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="16190" end="16194" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q688768" start="16352" end="16369" title="Nino Niederreiter" label="Nino Niederreiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423220" start="16410" end="16421" title="2013 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q44850" start="16535" end="16547" title="Thomas Vanek" label="Thomas Vanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="16568" end="16575" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182613" start="17274" end="17288" title="John Torchetti" label="John Torchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q446986" start="17668" end="17678" title="Eric Staal" label="Eric Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q991551" start="17725" end="17739" title="Bruce Boudreau" label="Bruce Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="18012" end="18033" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="18344" end="18365" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q516636" start="18432" end="18448" title="Lady Byng Trophy" label="Lady Byng Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11858149" start="18525" end="18535" title="Erik Haula" label="Erik Haula"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="18552" end="18572" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17181019" start="18617" end="18626" title="Alex Tuch" label="Alex Tuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339839" start="18668" end="18683" title="Marco Scandella" label="Marco Scandella"/>
<link wikidata="Q129210" start="18743" end="18754" title="Tyler Ennis (ice hockey)" label="Tyler Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q246404" start="18759" end="18773" title="Marcus Foligno" label="Marcus Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376984" start="18792" end="18803" title="Matt Cullen" label="Matt Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="19047" end="19061" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="19082" end="19106" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="100-point regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q50912481" start="19202" end="19215" title="2018 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2018 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059528" start="19741" end="19752" title="Paul Fenton (ice hockey)" label="Paul Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="19825" end="19839" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="19896" end="19912" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q446986" start="20008" end="20018" title="Eric Staal" label="Eric Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684008" start="20023" end="20035" title="Jason Zucker" label="Jason Zucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q520141" start="20270" end="20285" title="Mikael Granlund" label="Mikael Granlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q547607" start="20287" end="20300" title="Charlie Coyle" label="Charlie Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q688768" start="20305" end="20322" title="Nino Niederreiter" label="Nino Niederreiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q252043" start="20508" end="20523" title="Mats Zuccarello" label="Mats Zuccarello"/>
<link wikidata="Q795013" start="20690" end="20701" title="Bill Guerin" label="Bill Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q991551" start="20802" end="20816" title="Bruce Boudreau" label="Bruce Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181066" start="20827" end="20838" title="Dean Evason" label="Dean Evason"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="20871" end="20888" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="20956" end="20981" title="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="21037" end="21054" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="21057" end="21072" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="21170" end="21187" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="21400" end="21404" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="21588" end="21603" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q368554" start="21711" end="21728" title="Marc-Andre Fleury" label="Marc-Andre Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989104" start="21797" end="21808" title="Kevin Fiala" label="Kevin Fiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="21827" end="21844" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q110973348" start="21892" end="21903" title="Brock Faber" label="Brock Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047621" start="21941" end="21954" title="Nick Bjugstad" label="Nick Bjugstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964625" start="21959" end="21978" title="Nicolas Deslauriers" label="Nicolas Deslauriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026393" start="22050" end="22060" title="Cam Talbot" label="Cam Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="22068" end="22083" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278073" start="22100" end="22116" title="Filip Gustavsson" label="Filip Gustavsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="22582" end="22594" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q110973348" start="22612" end="22623" title="Brock Faber" label="Brock Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465468" start="22728" end="22766" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers" label="University of Minnesota Golden Gophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174102" start="22774" end="22807" title="University of Michigan Wolverines" label="University of Michigan Wolverines"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="23196" end="23200" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q44086008" start="23220" end="23231" title="Marco Rossi (ice hockey)" label="Marco Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957723" start="23403" end="23419" title="Joel Eriksson Ek" label="Joel Eriksson Ek"/>
<link wikidata="Q550849" start="23429" end="23443" title="Jared Spurgeon" label="Jared Spurgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q246404" start="23445" end="23459" title="Marcus Foligno" label="Marcus Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q252043" start="23461" end="23476" title="Mats Zuccarello" label="Mats Zuccarello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702919" start="23482" end="23494" title="Jonas Brodin" label="Jonas Brodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="24350" end="24364" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="25320" end="25341" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="25436" end="25448" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384161" start="25450" end="25463" title="Martin Hanzal" label="Martin Hanzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q715065" start="25539" end="25553" title="Bill Masterton" label="Bill Masterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="25660" end="25666" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="25670" end="25676" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="26445" end="26459" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="26739" end="26753" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737929" start="26829" end="26848" title="2022 NHL Winter Classic" label="2022 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="27062" end="27084" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis–Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8923" start="27228" end="27234" title="Gemini (constellation)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q893936" start="27567" end="27582" title="Born to Be Wild" label="Born to Be Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503883" start="27599" end="27619" title="Rock and Roll Part 2" label="Rock and Roll Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072035" start="27992" end="28003" title="Crowd Chant" label="Crowd Chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q194287" start="28013" end="28025" title="Joe Satriani" label="Joe Satriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="28093" end="28099" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054654" start="28168" end="28193" title="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139937" start="28243" end="28262" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go Crazy" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811222" start="28752" end="28763" title="Jump Around" label="Jump Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q752410" start="28773" end="28786" title="House of Pain" label="House of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178134" start="28865" end="28883" title="The Isley Brothers" label="The Isley Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="29107" end="29117" title="Polaris" label="north star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456020" start="29208" end="29229" title="L&amp;#x27;Étoile du Nord" label="L&amp;#x27;Étoile du Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694077" start="29781" end="29796" title="Bob Naegele, Jr" label="Bob Naegele, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="29919" end="29938" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181152" start="29945" end="29958" title="Craig Leipold" label="Craig Leipold"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="30126" end="30143" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708731" start="30779" end="30784" title="Georgia Swarm" label="Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373495" start="30984" end="31006" title="Roy Wilkins Auditorium" label="Roy Wilkins Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875563" start="31340" end="31360" title="Hockey Day Minnesota" label="Hockey Day Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753937" start="31873" end="31882" title="Iowa Wild" label="Iowa Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="31890" end="31912" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q105333945" start="31927" end="31944" title="Iowa Heartlanders" label="Iowa Heartlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="31952" end="31956" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474092" start="32034" end="32041" title="Houston Aeros (1994–2013)" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q478447" start="32092" end="32103" title="Alaska Aces (ECHL)" label="Alaska Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621290" start="32106" end="32121" title="Allen Americans" label="Allen Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q781099" start="32124" end="32139" title="Austin Ice Bats" label="Austin Ice Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826186" start="32142" end="32161" title="Bakersfield Condors (1998–2015)" label="Bakersfield Condors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100775" start="32164" end="32185" title="Cleveland Lumberjacks" label="Cleveland Lumberjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474092" start="32188" end="32201" title="Houston Aeros (1994–2013)" label="Houston Aeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q174051" start="32204" end="32220" title="Johnstown Chiefs" label="Johnstown Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546468" start="32223" end="32242" title="Louisiana IceGators (ECHL)" label="Louisiana IceGators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939169" start="32245" end="32267" title="Mississippi Sea Wolves" label="Mississippi Sea Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031076" start="32270" end="32289" title="Orlando Solar Bears (ECHL)" label="Orlando Solar Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281380" start="32292" end="32310" title="Quad City Mallards" label="Quad City Mallards"/>
<link wikidata="Q954032" start="32313" end="32328" title="Rapid City Rush" label="Rapid City Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407678" start="32331" end="32348" title="Texas Wildcatters" label="Texas Wildcatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q459582" start="32497" end="32527" title="List of Minnesota Wild seasons" label="List of Minnesota Wild seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q681705" start="32924" end="32939" title="Jacques Lemaire" label="Jacques Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438502" start="32947" end="32960" title="Todd Richards (ice hockey)" label="Todd Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q720559" start="33259" end="33278" title="Sean O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Sean O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261014" start="33297" end="33311" title="Scott Pellerin" label="Scott Pellerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q330133" start="33331" end="33339" title="Wes Walz" label="Wes Walz"/>
<link wikidata="Q896747" start="33359" end="33373" title="Brad Bombardir" label="Brad Bombardir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497227" start="33407" end="33424" title="Darby Hendrickson" label="Darby Hendrickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q720162" start="33474" end="33482" title="Jim Dowd (ice hockey)" label="Jim Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336487" start="33501" end="33511" title="Filip Kuba" label="Filip Kuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923382" start="33531" end="33541" title="Brad Brown" label="Brad Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q503954" start="33580" end="33595" title="Andrew Brunette" label="Andrew Brunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299489" start="33742" end="33754" title="Matt Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Matt Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q715699" start="33774" end="33788" title="Sergei Zholtok" label="Sergei Zholtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q562194" start="33916" end="33928" title="Richard Park (ice hockey)" label="Richard Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622636" start="34031" end="34041" title="Alex Henry" label="Alex Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037725" start="34092" end="34107" title="Willie Mitchell (ice hockey)" label="Willie Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q595728" start="34146" end="34159" title="Brian Rolston" label="Brian Rolston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311674" start="34298" end="34310" title="Keith Carney" label="Keith Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q358201" start="34330" end="34342" title="Mark Parrish" label="Mark Parrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q363628" start="34412" end="34425" title="Pavol Demitra" label="Pavol Demitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q738460" start="34509" end="34521" title="Nick Schultz (ice hockey)" label="Nick Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q715623" start="34540" end="34551" title="Mikko Koivu" label="Mikko Koivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="34571" end="34585" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q961870" start="34713" end="34725" title="Kim Johnsson" label="Kim Johnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q550849" start="34828" end="34842" title="Jared Spurgeon" label="Jared Spurgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="34896" end="34909" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="34956" end="34978" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="35072" end="35091" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q681705" start="35157" end="35172" title="Jacques Lemaire" label="Jacques Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="35238" end="35242" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="35244" end="35258" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="35275" end="35279" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q715623" start="35281" end="35292" title="Mikko Koivu" label="Mikko Koivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="35309" end="35313" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064864" start="35315" end="35335" title="Pierre-Marc Bouchard" label="Pierre-Marc Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854869" start="35352" end="35356" title="2003 NHL entry draft" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q909711" start="35358" end="35369" title="Brent Burns" label="Brent Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="35387" end="35391" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q788770" start="35393" end="35405" title="A. J. Thelen" label="A. J. Thelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="35423" end="35427" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q818131" start="35429" end="35443" title="Benoît Pouliot" label="Benoit Pouliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="35460" end="35464" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q441875" start="35466" end="35480" title="James Sheppard" label="James Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="35497" end="35501" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q442223" start="35503" end="35517" title="Colton Gillies" label="Colton Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="35535" end="35539" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q128515" start="35541" end="35551" title="Tyler Cuma" label="Tyler Cuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="35569" end="35573" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985505" start="35575" end="35585" title="Nick Leddy" label="Nick Leddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="35603" end="35607" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q520141" start="35609" end="35624" title="Mikael Granlund" label="Mikael Granlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="35641" end="35645" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702919" start="35647" end="35659" title="Jonas Brodin" label="Jonas Brodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q139855" start="35679" end="35692" title="Zack Phillips" label="Zack Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="35710" end="35714" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298541" start="35716" end="35726" title="Matt Dumba" label="Matt Dumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="35743" end="35747" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q17181019" start="35749" end="35758" title="Alex Tuch" label="Alex Tuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="35776" end="35780" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957723" start="35782" end="35798" title="Joel Eriksson Ek" label="Joel Eriksson Ek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="35816" end="35820" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q24797868" start="35822" end="35832" title="Luke Kunin" label="Luke Kunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="35850" end="35854" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q55192056" start="35856" end="35871" title="Filip Johansson (ice hockey)" label="Filip Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="35889" end="35893" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781754" start="35895" end="35905" title="Matt Boldy" label="Matt Boldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="35923" end="35927" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q44086008" start="35929" end="35940" title="Marco Rossi (ice hockey)" label="Marco Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="35957" end="35961" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q91772149" start="35963" end="35979" title="Jesper Wallstedt" label="Jesper Wallstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q105293487" start="35999" end="36012" title="Carson Lambos" label="Carson Lambos"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="36030" end="36034" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q112960703" start="36036" end="36047" title="Liam Öhgren" label="Liam Ohgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q110282106" start="36067" end="36079" title="Danila Yurov" label="Danila Yurov"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="36097" end="36101" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q81907294" start="36103" end="36118" title="Charlie Stramel" label="Charlie Stramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127690" start="36136" end="36140" title="2024 NHL entry draft" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q124098765" start="36142" end="36152" title="Zeev Buium" label="Zeev Buium"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="36193" end="36223" title="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q942610" start="36226" end="36238" title="Josh Harding" label="Josh Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="36240" end="36247" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q969927" start="36250" end="36262" title="Devan Dubnyk" label="Devan Dubnyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="36264" end="36271" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="36273" end="36295" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="36298" end="36313" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="36315" end="36322" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="36325" end="36341" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q681705" start="36344" end="36359" title="Jacques Lemaire" label="Jacques Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="36361" end="36368" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q748288" start="36371" end="36403" title="Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award" label="Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q708093" start="36406" end="36422" title="Niklas Bäckström" label="Niklas Backstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="36424" end="36431" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q608304" start="36434" end="36448" title="Dwayne Roloson" label="Dwayne Roloson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="36450" end="36457" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q250753" start="36460" end="36487" title="King Clancy Memorial Trophy" label="King Clancy Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298541" start="36490" end="36500" title="Matt Dumba" label="Matt Dumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="36502" end="36509" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684008" start="36512" end="36524" title="Jason Zucker" label="Jason Zucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="36526" end="36533" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="36536" end="36562" title="William M. Jennings Trophy" label="William M. Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360814" start="36565" end="36580" title="Manny Fernandez (ice hockey)" label="Manny Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q708093" start="36585" end="36601" title="Niklas Bäckström" label="Niklas Backstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="36603" end="36610" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="36613" end="36636" title="NHL All-Star team" label="NHL first All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q722707" start="36639" end="36649" title="Ryan Suter" label="Ryan Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="36651" end="36658" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="36661" end="36685" title="NHL All-Star team" label="NHL second All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q969927" start="36688" end="36700" title="Devan Dubnyk" label="Devan Dubnyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="36702" end="36709" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960831" start="36712" end="36731" title="NHL All-Rookie Team" label="NHL All-Rookie Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702919" start="36734" end="36746" title="Jonas Brodin" label="Jonas Brodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="36748" end="36755" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="36758" end="36773" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="36775" end="36782" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q715623" start="37192" end="37203" title="Mikko Koivu" label="Mikko Koivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="37244" end="37259" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="37302" end="37317" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="37360" end="37375" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299489" start="37427" end="37439" title="Matt Johnson (ice hockey)" label="Matt Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q909711" start="37493" end="37503" title="Brent Burns" label="Ryan Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164618" start="37553" end="37568" title="Kirill Kaprizov" label="Kirill Kaprizov"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="37606" end="37620" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="37645" end="37661" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q139368" start="37689" end="37700" title="Zach Parise" label="Zach Parise"/>
<link wikidata="Q708093" start="37729" end="37745" title="Niklas Bäckström" label="Niklas Backstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q969927" start="37775" end="37787" title="Devan Dubnyk" label="Devan Dubnyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q708093" start="37830" end="37846" title="Niklas Bäckström" label="Niklas Backstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390408" start="37887" end="37901" title="Alex Goligoski" label="Alex Goligoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q722707" start="37960" end="37970" title="Ryan Suter" label="Ryan Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q969927" start="38024" end="38036" title="Devan Dubnyk" label="Devan Dubnyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381691" start="38134" end="38173" title="List of Minnesota Wild general managers" label="List of Minnesota Wild general managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378080" start="38176" end="38211" title="List of Minnesota Wild head coaches" label="List of Minnesota Wild head coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590451" start="38214" end="38244" title="List of Minnesota Wild players" label="List of Minnesota Wild players"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005478" start="38247" end="38282" title="List of Minnesota Wild broadcasters" label="List of Minnesota Wild broadcasters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73133" wikidata="Q192890" url="?curid=73133" title="Vancouver Canucks">
<text>The Vancouver Canucks are a professional ice hockey team based in Vancouver. The Canucks compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Pacific Division in the Western Conference. The team plays its home games at Rogers Arena. Rick Tocchet is the head coach, Jim Rutherford serves as the president of hockey operations, and Patrik Allvin serves as the general manager.

The Canucks joined the league in 1970 as an expansion team along with the Buffalo Sabres. The team has advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals three times, losing to the New York Islanders in 1982, the New York Rangers in 1994 and the Boston Bruins in 2011. They have won the Presidents&#x27; Trophy in back-to-back seasons as the team with the league&#x27;s best regular season record in both the 2010–11 and 2011–12 seasons. The Canucks have won three division titles as a member of the Smythe Division from 1974 to 1993, seven titles as a member of the Northwest Division from 1998 to 2013, and one title as a member of the Pacific Division in 2024. The Canucks, along with the Sabres, are the two oldest teams in the NHL to have never won the Stanley Cup.

The Canucks have retired six players&#x27; jerseys in their history—Pavel Bure (10), Stan Smyl (12), Trevor Linden (16), Markus Naslund (19), Daniel Sedin (22) and Henrik Sedin (33); all but Bure and Daniel Sedin have served as team captain, and all but Naslund were on one of the three Stanley Cup Finals rosters. Smyl has the distinction of being the only Canuck to have his jersey number retired at their former arena, Pacific Coliseum.

==History==
===Background and establishment===
The first professional ice hockey team based in Vancouver were the Vancouver Millionaires, formed by Frank and Lester Patrick. Established in 1911, the Millionaires were one of three teams in the new Pacific Coast Hockey Association. To accommodate the Millionaires, the Patrick brothers directed the building of the Denman Arena, which was known at the time as the world&#x27;s largest artificial ice rink. The arena was later destroyed in a fire in 1936. The Millionaires played for the Stanley Cup five times, winning over the Ottawa Senators in 1915 on home ice. It marked the first time the Stanley Cup was won by a West Coast team in the trophy&#x27;s history. Absorbed by the Western Canada Hockey League in 1924, the team continued operations until folding at the end of the 1925–26 WHL season.

From 1926 to 1970, Vancouver was home to only minor league teams. Most notably the present-day Canucks&#x27; minor league predecessor (also known as the Vancouver Canucks) played from 1945 to 1970 in the Pacific Coast Hockey League and the Western Hockey League.

====NHL application====
With the intention of attracting an NHL franchise, Vancouver began the construction of a new modern arena, the Pacific Coliseum, in 1966 (with the arena opening in January 1968). The WHL&#x27;s Canucks were playing in a small arena at the time, the Vancouver Forum, situated on the same Pacific National Exhibition grounds as the Coliseum. Meanwhile, a Vancouver group led by WHL Canucks owner and former Vancouver mayor Fred Hume made a bid to be one of the six teams due to join the league in 1967, but the NHL rejected their application. Bid leader Cyrus McLean called the denial a &quot;cooked-up deal&quot;, referring to several biases that factored against them. Speculation long abounded afterwards that the bid was hindered by Toronto Maple Leafs president Stafford Smythe; after a failed Vancouver-based business deal, he was quoted as saying that the city would not get an NHL franchise in his lifetime. Additionally, along with the Montreal Canadiens, Smythe purportedly did not wish to split Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) hockey revenues three ways rather than two.

Less than a year later, the Oakland Seals were in financial difficulty and having trouble drawing fans. An apparent deal was in place to move the team to Vancouver, but the NHL did not want to see one of their franchises from the expansion of 1967 move so quickly and vetoed the deal. In exchange for avoiding a lawsuit, the NHL promised Vancouver would get a team in the next expansion round. Another group, headed by Minnesota entrepreneur Tom Scallen, made a new presentation and was awarded an expansion franchise for the price of $6 million (three times the cost in 1967). The new ownership group purchased the WHL Canucks, and brought the team into the league with the Buffalo Sabres as expansion teams for the 1970–71 season.

In preparation for joining the NHL, the WHL Canucks had brought in players with prior NHL experience. Six of these players (John Arbour, George Gardner, Len Lunde, Marc Reaume, Ted Taylor and Murray Hall) would remain with the club for its inaugural NHL season. The rest of the roster was built through an expansion draft.

===Early years (1970–1982)===
To fill the Canucks&#x27; roster for their inaugural season, the league held an expansion draft in the preceding summer. A draft lottery was held on June 9, 1970, determining who between the Canucks and Sabres would get the first selection in the expansion draft, as well as the 1970 NHL amateur draft; the Sabres won both spins. With his first selection in the expansion draft, Canucks general manager Bud Poile chose defenceman Gary Doak. Among the other players chosen by Vancouver were centre Orland Kurtenbach, who was named the Canucks&#x27; first captain, as well as defenceman Pat Quinn, who later became the team&#x27;s general manager and coach in the 1990s. Two days later, on June 11, 1970, the Canucks made defenceman Dale Tallon their first-ever Amateur Draft selection. Tallon played three seasons with the club before being traded away to the Chicago Black Hawks. By comparison, the Sabres chose centre Gilbert Perreault with the first overall selection they won from the lottery; Perreault went on to become a nine-time All-Star and member of the Hockey Hall of Fame.
With the Canucks&#x27; roster set, the team played its inaugural game against the Los Angeles Kings on October 9, 1970. They lost the contest 3–1; defenceman Barry Wilkins scored the Canucks&#x27; lone goal in the game and first in franchise history, a backhander against goaltender Denis DeJordy. Two days later, the squad recorded the first win in franchise history, a 5–3 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs.

The Canucks struggled in their early years, failing to make the playoffs in their first four seasons. Placed in the competitive East Division, Poile assembled a core of players during this period led by Kurtenbach that included defencemen Tallon and Jocelyn Guevremont, as well as wingers Andre Boudrias and Dennis Ververgaert. Boudrias emerged as the team&#x27;s leading point-scorer in four of their first five seasons.

Prior to the 1974–75 season, Scallen and his ownership group from Minnesota sold the team to local media mogul Frank Griffiths for $9 million. Also in the summer of 1974, the Canucks were re-aligned within the league and placed in the new Smythe Division. They responded with their first winning record (38 wins, 32 losses and 10 ties), backstopped by goaltender Gary &quot;Suitcase&quot; Smith finishing first in the Division with 86 points. Making their debut in the Stanley Cup playoffs, the Canucks lost the opening series of the 1975 playoffs in five games to the Montreal Canadiens. Head coach and general manager Phil Maloney (the third general manager in team history after Poile and Hal Laycoe) recalled the importance of a successful season for the Canucks in that year specifically, as the rival league World Hockey Association (WHA) had established another major professional team in the city, the Vancouver Blazers. Competing for the same hockey market, the Canucks emerged over the Blazers as the latter relocated to Calgary, Alberta, the following season. The Canucks posted a second consecutive winning record and made the playoffs in 1975–76, but lost to the New York Islanders in a two-game preliminary series. It would be another 16 years until the team would have another winning record though they made the playoffs nine times in that span.

Kurtenbach retired and assumed a coaching position with Vancouver. His departure as a player marked the beginning of a seven-year period in which the Canucks had four different captains—Boudrias, Chris Oddleifson, Don Lever and Kevin McCarthy. Following the 1976–77 season, Maloney was replaced as general manager by Jake Milford, who acquired such players as Stan Smyl, Thomas Gradin, Darcy Rota, Ivan Boldirev and Richard Brodeur, a core that would lead the team throughout the 1980s.

====1982 Stanley Cup run====

The Canucks made their first significant playoff impact in the 1982 playoffs. In their previous five playoff appearances, the team had failed to win a single series. Though the Canucks finished three games under a .500 win percentage in the 1981–82 regular season, they began gaining momentum by finishing the campaign on a nine-game unbeaten streak. Meanwhile, Smyl emerged as the club&#x27;s leader, replacing McCarthy as the captain after the latter was sidelined with an injury late in the season (he would retain that position for a team-record eight years). Continuing their success in the playoffs, the Canucks made the Stanley Cup Finals with a combined 11–2 record in series against the Calgary Flames, Los Angeles Kings, and Chicago Black Hawks. Despite having a losing regular season record, Vancouver had a home-ice advantage in the first series, having finished second in the Smythe Division to the Edmonton Oilers. The Canucks also had a home-ice advantage during the second-round series against the Kings, who upset the Oilers in the first round.

Late in Game 2 of the conference finals in Chicago, Vancouver&#x27;s interim head coach Roger Neilson, frustrated with what he felt was the poor officiating in the game, placed a white towel on the end of a hockey stick and held it up in a gesture mocking surrender (waving the white flag). The players on the Canucks&#x27; bench followed suit. When the series shifted to Vancouver for the next two games, the team&#x27;s fans cheered them on by waving white towels above their heads. The habit stuck, becoming an original Canuck fan tradition now seen across the league and in other sports, known as &quot;Towel Power.&quot; The Canucks proceeded to win the series in five games, making it to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in their history.

Entering the Finals against the New York Islanders, the Canucks were the first team from Western Canada to play for the Stanley Cup in 56 years, when the Victoria Cougars reached the 1926 Stanley Cup Finals. It also marked the first-ever coast-to-coast Stanley Cup Finals. Competing against the Islanders—the Stanley Cup champions of the previous two years, who had finished with 41 points more than Vancouver in the regular season standings—Vancouver took the first game to overtime. In the final minute of the extra period, Canucks defenceman and fan favourite Harold Snepsts gave the puck away with an errant pass from behind his net, leading to a Mike Bossy goal. Like the first game, the Canucks held a 3–2 lead after the first two periods in the second game, but were not able to keep their lead, and lost 6–4. The Canucks were unable to complete their Cinderella run and were swept, losing their next two games by 3–0 and 3–1 scores. The 1982 playoffs proved to be the last year in which Vancouver won a playoff series until 1992.

===Decline (1982–1987)===
After their improbable Stanley Cup run, the Canucks slipped back into mediocrity for the rest of the 1980s, making the playoffs only four times for the rest of the decade. Notable players that joined the Canucks&#x27; core following the 1982 playoffs included offensively skilled forwards Patrik Sundstrom and Tony Tanti. Beginning in 1983–84, the Canucks&#x27; scoring title was held by either Sundstrom or Tanti for four of the next five seasons, the only season in which neither won the team scoring title was , when it was won by Petri Skriko. For most of the second half of the 1980s, the Canucks competed with the Los Angeles Kings for the final playoff spot in the Smythe Division. In the years in which they qualified for the playoffs, the team was eliminated in the first round by either the Edmonton Oilers (in ) or the Calgary Flames (in , and the Flames championship season of , which was decided in Game 7), both division rivals.
Following Milford&#x27;s tenure as general manager from 1977 to 1982, the position was held by Harry Neale for three years, then Jack Gordon for two. The latter was responsible for trading away power forward Cam Neely to the Boston Bruins in 1986. In addition to Neely, the Canucks gave up their 1987 first-round draft pick, with which the Bruins chose Glen Wesley, and in return acquired centre Barry Pederson. While Pederson collected back-to-back 70-point seasons with the Canucks in his first two seasons after the trade, he was traded away to the Pittsburgh Penguins in 1989 as his performance quickly declined. Neely went on to have a Hall of Fame career with the Bruins, recording three 50-goal seasons, and Wesley had a solid 20-year career.

===Pat Quinn era (1987–1998)===
After the installation of former Canucks defenceman Pat Quinn as general manager in the summer of 1987, the team underwent an immediate rebuilding process, trading away core veterans for younger prospects and players. Among the more key transactions was a deal with the New Jersey Devils, in which Sundstrom was traded away in exchange for winger Greg Adams and goaltender Kirk McLean. In addition to Quinn&#x27;s trades, the team improved through the draft route with two selections, in particular. With the second overall selection in the 1988 NHL entry draft, the Canucks chose winger Trevor Linden from the Western Hockey League (WHL). The following year, the team made a controversial selection by choosing Russian winger Pavel Bure 113th overall. Bure was believed by most teams to be ineligible for selection that year. Consequently, his draft by the Canucks took a year to be verified by the league as team management went about procuring documents to prove his eligibility.

As the decade turned, a shift in the Canucks&#x27; leadership occurred as Stan Smyl resigned his captaincy prior to the 1990–91 season due to a reduced on-ice role with the team. In his place, the Canucks implemented a rotating captaincy of Linden, Dan Quinn and Doug Lidster; of the three, Linden retained the captaincy thereafter, becoming the youngest permanent captain in team history at 21 years of age. At the end of the season, Smyl retired as the team&#x27;s all-time leader in games played, goals, assists and points. Led by Linden and in large part to Quinn&#x27;s dealings, the Canucks rose to prominence in the early 1990s. This increased success came roughly around the time the Oilers and Flames began to sink in the standings. As a result, Vancouver won their first division title in 17 years with 42 wins, 26 losses and 12 ties during the 1991–92 season (it was also the team&#x27;s first winning season since the 1975–76 season). During the campaign, the Canucks honoured Smyl, who had remained on the team as an assistant coach, by making him the first player in team history to have his jersey (number 12) retired. In the 1992 playoffs, the Canucks won their first series since 1982 before being eliminated by the Oilers in the second round. Quinn and Bure became the first Canucks recipients of major NHL awards in the off-season, being awarded the Jack Adams Award as the best coach (Quinn assumed a dual coaching and general managerial role starting that year) and the top rookie in the league, respectively. The following year, the Canucks repeated as regular season division champions, while Bure emerged as arguably the team&#x27;s first superstar with his first of back-to-back 60-goal seasons, totals which remain the highest recorded in Canucks history. As the team struggled to score in the second half of the 1993–94 season, Bure recorded 49 goals in the club&#x27;s final 51 games and contributed to 46.45% of his team&#x27;s goals in the final 47 games of the season to carry the Canucks into the 1994 postseason. Jim Matheson of the &quot;Edmonton Journal&quot; called Bure &quot;the NHL&#x27;s best forward the last 40 games, scoring almost a goal a game.&quot;

====1994 Stanley Cup run====

In , the Canucks made their second trip to the Stanley Cup Finals, entering the playoffs as the seventh seed in the renamed Western Conference. Despite underachieving in the regular season (their points total decreased by 16 from the previous year, although they finished second in the newly renamed Pacific Division), the Canucks played well in the playoffs and embarked on another unexpected run.

Opening the playoffs with a close first-round series against the Calgary Flames, Vancouver rallied from a three-games-to-one deficit to win the series in seven contests. Games 5 through 7 were all won in overtime with goals from Geoff Courtnall, Trevor Linden, and Pavel Bure, respectively. The deciding seventh game featured two of the most recognizable and celebrated plays in Canucks history. With the game tied 3–3 in the first overtime, goaltender Kirk McLean made what became known thereafter as &quot;The Save&quot;, sliding across the crease feet-first and stacking his pads on the goal line to stop Robert Reichel on a one-timer pass from Theoren Fleury. The following period, Pavel Bure received a breakaway pass from defenceman Jeff Brown before deking Calgary goaltender Mike Vernon to score and win the series. Fifteen years later, Bure&#x27;s goal and McLean&#x27;s save were ranked first and second in a &quot;Vancouver Sun&quot; article listing the &quot;40 most memorable moments in team history.&quot;

Following their victory over the Flames, the Canucks then upset both the Dallas Stars and Toronto Maple Leafs (both in five games) en route to the franchise&#x27;s second Stanley Cup Finals appearance. Forward Greg Adams sent the Canucks into the Finals with a double-overtime goal against Maple Leafs goaltender Felix Potvin in Game 5. Staging the second coast-to-coast Finals in league history, the Canucks were matched against the Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning New York Rangers. Vancouver achieved victory in Game 1 by a score of 3–2 in overtime, largely due to a 52-save performance by goaltender McLean. After losing the next 3 games, the Canucks won the next two to force a seventh game at Madison Square Garden on June 14, 1994. Despite a two-goal effort (one on a shorthanded breakaway) from Linden (who was playing with cracked ribs), Vancouver lost the game by a 3–2 score. The Canucks&#x27; efforts to tie the game included a post hit by forward Nathan LaFayette with just over a minute remaining in regulation. The loss was followed by a riot in Downtown Vancouver, which resulted in property damage, injuries and arrests. Two days after the riots, the team held a rally at BC Place attended by 45,000 fans, who congratulated the team for their effort.

With a young core that included Linden, Bure and McLean still in their 20s after the 1994 playoffs, the Canucks appeared poised to remain contenders in the league. However, the team failed to record a winning season in the six years following their Stanley Cup Finals appearance. Prior to the lockout-shortened 1994–95 season, Quinn stepped down as head coach to focus on his managerial duties and was replaced by Rick Ley; Vancouver finished with a .500 record that year. Their elimination from the 1995 Stanley Cup playoffs in Game 4 of the second round marked the Canucks&#x27; last game played at the Pacific Coliseum, as the team moved into the new General Motors Place (since renamed Rogers Arena), a new $160 million arena situated in Downtown Vancouver, the following season.
The Canucks made another significant move in the off-season by acquiring high-scoring Russian forward Alexander Mogilny from the Buffalo Sabres, reuniting Bure with his former CSKA Moscow and national team linemate. While Mogilny became the second player in team history to record 50 goals and 100 points in a season, chiefly playing with centre Cliff Ronning, the expected chemistry between Mogilny and Bure never materialized, with the latter suffering a season-ending knee injury early in the campaign. Vancouver finished 1995–96 two games below .500 and were defeated in the first round of the playoffs by the Colorado Avalanche. The season also marked the arrival of another future Canucks superstar, as Markus Naslund was acquired from the Pittsburgh Penguins in exchange for Alek Stojanov. The deal is regarded as one of the most lopsided trades in NHL history, as Stojanov soon became a minor-leaguer, while Naslund became the team&#x27;s all-time leading goal- and point-scorer years later. Despite a late season swoon, Ley was fired and replaced by Quinn down the stretch. The team limped into the playoffs, losing to the Colorado Avalanche in the first round.

In the 1996 off-season, Quinn hired Tom Renney whose tenure as the team&#x27;s head coach lasted less than two seasons. Despite strong performances from Mogilny and team-leading point-scorer Martin Gelinas in Bure and Linden&#x27;s absence (both of whom were injured for long periods of time during the season), the Canucks missed the playoffs for the first of four consecutive seasons that year. Making another high-profile acquisition on July 27, 1997, the Canucks signed free agent Mark Messier to a three-year deal. They had come close to signing Wayne Gretzky the previous summer, but were reportedly spurned away when they refused to continue negotiations and gave Gretzky an ultimatum to sign.

====Keenan and Messier (1997–1998)====

Heading into the 1997–98 season, Linden resigned his captaincy for Messier, who had developed a strong reputation as a leader, having captained the New York Rangers over the Canucks in 1994 (he also captained the Oilers to a Stanley Cup in 1990). Linden later recalled regretting the decision, feeling that Messier generated hostility and tension in the dressing room. Messier later said if he could change one thing about his time in Vancouver, he would not have accepted the captaincy.

The Canucks began the campaign overseas in a two-game series against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in Tokyo, Japan. It marked the first time in NHL history that a regular season game was held outside of North America—an effort from the league to attract attention to the sport in anticipation of the 1998 Winter Olympics, which were held in Nagano, Japan. As the team&#x27;s performance continued to worsen, starting the 1997–98 season with three wins in the first 16 games, Quinn was fired as general manager after ten years with the team. Soon thereafter, Renney was fired and replaced as coach by Mike Keenan, reuniting him with Messier, another central figure from the Rangers&#x27; 1994 team. Keenan&#x27;s hiring reportedly exacerbated tensions between groups of Canucks players and his negative relationship with Linden was given ample media attention. Two months into his tenure with the team, his role was expanded and he was made de facto general manager. With control of player personnel, Keenan overhauled the roster, making ten trades within two months, most notably dealing Linden to the New York Islanders. Although the trade was unpopular with fans, the Canucks received winger Todd Bertuzzi in return, who would later become an integral part of the team&#x27;s return to success in the next decade. Defenceman Bryan McCabe was also part of the deal, who would eventually be involved in a key transaction in the 1999 NHL entry draft.

===Brian Burke era (1998–2004)===

====West Coast Express years and the early years of the Sedins (1998–2006)====
After the Canucks finished the 1997–98 season last in the Western Conference, former NHL vice president Brian Burke was named general manager in the summer. Suffering their worst season since 1977–78 the subsequent year, Keenan was fired midway through and replaced with Marc Crawford (who had won the Stanley Cup with the Colorado Avalanche in 1996). Meanwhile, Pavel Bure, unhappy in Vancouver, had withheld himself from the team and requested a trade at the beginning of the campaign. By January 1999, he was dealt to the Florida Panthers in a seven-player trade, which saw eventual five-time NHL All-Star Ed Jovanovski heading west. The trade also involved two draft picks. Finishing last in the Western Conference for a second straight year, Vancouver possessed the third overall pick in the 1999 NHL entry draft. Set on drafting highly touted Swedish forwards Daniel and Henrik Sedin, Burke orchestrated several transactions to move up to the second and third overall picks, with which he chose both players.

The Canucks began to show improvement in the 1999–2000 season, finishing four points out of a playoff spot. During the campaign, Mogilny was traded to the New Jersey Devils for forwards Denis Pederson and Brendan Morrison. With Bure gone and Messier in the last year of his contract, several previously under-achieving players began developing into key contributors for the team, most notably Markus Naslund and Todd Bertuzzi. In the off-season, Messier left the team and returned to the Rangers; during the team&#x27;s September 2000 training camp, held in Sweden, Naslund was selected to replace Messier as captain, a position he held for seven seasons. As part of the team&#x27;s stay in Sweden, they played exhibition games against Swedish and Finnish teams as part of the NHL Challenge.

Under the leadership of general manager Brian Burke and head coach Marc Crawford, the Canucks once again became a playoff team. After qualifying for the postseason in 2001 and 2002 as the eighth and final seed in the Western Conference (losing to the eventual Stanley Cup winners Colorado Avalanche and Detroit Red Wings, respectively), the Canucks became regular contenders for the Northwest Division title.
Coinciding with the team&#x27;s success in the early 2000s was the rise of power forward Todd Bertuzzi and captain Markus Naslund into high-scoring wingers and NHL All-Stars. Joined by centre Brendan Morrison during the 2001–02 season, the trio were nicknamed the &quot;West Coast Express&quot; (after the Vancouver rail service of the same name) among Canucks fans and media. Over the next three years, Naslund ranked in the top five among league scorers and was a Lester B. Pearson Award winner and Hart Memorial Trophy finalist in 2003. Bertuzzi was also a top-five scorer in the league in 2001–02 and 2002–03. During this span, Burke made a trade with the Washington Capitals to facilitate the return of Trevor Linden. The ex-captain returned to a markedly different Canucks team with a young core consisting of the aforementioned trio, defencemen Ed Jovanovski and Mattias Ohlund, as well as goaltender Dan Cloutier.

In 2002–03, the Canucks set a franchise record with a 10-game win streak but lost the division title to the Colorado Avalanche on the last day of the regular season. Individually, Naslund was surpassed the same night by Avalanche forwards Peter Forsberg and Milan Hejduk for the Art Ross Trophy and Maurice &quot;Rocket&quot; Richard Trophy, respectively. Entering the 2003 playoffs with the fourth seed in the Western Conference, the Canucks won their first playoff series in eight years, defeating the St. Louis Blues in seven games before losing to the Minnesota Wild in the second round. In both series, they were 3–1 comebacks; the Canucks rallied to beat the Blues, but lost their own 3–1 lead to the Wild, who had also come back from a 3–1 deficit in the first round, against the Avalanche.

Amidst a run for the team&#x27;s first Northwest Division title the following season, the Canucks received significant media attention for their involvement in a violent on-ice attack during a game against the Avalanche. On March 8, 2004, Bertuzzi grabbed Avalanche forward Steve Moore from behind and punched him in the head. As Moore fell to the ice, Bertuzzi landed on top of him; Moore suffered three fractured neck vertebrae, facial cuts and a concussion. The incident was in retaliation of a hit that Moore landed on Naslund during a previous game between the two teams. For his actions, Bertuzzi was suspended by the NHL and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) through to the start of the 2005–06 season. He also faced legal action in British Columbia court, while Moore filed lawsuits against him and the Canucks organization in Colorado and Ontario courts.

The Canucks went on to win their first Northwest Division title that season, but lost in the first round of the 2004 playoffs to the Calgary Flames. After their elimination, Burke&#x27;s contract as general manager was not renewed and he was replaced by assistant general manager and director of hockey operations Dave Nonis. At 37 years old, he became the youngest general manager in team history. Due to the NHL lockout, the 2004–05 season was not played. Several Canucks players went overseas to Europe to play professionally, including Naslund and the Sedin twins, who all returned to their former Swedish team, Modo Hockey.

===Dave Nonis era (2004–2008)===
Upon the resolution of the labour dispute between NHL players and owners, new gameplay rules were set in place for the 2005–06 season that were intended to benefit skilled players and generate more goal-scoring. As the Canucks&#x27; basis of success in previous seasons was built on playing a fast-paced, high-scoring style of play, expectations for the team were high going into the season. However, the team failed to qualify for the playoffs, completing the regular season ninth place in the conference. The first line of Naslund, Bertuzzi and Morrison suffered offensively, as all three players recorded decreased points totals. Head coach Marc Crawford later recalled the campaign as a turning point for the team&#x27;s offensive leadership as the Sedin twins began their rise to stardom, matching the top line&#x27;s production. Crawford was fired in the off-season and replaced with Alain Vigneault, who had been coach of the team&#x27;s American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate, the Manitoba Moose. Three days after Vigneault&#x27;s hiring, Nonis dealt Bertuzzi to the Florida Panthers, ending the &quot;West Coast Express&quot; era. In return, the Canucks received All-Star goaltender Roberto Luongo as part of a six-player trade. With the acquisition of Luongo, Cloutier was traded away to the Los Angeles Kings.
With widespread changes to team personnel in 2006–07, the Canucks won the Northwest Division title for the second time in three seasons. In his first season with the Canucks, Luongo was nominated for the Hart Memorial and Vezina Trophies. He also tied Bernie Parent for the second-most wins in a single-season by an NHL goaltender, with 47. The Canucks opened the 2007 playoffs with a quadruple-overtime win against the Dallas Stars. Ending at the 138-minute mark, the game was the longest in club history and the sixth-longest in NHL history. The Canucks also set a league record for shots against in one game, allowing 76. Vancouver won the series in seven games despite a lack of goal-scoring; Stars goaltender Marty Turco recorded three shutouts in the series and equalled the league record for most shutouts in a playoff series. Advancing to the second round, the team was defeated in five games by the Anaheim Ducks, who went on to win the Stanley Cup that year. Following the playoffs, head coach Vigneault received the Jack Adams Award.

Suffering numerous injuries to players in the 2007–08 season, the Canucks struggled and finished three points out of a playoff spot. The final game of the season, a 7–1 loss to the Calgary Flames, marked Trevor Linden&#x27;s last NHL game, as the former Canucks&#x27; all-time leading scorer retired. Having missed the playoffs for the second time in three years, the team underwent numerous personnel changes in the off-season.

===Mike Gillis era (2008–2014)===
====2008–2010: Return to the playoffs====
After Nonis was fired and replaced with former player agent Mike Gillis in April 2008, longtime Canucks captain Markus Naslund, as well as Brendan Morrison, were let go via free agency. Also in the off-season, on May 29, 2008, the Canucks lost defensive prospect Luc Bourdon to a fatal motorcycle crash near his hometown of Shippagan, New Brunswick.
With Naslund&#x27;s departure, Gillis announced on September 30, 2008, that Roberto Luongo had been named team captain, marking the first time since Bill Durnan of the Montreal Canadiens in 1947–48 that a goaltender had been named the captain of an NHL team. During the ensuing season, the Canucks retired their second jersey number in team history, hanging Linden&#x27;s number 16 beside Smyl&#x27;s number 12 in a pre-game ceremony on December 17, 2008. Later that month, the Canucks acquired unrestricted free agent Mats Sundin. The arrival of the former Toronto Maple Leafs captain and 500-goal scorer in the NHL came with high expectations. However, Sundin scored below his usual pace and retired in the subsequent off-season. The team finished the regular season with another Northwest Division title and the third seed in the Western Conference. In the 2009 playoffs, the Canucks swept their first round series against the sixth-seeded St. Louis Blues (the first four-game sweep in franchise history), but were defeated in six games by the fourth-seeded Chicago Blackhawks in the second round.

In the 2009–10 season, the Canucks faced the longest road trip in NHL history, playing 14 games over six weeks, from January 27 to March 13, 2010. The schedule was a result of Vancouver hosting the 2010 Winter Olympics, which shut down the NHL for two weeks, facilitating General Motors Place&#x27;s use for ice hockey during the games. It marked the first time that an NHL market hosted an Olympics since the league allowed its players to compete in the games, beginning with the 1998 Games in Nagano. Among the several Canucks players named to their respective national teams, centre Ryan Kesler of the United States and goaltender Roberto Luongo of Canada played against each other in the gold medal game; Luongo and Team Canada emerged with the win.

As the NHL season resumed, Henrik Sedin went on to become the first Canucks player to win the Art Ross and Hart Memorial Trophies as the league&#x27;s leading scorer and most valuable player, respectively. He achieved the feat with a franchise-record 112 points, surpassing Pavel Bure&#x27;s mark of 110 set in 1991–92. Vancouver won the Northwest Division title and finished third in the Western Conference for the second-straight year. They opened the playoffs by defeating the sixth-place Los Angeles Kings in six games, but were once again eliminated by Chicago in six games, who went on to win the Stanley Cup that year, the following round in six games.

====2010–2012: third Stanley Cup Finals run and back-to-back Presidents&#x27; Trophies====

The 2010–11 season began on October 9, 2010, with a pre-game ceremony to commemorate the team&#x27;s 40-year anniversary. Henrik Sedin was named in the ceremony as the team&#x27;s new captain, replacing Roberto Luongo, who had relinquished his captaincy in the off-season. The Canucks played the Los Angeles Kings, their first opponent in their inaugural season in 1970; both teams wore their original uniforms used in the Canucks&#x27; inaugural game. Throughout the season, the Canucks continued to celebrate their 40th anniversary with the creation of the &quot;Ring of Honour&quot;, a permanent in-arena display commemorating their most significant players from past years. Four players were inducted during the campaign—Orland Kurtenbach, Kirk McLean, Thomas Gradin and Harold Snepsts. In December 2010, the Canucks also honoured Markus Naslund by retiring his number 19 jersey. Naslund had retired two years after leaving the Canucks in 2008. The team finished the season first overall in the league for the first time, winning the Presidents&#x27; Trophy. Finishing with 54 wins and 117 points, the Canucks broke the previous team records in both categories by significant margins. Individually, numerous players had career years. Daniel Sedin won the Art Ross Trophy as the league&#x27;s top scorer with 104 points, marking the first time in NHL history that two brothers won the award in back-to-back years. Meanwhile, Ryan Kesler tied Daniel Sedin for the team goal-scoring lead, with 41 goals. In goal, Roberto Luongo and backup Cory Schneider captured the William M. Jennings Trophy for allowing the fewest goals against.
Entering the opening round of the 2011 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Canucks played the defending Stanley Cup champions and eighth-seeded Chicago Blackhawks, who had eliminated Vancouver in the previous two years in six games in the second round. While Vancouver initially took a 3–0 lead in the series, Chicago came back to win three straight games and force the seventh game in the series. Forced into overtime in game seven, winger Alexandre Burrows scored his second goal of the game in overtime on Blackhawks goaltender Corey Crawford following a failed clearing attempt by Chicago defenceman Chris Campoli to win the game 2–1 and the series 4–3. The Canucks played the fifth-seeded Nashville Predators in the second round, defeating the Predators in six games to clinch a spot in the conference finals for the first time since 1994. Facing the second seeded San Jose Sharks in the conference finals, Vancouver won in five games against the second-seeded Sharks with Kevin Bieksa scoring the winning goal in overtime against Sharks&#x27; goaltender Antti Niemi. Advancing to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 1994, the Canucks won the first two games of the series on home ice against the third-seeded Boston Bruins, with Boston winning the next two in Boston. Vancouver won Game 5 at home giving them a 3–2 series lead and a chance to capture the Stanley Cup in Game 6 in Boston. The Bruins, however, won Game 6 in Boston and then the deciding Game 7 in Vancouver to win the Stanley Cup for the first time since 1972. After the game, riots and looting broke out in downtown Vancouver, repeating the events of 17 years earlier.
During the season-opening game on October 6, 2011 against the Pittsburgh Penguins, a ceremony was held to honour Rick Rypien, who died by suicide during the 2011 off-season. For the rest of the season, the players wore decals on their helmets saying &quot;37 RYP.&quot; The Canucks were strong contenders for much of the 2011–12 season, and clinched Presidents&#x27; Trophy, for the second consecutive year and second time in franchise history altogether. Despite projections for another Stanley Cup run at the outset of the 2012 playoffs, the Canucks were eliminated in five games by the eighth-seeded and eventual Cup champion Los Angeles Kings.

====2012–2014: End of the Gillis era====
Prior to the start of the 2012–13 season, the league&#x27;s collective bargaining agreement (CBA) expired. Unable to agree on a new CBA, the NHL enacted a lockout on September 15, 2012. The lockout continued on for days, which resulted a 48-game shortened season. The Canucks wore Vancouver Millionaires replica jerseys on March 16, 2013, to celebrate the 100-year anniversary of the Millionaires.

Vancouver finished the year winning their fifth consecutive Northwest Division title and the third seed in the West, but were swept in the first round of the 2013 playoffs by the sixth-seeded San Jose Sharks. Vigneault and his coaching staff were fired at the end of the season, and replaced by John Tortorella.

The Canucks participated in their first outdoor NHL game on March 2, 2014, a match against the Ottawa Senators at BC Place. The event was titled the 2014 Heritage Classic. Luongo was traded back to the Florida Panthers late in the season, while the team failed to make the playoffs for the first time in six years. This saw Gillis fired and Linden named president of hockey operations; Tortorella was also relieved as coach after his one season.

===Jim Benning era (2014–2021)===

====2014–2018: Later years of the Sedins====

On May 21, 2014, Jim Benning was announced as general manager, having previously served as assistant general manager of the 2011 Boston Bruins championship team that had beaten the Canucks three years prior. On June 23, 2014, Willie Desjardins was named the 18th head coach of the Canucks. The team underwent a series of changes under the new management: veteran forward Ryan Kesler was traded to the Anaheim Ducks, veteran defenceman Jason Garrison was traded to the Tampa Bay Lightning and veteran forward David Booth was let go in free agency, while Ryan Miller and Radim Vrbata were signed as free agents. This season saw the team honour former general manager and head coach Pat Quinn, following his death, by renaming a city street after him (Pat Quinn Way) as well as having his family participate in a pregame ceremonial puck drop. The Canucks finished second in the Pacific Division in the 2014–15 season, reaching the 100-point plateau for the ninth time in franchise history. They faced the Calgary Flames in the first round of the 2015 playoffs, losing in six games.

As the team fared poorly throughout the 2016–17 season, more veteran players were traded: Alex Burrows and Jannik Hansen were dealt in an effort to rebuild. On March 25, 2017, the Canucks&#x27; 2015 first-round pick Brock Boeser made his NHL debut in his home state of Minnesota. Desjardins and his coaching staff, with the exception of assistant coach Doug Jarvis, were let go at the end of the season, replaced by Travis Green who coached their AHL affiliate in Utica. They also added Nolan Baumgartner, Newell Brown, and Manny Malhotra as assistant coaches.

The 2017–18 season was another poor year for the Canucks, but rookie Boeser was a bright spot for the team. Despite an injury late in the season, Boeser&#x27;s 29 goals and 55 points in 62 games were enough to place him second in Calder Memorial Trophy voting for rookie of the year. Longtime Canucks Daniel and Henrik Sedin played their final game on April 7, 2018, against the Edmonton Oilers. On June 5, 2018, longtime Canucks&#x27; public address announcer John Ashbridge died, having worked in his capacity with the franchise since 1987. During the off-season, Linden stepped down as president of hockey operations.

====2018–2021: Rebuilding====
The 2018–19 season saw the debut of the Canucks&#x27; 2017 first-round draft pick, Elias Pettersson. Pettersson broke the Canucks&#x27; record for points by a rookie, set by Ivan Hlinka (1981–82) and matched by Pavel Bure (1991–92), and finished with 66 points to lead all NHL rookies, winning the Calder Trophy.

The franchise celebrated its 50th season in the NHL, the 2019–20 season, with a ceremony at the home opener on October 9, 2019. Bo Horvat was named the 14th captain in team history, following a one-year hiatus without a captain with the retirement of long-time captain Henrik Sedin. The 2019–20 season also saw the rookie campaign of Quinn Hughes, who finished the regular season with 8 goals and 45 assists for 53 points in 68 games, finishing as runner-up in Calder Memorial Trophy votes. The Canucks became the first team to have a top two Calder Trophy finalist three years in a row since the Toronto Maple Leafs, who did so when the league only had six teams from 1957 to 1959. On February 12, 2020, Daniel and Henrik Sedin&#x27;s numbers 22 and 33 were retired before a game against the Chicago Blackhawks. On March 12, 2020, the Canucks and the NHL&#x27;s season was suspended due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. When the league resumed play, the Canucks won their first postseason series in nine years in the 2020 Qualifying Round by defeating the Minnesota Wild. They then beat the defending Stanley Cup champions St. Louis Blues in six games in the first round before being eliminated by the Vegas Golden Knights in seven games in the second round.

General manager Jim Benning, head coach Travis Green, assistant coach Nolan Baumgartner, and assistant general manager John Weisbrod were fired on December 5, 2021, after an 8–15–2 start to the 2021–22 NHL season. On the same day, Bruce Boudreau was named the 20th head coach of the Canucks.

===Patrik Allvin/Jim Rutherford era (2021–present)===
On December 9, 2021, Jim Rutherford was named president of hockey operations and interim general manager. He hired Patrik Allvin as general manager on January 26, 2022. On January 22, 2023, after weeks of speculation, the Canucks fired head coach Bruce Boudreau and hired Rick Tocchet as the franchise&#x27;s 21st head coach. As the news broke that Boudreau would be fired weeks before while he was still coaching, the Canucks organization faced widespread criticism by fans and journalists mainly directed towards owner Francesco Aquilini, head of hockey operations Jim Rutherford and general manager Patrik Allvin, for their public mishandling of the coaching switch. Following Horvat&#x27;s trade to the New York Islanders in exchange for Anthony Beauvillier and Aatu Raty, Hughes was named the 15th captain in franchise history during the 2023 off-season, making him the youngest captain in the NHL and first American captain of the Canucks.

The 2023–24 season was the first season with Hughes as captain and the first full season with Tocchet as head coach. With low expectations from fans and media at the start of the season, the team started 9–2–1 in their first twelve regular season games, and finished third in the Western Conference en route to winning their first-ever Pacific Division title (and their first franchise division title since 2013). The Canucks qualified for the playoffs for the first time since the expanded playoffs in 2020 and played their first playoff games in Vancouver since 2015. The Canucks defeated their first round opponent, the wild card Nashville Predators in six games, but lost their second round series in seven games to the Edmonton Oilers. Following the season, Tocchet was announced as the winner of the Jack Adams Award and Hughes won the James Norris Memorial Trophy; Allvin was voted as a finalist for the Jim Gregory General Manager of the Year Award.

==Team information==

===Home arenas===

The Canucks play their home games at Rogers Arena. The venue opened in 1995 as General Motors Place, and seats up to 18,890 for Canucks games. Rogers Arena was also the venue for ice hockey games during the 2010 Winter Olympics, where it was temporarily named Canada Hockey Place. The arena is owned and operated by Canucks Sports &amp; Entertainment. Before moving to Rogers Arena, the Canucks played their home games at Pacific Coliseum in Hastings Park for 25 years. The arena holds 16,281 for ice hockey games, though capacity at its opening was 15,713. During the 2010 Winter Olympics, it was the venue for figure skating and short-track speed skating. The Pacific Coliseum was also the home of the Western Hockey League (WHL)&#x27;s Vancouver Giants from 2001 to 2016.

===Logos and jerseys===
The team has gone through four primary logos and six major uniform designs over the years, with numerous minor changes to each, in addition to several alternate logos and jerseys.
The team&#x27;s first NHL jerseys, worn from the inaugural season of 1970–71 (modified for the 1972–73 season) until the end of the 1977–78 season, featured a hockey stick in the shape of a shallow &quot;V&quot; superimposed on a blue rink-shaped rectangle forming the letter &quot;C&quot;, designed by North Vancouver artist Joe Borovich. During this era, the Canucks wore blue and white jerseys with green stripes, though for the first two seasons, a white &quot;V&quot; adorned the sleeve stripes. A modified version of this logo is still in use, as a shoulder patch on the team&#x27;s current jerseys and as the primary logo of their alternate jerseys.

In 1978, aiming for a more aggressive image, the organization asked San Francisco-based design agency Beyl &amp; Boyd to design new uniforms. These consisted of a huge, yellow, red-orange and black striped &quot;V&quot; coming down from the shoulders (suggesting &quot;victory&quot;, according to its designers). Hockey writer Stephen Cole described it as looking like &quot;a punch in the eye&quot;. The colour of the home jerseys changed from white to yellow with the logo and uniform change.
The &quot;Flying V&quot; theme, which included several slight modifications over the years, was abandoned in 1985, to feature the team&#x27;s emblem on the front rather than the &quot;V&quot; (the emblem had previously been worn only on the sleeves; the V&#x27;s would appear on the shoulders from 1985 to 1989). The logo consisted of the word &quot;Canucks&quot; in a diagonal slant as part the blade of a skate and was designed by San Francisco graphic artist Mike Bull. The logo, with its laser-like design, was sometimes referred to as the &quot;Star Wars&quot; logo, the &quot;waffle iron&quot;, the &quot;plate of spaghetti&quot;, and most commonly as the &quot;Flying Skate.&quot;

The yellow home jerseys were scrapped in 1989 in favour of more conventional white ones, and the triangular shoulder stripes which adorned the post-&quot;V&quot; jerseys were discarded as well. The new incarnation was worn from 1989 to 1992, when a subtle change was made—and went largely unnoticed for the rest of the jersey&#x27;s lifespan. The orange was changed to red, and the deep &quot;gold&quot; colour was changed to a much brighter yellow, reportedly because jersey-maker CCM no longer produced the required hues. In 1996, an alternate jersey was introduced, retaining the &quot;Flying Skate&quot; logo, but using a salmon colour graduating to black near the bottom.
In 1997 the Canucks unveiled a new logo, in which a Haida-style orca breaking out of a patch of ice forms a stylized &quot;C.&quot; The logo has been much-maligned, accused of being a blatant reference to their parent company, Orca Bay (now Canucks Sports and Entertainment). At the time, general manager Pat Quinn discussed wanting to have a West Coast colour scheme, and overall West Coast themes in the logo; the colour scheme included blue, red and silver. Beginning in 2001, an alternate jersey was utilized, with contrasting shoulder patches and a blue-to-maroon graduated colour in the body. In 2006, these gradient-coloured alternate jerseys were officially replaced with the popular, royal blue &quot;Stick-in-Rink&quot; uniforms from the 1970s.
Little more than halfway through the 2006–07 season, the Canucks announced that they would be changing their jerseys once again. The new uniform was unveiled prior to training camp, on August 29, 2007. It featured the same orca design present on their previous jerseys, but the colour scheme was changed to their &quot;retro&quot; colours of royal blue and kelly green. Additionally, the word &quot;Vancouver&quot; was added to the chest area above the orca. The actual jerseys themselves were changed to the Rbk Edge design, along with all other teams in the NHL. &quot;The Vancouver Sun&quot; described the new look as &quot;decidedly unpopular.&quot;
On November 14, 2008, prior to their Sport Celebrities Festival, the Canucks released their new RBK Edge Third Jersey. While staying with the colours of Vancouver, and combining the old with the new, the jersey looks very similar to their home jersey. The modernized &quot;Stick-in-Rink&quot; logo unveiled the previous year on the shoulder of the main jerseys is used as the main crest. On the shoulder, a &quot;V&quot; with the head of Johnny Canuck on top is used. This is the first time in team history since joining the NHL that Johnny Canuck has appeared on a Vancouver uniform. &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; rated it 13th overall out of the 19 third jerseys released for the 2008 season.

On opening night October 9, 2010, the Canucks revealed jerseys they would wear for select games during their 40th-anniversary season. They look exactly like the jerseys the team wore in their early years, only with the addition of Reebok manufacturing the jerseys. The jerseys sport a &#x27;40th Anniversary&#x27; patch on the upper-right chest commemorating their 40th season. Just like the early years, they also bear no player names, only numbers, with permission from the NHL.

On August 13, 2015, the Canucks announced that they would be wearing their 1990s Flying Skate jerseys for a February 13, 2016, game against the Toronto Maple Leafs to honour the 20th Anniversary of Rogers Arena. They attempted to do this in the previous season to honour Pat Quinn, but were unsuccessful. The 1990s jerseys were used again for select games in the 2019–20 season (the design was chosen via an online fan vote over two other throwback jerseys) to coincide with the team&#x27;s 50th anniversary.
On June 14, 2019, the Canucks updated their primary uniforms. The &quot;Vancouver&quot; script was removed while the modern &quot;stick-in-rink&quot; logo was modified with white as the main colour. A new &quot;Heritage&quot; uniform was also released, featuring design elements inspired from their inaugural season uniforms.

For the 2020–21 season, the NHL introduced &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniforms. The Canucks&#x27; design used was similar to the alternates they wore from 2001 to 2006, but with green replacing maroon. A second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; design was released in the 2022–23 season, featuring the &quot;Johnny Canuck&quot; logo in front with a blue base and green and beige stripes. The design harkened back to the Canucks uniforms worn during the 1960s.

On January 18, 2023, the Canucks debuted a new version of the black Flying Skate jerseys as their alternate uniform. The design featured a modernized version of the Flying Skate logo minus the white elements, and features thick red and yellow stripes with subtle &quot;V&quot; patterns in homage to the infamous &quot;Flying V&quot; uniforms of 1978–1985. The silhouette of the North Shore Mountains in black and yellow was added on the inside collar. The current Canucks jersey lettering is used in lieu of standard block lettering of the 1990s Flying Skate uniforms. The uniform was first worn on the night the Canucks honoured former player Gino Odjick, who died January 15.

===Mascot===

The Vancouver Canucks&#x27; mascot is an anthropomorphic killer whale (orca) named Fin the Orca. He is often seen banging a First Nations drum or skating around during intermissions firing t-shirts out of a compressed air cannon. On occasion, &quot;smoke&quot; also comes out of the blowhole on his head. Fin is known for his &quot;chomping&quot; where he bites the heads of fans.

Two fans of the Canucks became unofficial mascots of the team at the end of the 2009–2010 season, donning zentai-style, skin-tight green bodysuits in slightly different shades of green as The Green Men, and have been known to accompany the team on road games, as they did in the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals to the TD Garden against the Boston Bruins. On September 5, 2012, as an acknowledgement of their rising popularity, ESPN inducted The Green Men into the &quot;Hall of Fans&quot;, a semi-satirical take on a Hall of Fame. In November 2014, the Green Men announced that 2014–15 would be their final season. After an 8-season absence, the Green Men made two surprise appearances during the 2023–24 season, on February 24, 2024, during a game against the Bruins, and on May 8, 2024, during the Canucks&#x27; first game of the conference semifinals against the Edmonton Oilers in the 2024 Stanley Cup playoffs.

===Media===
After a relationship with CKNW stretching since the Canucks joined the NHL in 1970, the Canucks entered into a new radio broadcast deal in 2006 with CKST—an AM sports/talk station. John Shorthouse continues to call the play-by-play, as he has since 1999, though with his role on the Canucks&#x27; television broadcasts becoming more prominent in recent years. As of 2023, Shorthouse now works the Canucks&#x27; TV broadcasts on a full-time basis alongside analysts Dave Tomlinson (primary) and Ray Ferraro (select games). Brendan Batchelor and Randip Janda call Canucks games on radio. The games aired on 14 stations across British Columbia. On March 9, 2017, it was announced that Rogers Media had acquired radio rights to the Canucks under a 5-year deal to begin in the 2017–18 season. On April 25, 2017, Rogers announced that it would acquire CISL from Newcap Radio and convert it to a sports radio format to serve as team flagship.

Sportsnet and Rogers hold a monopoly on all television broadcasts of the Canucks; regional games are aired by Sportsnet Pacific, and occasionally on the overflow channel Sportsnet Canucks. Sportsnet had held the television rights to the team since 1998. Since 2014, Sportsnet also held the NHL national TV rights in Canada, allowing Canucks broadcasts (including the now sublicensed Hockey Night in Canada from CBC) to be televised nationally on a number of occasions.

===Ownership===
The initial owners were Tom Scallen&#x27;s Medicor group. In 1972, hints of impropriety were circulating about Scallen. He was charged with stock fraud and spent the last two years of his Canuck ownership in prison. In 1974, Scallen and Medicor sold the team to media executive Frank Griffiths.
From 1988 to 1997, the Vancouver Canucks were owned by local businessman and philanthropist Arthur Griffiths, who had inherited ownership from his father, Frank. However, he was forced to sell his majority interest in the Canucks after overextending his resources trying to build a new arena, General Motors Place (now known as Rogers Arena). As a result, he sold his majority share to an American billionaire, John McCaw Jr.

On November 17, 2004, the Aquilini Investment Group, headed by Francesco Aquilini, purchased a 50% share in Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment (the owners of both the Canucks franchise and Rogers Arena) from John McCaw Jr. Prior to the sale, Aquilini and two business partners, Tom Gaglardi and Ryan Beedie, had negotiated with Orca Bay for several months without concluding an agreement. In January 2005, Gaglardi and Beedie filed a lawsuit against Aquilini and Orca Bay, alleging that Aquilini and Orca Bay had acted in bad faith in concluding a deal using information obtained from their joint offer.

On November 8, 2006, Aquilini, along with his brothers Roberto and Paolo, purchased the remaining 50% of the Vancouver Canucks and Rogers Arena from McCaw.

In May 2007, Gaglardi and Beedie&#x27;s civil lawsuit over Aquilini&#x27;s purchase reached the Supreme Court of British Columbia. The court ruled for Aquilini, on January 10, 2008. The court held that there was no legal partnership between Aquilini, Beedie, and Gaglardi, and that McCaw was free to sell the team to anyone he wished.

On January 29, 2008, the company responsible for operating the Vancouver Canucks and Rogers Arena, changed its name from Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment to Canucks Sports &amp; Entertainment.

==Minor league affiliates==

===Top affiliates===

* 1970–1972 – Rochester Americans (AHL)
* 1972–1975 – Seattle Totems (WHL, CHL)
* 1975–1978 – Tulsa Oilers (CHL)
* 1978–1982 – Dallas Black Hawks (CHL)
* 1982–1988 – Fredericton Express (AHL)
* 1988–1992 – Milwaukee Admirals (IHL)
* 1992–1994 – Hamilton Canucks (AHL)
* 1994–2000 – Syracuse Crunch (AHL)
* 2000–2001 – Kansas City Blades (IHL)
* 2001–2011 – Manitoba Moose (AHL)
* 2011–2013 – Chicago Wolves (AHL)
* 2013–2021 – Utica Comets (AHL)
* 2021–present – Abbotsford Canucks (AHL)
===Secondary affiliates===

* 1987–1988 – Flint Spirits (IHL)
* 1991–1992 – Columbus Chill (ECHL)
* 2002–2006 – Columbia Inferno (ECHL)
* 2006–2011 – Victoria Salmon Kings (ECHL)
* 2011–2015 – Kalamazoo Wings (ECHL)
* 2016–2017 – Alaska Aces (ECHL)
* 2017–2021, 2023–present – Kalamazoo Wings (ECHL)
==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Canucks. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Vancouver Canucks seasons&quot;.

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players and personnel==
===Current roster===
===Retired numbers===
;Notes
* Bure wore number 10 for five of his seven seasons in Vancouver. He wore number 96 during the 1995–96 and 1996–97 seasons before returning to number 10 during the 1997–98 season.
* The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s #99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.

====Numbers taken out of circulation====
* 11 – Wayne Maki, LW, 1970–1973, taken out of circulation following his death from brain cancer on May 1, 1974. Chris Oddleifson (C, 1974–1976) and Mark Messier (C, 1997–2000) are the only Canucks players to have worn it since.
* 28 – Luc Bourdon, D, 2006–2008, taken out of circulation following his death in a motorcycle crash on May 29, 2008. Ian Cole initially chose to wear the number, but later made the decision to switch to #82 as a mark of respect for Bourdon and to pay tribute to his memory.
* 37 – Rick Rypien, C, 2005–2011, taken out of circulation following his death from suicide on August 15, 2011.

===Hall of Famers===
Several former players and builders from the Canucks have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. Eight former players have been inducted, and six builders (executives, general managers, head coaches, and owners).

Players
Builders
===Ring of Honour inductees===
The Vancouver Canucks Ring of Honour is a collection of permanent in-arena displays, that commemorates individuals that made an impact with the franchise. Inductees to the Ring of Honour include:
* Orland Kurtenbach, C, 1970–1974, inducted on October 26, 2010.
* Kirk McLean, G, 1987–1998, inducted on November 24, 2010.
* Thomas Gradin, C, 1978–1986, inducted on January 24, 2011.
* Harold Snepsts, D, 1974–1984; 1988–1990, inducted on March 14, 2011.
* Pat Quinn, D, 1970–1972; president and general manager, 1987–1997; head coach, 1991–1994; 1996, inducted on April 13, 2014.
* Mattias Ohlund, D, 1997–2009, inducted on December 16, 2016.
* Alex Burrows, RW, 2005–2017, inducted on December 3, 2019.
* Roberto Luongo, G, 2006–2014, inducted on December 14, 2023.

===Team captains===

There have been 15 Canucks players who have served as the captain. The franchise&#x27;s first captain was Orland Kurtenbach, who captained the team until his retirement in 1974. The longest-tenured Canucks captains have been Stan Smyl and Henrik Sedin, who each served as captain for eight seasons; each were also the only captains to have spent their entire NHL career with the Canucks. Swedish winger Markus Naslund, who captained for seven seasons, was the first non-Canadian to have captained the Canucks.

Though goaltenders are not permitted to act as captains during games, Roberto Luongo served as the captain from 2008 to 2010, but because of the NHL rule against goaltender captains, the league did not allow Luongo to serve as on-ice captain. In his place, the three alternate captains were responsible for dealing with officials during games. They also handled ceremonial face-offs. Luongo was not permitted to wear the &quot;C&quot; on his jersey. Instead, he incorporated it into the artwork on the front of one of his masks, which he occasionally wore for the early months of the 2008–09 season.

* Orland Kurtenbach, 1970–1974
* Andre Boudrias, 1975–1976
* Chris Oddleifson, 1976–1977
* Don Lever, 1977–1979
* Kevin McCarthy, 1979–1982
* Stan Smyl, 1982–1990
* Dan Quinn, Doug Lidster and Trevor Linden, 1990–1991 
* Trevor Linden, 1991–1997
* Mark Messier, 1997–2000
* Markus Naslund, 2000–2008
* Roberto Luongo, 2008–2010
* Henrik Sedin, 2010–2018
* Bo Horvat, 2019–2023
* Quinn Hughes, 2023–present
===Draft picks===

The Canucks selected Dale Tallon, a defenceman from the Toronto Marlboros with their first pick, second overall in the 1970 NHL amateur draft. In 1978, they drafted Stan Smyl from the New Westminster Bruins. Ten years later, the Canucks also drafted Trevor Linden from the Medicine Hat Tigers in 1988. The Canucks have had 13 top-five draft picks in franchise history, but have never had the first overall pick. The Canucks are one of the two franchises in the NHL to have drafted two twin brothers in the same year. They drafted Daniel Sedin second overall and Henrik Sedin third overall in 1999. Two players from British Columbia have been selected by the Canucks in the first round of an NHL entry draft: Cam Neely in 1983 and Jake Virtanen, taken sixth overall in 2014.

===General managers===
===Head coaches===

There have been 21 head coaches for the Canucks. The franchise&#x27;s first head coach was Hal Laycoe, who coached the Canucks for two seasons. Alain Vigneault coached the most games of any Canucks head coach with 540 games, and has the most points all-time with the Canucks with 683, from the 2006–07 season through the 2012–13 season. He is followed by Marc Crawford, who has 586 points all-time with the Canucks. Vigneault also has the most points in a season of any Canucks coach, with 117 in the 2010–11 season. Roger Neilson and Pat Quinn are the only Hockey Hall of Fame inductees to coach the Canucks. Quinn, Vigneault, and Tocchet are the only three Canucks head coaches to win a Jack Adams Award with the team. Bill LaForge, who coached the start of the 1984 season, has the fewest points with the Canucks, with 10. Harry Neale served the most terms as head coach of the Canucks with three while Pat Quinn served two.

The current head coach Rick Tocchet was hired on January 22, 2023.

==Awards and trophies==
===NHL===

Clarence S. Campbell Bowl
* 1981–82, 1993–94, 2010–11

Presidents&#x27; Trophy
* 2010–11, 2011–12

Calder Memorial Trophy
* Pavel Bure: 1991–92
* Elias Pettersson: 2018–19

Jack Adams Award
* Pat Quinn: 1991–92
* Alain Vigneault: 2006–07
* Rick Tocchet: 2023–24

James Norris Memorial Trophy
* Quinn Hughes: 2023–24

Budweiser NHL Man of the Year Award
* Ryan Walter: 1991–92

King Clancy Memorial Trophy
* Trevor Linden: 1996–97
* Henrik Sedin: 2015–16
* Daniel Sedin and Henrik Sedin: 2017–18

Lester B. Pearson Award / Ted Lindsay Award
* Markus Naslund: 2002–03
* Daniel Sedin: 2010–11

NHL Plus/Minus Award
* Marek Malik: 2003–04 

NHL Foundation Player Award
* Trevor Linden: 2007–08 

Scotiabank Fan Fav Award
* Roberto Luongo: 2008–09

Art Ross Trophy
* Henrik Sedin: 2009–10
* Daniel Sedin: 2010–11

Hart Memorial Trophy
* Henrik Sedin: 2009–10

William M. Jennings Trophy
* Roberto Luongo and Cory Schneider: 2010–11

Frank J. Selke Trophy
* Ryan Kesler: 2010–11

NHL General Manager of the Year Award
* Mike Gillis: 2010–11
===All-Star===

First All-Star team
* Pavel Bure: 1993–94
* Markus Naslund: 2001–02, 2002–03, 2003–04
* Todd Bertuzzi: 2002–03
* Henrik Sedin: 2009–10, 2010–11
* Daniel Sedin: 2010–11
* Quinn Hughes: 2023–24

Second All-Star team
* Kirk McLean: 1991–92
* Alexander Mogilny: 1995–96
* Roberto Luongo: 2006–07
* Daniel Sedin: 2009–10
* Thatcher Demko: 2023–24
NHL All-Rookie Team
* Jim Sandlak: 1986–87
* Trevor Linden: 1988–89
* Corey Hirsch: 1995–96
* Mattias Ohlund: 1997–98
* Brock Boeser: 2017–18
* Elias Pettersson: 2018–19
* Quinn Hughes: 2019–20

===Franchise===
==Franchise records==

===Scoring leaders===

These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Canucks player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;




===Individual records===

Skaters
* Most games played in a career – Henrik Sedin, 1,330 (2000–2018)
* Most goals in a career – Daniel Sedin, 393 (2000–2018)
* Most assists in a career – Henrik Sedin, 830 (2000–2018)
* Most points in a career – Henrik Sedin, 1,070 (2000–2018)
* Most penalty minutes in a career – Gino Odjick, 2,127 (1990–1998)
* Most goals in a season – Pavel Bure, 60 (1992–93 and 1993–94)
* Most assists in a season – Henrik Sedin, 83 (2009–10)
* Most points in a season – Henrik Sedin, 112 (2009–10)
* Highest plus/minus in a season – Christian Ehrhoff, 36 (2009–10); Daniel Sedin, 36 (2009–10)
* Most penalty minutes in a season – Donald Brashear, 372 (1997–98)
* Most points in a season, defenceman – Quinn Hughes, 92 (2023–24)
* Most points in a season, rookie – Elias Pettersson, 66 (2018–19)
* Fastest goal recorded by a Canuck – Alex Burrows, 6 seconds (2012–13)

Goaltenders
* Most games played in a career, goaltender – Kirk McLean, 516 (1987–1997)
* Most wins in a career – Roberto Luongo, 252 (2006–2014)
* Most shutouts in a career – Roberto Luongo, 38 (2006–2014)
* Most wins in a season – Roberto Luongo, 47 (2006–07)
* Most shutouts in a season – Roberto Luongo, 9 (2008–09)
* Lowest GAA in a season (min. 30 GP) – Cory Schneider, 1.96 (2011–12)
* Best SV% in a season (min. 30 GP) – Cory Schneider, .937 (2011–12)

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="4" end="21" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="41" end="51" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="66" end="75" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="104" end="126" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="152" end="168" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="176" end="194" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q517318" start="229" end="241" title="Rogers Arena" label="Rogers Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q713811" start="243" end="255" title="Rick Tocchet" label="Rick Tocchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689207" start="275" end="289" title="Jim Rutherford" label="Jim Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547181" start="340" end="353" title="Patrik Allvin" label="Patrik Allvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="419" end="423" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="430" end="444" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="460" end="474" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="505" end="523" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="551" end="569" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580623" start="573" end="577" title="1982 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="583" end="599" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589739" start="603" end="607" title="1994 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="616" end="629" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q686507" start="633" end="637" title="2011 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="657" end="680" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="779" end="786" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="791" end="798" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295677" start="870" end="885" title="Smythe Division" label="Smythe Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q846353" start="937" end="955" title="Northwest Division (NHL)" label="Northwest Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="1128" end="1139" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="1210" end="1220" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q357666" start="1227" end="1236" title="Stan Smyl" label="Stan Smyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="1243" end="1256" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="1263" end="1277" title="Markus Näslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="1284" end="1296" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="1306" end="1318" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q832644" start="1564" end="1580" title="Pacific Coliseum" label="Pacific Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785037" start="1697" end="1719" title="Vancouver Millionaires" label="Vancouver Millionaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q450302" start="1731" end="1736" title="Frank Patrick (ice hockey)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="1741" end="1755" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381725" start="1830" end="1862" title="Pacific Coast Hockey Association" label="Pacific Coast Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q779088" start="1947" end="1959" title="Denman Arena" label="Denman Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2119" end="2130" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753100" start="2160" end="2175" title="Ottawa Senators (original)" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560081" start="2179" end="2183" title="1915 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028768" start="2313" end="2341" title="Western Canada Hockey League" label="Western Canada Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q995743" start="2413" end="2431" title="1925–26 WHL season" label="1925–26 WHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="2480" end="2492" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914129" start="2587" end="2604" title="Vancouver Canucks (WHL)" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q426023" start="2638" end="2665" title="Pacific Coast Hockey League" label="Pacific Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q976512" start="2674" end="2695" title="Western Hockey League (1952–1974)" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q832644" start="2833" end="2849" title="Pacific Coliseum" label="Pacific Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914183" start="2971" end="2986" title="Vancouver Forum" label="Vancouver Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179402" start="3009" end="3036" title="Pacific National Exhibition" label="Pacific National Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498074" start="3143" end="3152" title="Frederick Hume" label="Fred Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="3198" end="3221" title="1967 NHL Expansion" label="join the league in 1967"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3274" end="3286" title="Cyrus McLean" label="Cyrus McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="3457" end="3476" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381669" start="3487" end="3502" title="Stafford Smythe" label="Stafford Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="3665" end="3683" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="3726" end="3759" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849315" start="3839" end="3852" title="Oakland Seals" label="Oakland Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="4230" end="4239" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381664" start="4253" end="4264" title="Tom Scallen" label="Tom Scallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="4382" end="4386" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="4486" end="4500" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076588" start="4528" end="4542" title="1970–71 NHL season" label="1970–71 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180920" start="4669" end="4680" title="John Arbour" label="John Arbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539620" start="4682" end="4696" title="George Gardner (ice hockey)" label="George Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229411" start="4698" end="4707" title="Len Lunde" label="Len Lunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755816" start="4709" end="4720" title="Marc Reaume" label="Marc Reaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240013" start="4722" end="4732" title="Ted Taylor (ice hockey)" label="Ted Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939265" start="4737" end="4748" title="Murray Hall (ice hockey)" label="Murray Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q644816" start="4979" end="4994" title="1970 NHL expansion draft" label="expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q141069" start="5178" end="5200" title="1970 NHL amateur draft" label="1970 NHL amateur draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000556" start="5302" end="5311" title="Bud Poile" label="Bud Poile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524982" start="5329" end="5338" title="Gary Doak" label="Gary Doak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377822" start="5396" end="5413" title="Orland Kurtenbach" label="Orland Kurtenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="5484" end="5493" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q110556" start="5630" end="5641" title="Dale Tallon" label="Dale Tallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="5758" end="5777" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q141078" start="5818" end="5835" title="Gilbert Perreault" label="Gilbert Perreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="5936" end="5944" title="NHL All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="5963" end="5982" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="6066" end="6083" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864891" start="6142" end="6155" title="Barry Wilkins" label="Barry Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="6256" end="6266" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187336" start="6267" end="6280" title="Denis DeJordy" label="Denis DeJordy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278162" start="6526" end="6539" title="East Division (NHL)" label="East Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179834" start="6648" end="6666" title="Jocelyn Guevremont" label="Jocelyn Guevremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q387333" start="6687" end="6701" title="André Boudrias" label="Andre Boudrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023208" start="6706" end="6724" title="Dennis Ververgaert" label="Dennis Ververgaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="6834" end="6848" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1974–75 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486959" start="6932" end="6947" title="Frank Griffiths" label="Frank Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295677" start="7060" end="7075" title="Smythe Division" label="Smythe Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q362372" start="7184" end="7215" title="Gary Smith (ice hockey)" label="Gary &amp;quot;Suitcase&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="7290" end="7310" title="Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="7355" end="7368" title="1975 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1975 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="7390" end="7408" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378806" start="7441" end="7453" title="Phil Maloney" label="Phil Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125888" start="7513" end="7523" title="Hal Laycoe" label="Hal Laycoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="7635" end="7659" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q818802" start="7731" end="7748" title="Vancouver Blazers" label="Vancouver Blazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="7852" end="7859" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="7861" end="7868" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q753602" start="7874" end="7890" title="1975–76 WHA season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189268" start="7972" end="7979" title="1975–76 NHL season" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="7997" end="8015" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964829" start="8380" end="8396" title="Chris Oddleifson" label="Chris Oddleifson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035826" start="8398" end="8407" title="Don Lever" label="Don Lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377709" start="8412" end="8426" title="Kevin McCarthy (ice hockey)" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092006" start="8442" end="8456" title="1976–77 NHL season" label="1976–77 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124849" start="8501" end="8513" title="Jake Milford" label="Jake Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q357666" start="8544" end="8553" title="Stan Smyl" label="Stan Smyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q513652" start="8555" end="8568" title="Thomas Gradin" label="Thomas Gradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016013" start="8570" end="8580" title="Darcy Rota" label="Darcy Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675526" start="8582" end="8595" title="Ivan Boldirev" label="Ivan Boldirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430575" start="8600" end="8615" title="Richard Brodeur" label="Richard Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964390" start="8765" end="8778" title="1982 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1982 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="8943" end="8965" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82 regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580623" start="9329" end="9347" title="1982 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="9398" end="9412" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="9614" end="9629" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="9808" end="9815" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="9853" end="9866" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q252661" start="10043" end="10053" title="white flag" label="white flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287109" start="10211" end="10230" title="rally towel" label="waving white towels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829607" start="10372" end="10383" title="Towel Power" label="Towel Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787575" start="10674" end="10690" title="Victoria Cougars" label="Victoria Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561934" start="10703" end="10726" title="1926 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1926 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="10829" end="10840" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="10995" end="11003" title="overtime (ice hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q547452" start="11083" end="11097" title="Harold Snepsts" label="Harold Snepsts"/>
<link wikidata="Q372804" start="11171" end="11181" title="Mike Bossy" label="Mike Bossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975393" start="11379" end="11389" title="Cinderella (sports)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587936" start="11552" end="11556" title="1992 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q797882" start="11874" end="11890" title="Patrik Sundström" label="Patrik Sundstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531904" start="11895" end="11905" title="Tony Tanti" label="Tony Tanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347945" start="11920" end="11927" title="1983–84 NHL season" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q284827" start="12119" end="12131" title="Petri Skriko" label="Petri Skriko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127879" start="12623" end="12634" title="Harry Neale" label="Harry Neale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112749" start="12657" end="12668" title="Jack Gordon (ice hockey)" label="Jack Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078" start="12722" end="12735" title="power forward (ice hockey)" label="power forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027913" start="12736" end="12745" title="Cam Neely" label="Cam Neely"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="12753" end="12766" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377001" start="12881" end="12892" title="Glen Wesley" label="Glen Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q358189" start="12924" end="12938" title="Barry Pederson" label="Barry Pederson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="13080" end="13099" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="13363" end="13372" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="13581" end="13598" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q898635" start="13658" end="13668" title="Greg Adams (ice hockey, born 1963)" label="Greg Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q728115" start="13684" end="13695" title="Kirk McLean" label="Kirk McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q909673" start="13852" end="13872" title="1988 NHL entry draft" label="1988 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="13899" end="13912" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q849096" start="13922" end="13943" title="Western Hockey League" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q949629" start="13955" end="13969" title="1989 NHL entry draft" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="14038" end="14048" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="14415" end="14429" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013178" start="14544" end="14553" title="Dan Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Dan Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q290416" start="14558" end="14570" title="Doug Lidster" label="Doug Lidster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="15150" end="15164" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587936" start="15436" end="15449" title="1992 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1992 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="15664" end="15680" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="16134" end="16148" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396619" start="16367" end="16383" title="Edmonton Journal" label="Edmonton Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589741" start="16602" end="16610" title="1994 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499911" start="16626" end="16630" title="seed (sports)" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="16646" end="16664" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q720935" start="17151" end="17166" title="Geoff Courtnall" label="Geoff Courtnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030640" start="17530" end="17544" title="Robert Reichel" label="Robert Reichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q677434" start="17570" end="17584" title="Theoren Fleury" label="Theoren Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347964" start="17661" end="17671" title="Jeff Brown (ice hockey, born 1966)" label="Jeff Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q954962" start="17705" end="17716" title="Mike Vernon (ice hockey)" label="Mike Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004274" start="17847" end="17860" title="Vancouver Sun" label="Vancouver Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="18016" end="18028" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="18033" end="18052" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q330124" start="18256" end="18268" title="Felix Potvin" label="Felix Potvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="18377" end="18400" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="18409" end="18425" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="18641" end="18662" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q579221" start="18902" end="18918" title="Nathan LaFayette" label="Nathan LaFayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589796" start="18995" end="18999" title="1994 Vancouver Stanley Cup riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q612227" start="19131" end="19139" title="BC Place Stadium" label="BC Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="19522" end="19536" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q530015" start="19625" end="19633" title="Rick Ley" label="Rick Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590672" start="19711" end="19736" title="1995 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1995 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q517318" start="19865" end="19885" title="General Motors Place" label="General Motors Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076204" start="19953" end="19971" title="Downtown Vancouver" label="Downtown Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q505507" start="20097" end="20114" title="Alexander Mogilny" label="Alexander Mogilny"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="20124" end="20138" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q752418" start="20171" end="20182" title="HC CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q580627" start="20341" end="20354" title="Cliff Ronning" label="Cliff Ronning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="20520" end="20527" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="20609" end="20627" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="20704" end="20718" title="Markus Näslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="20741" end="20760" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622186" start="20777" end="20790" title="Alek Stojanov" label="Alek Stojanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="21127" end="21145" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q358613" start="21203" end="21213" title="Tom Renney" label="Tom Renney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232443" start="21358" end="21372" title="Martin Gélinas" label="Martin Gelinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="21652" end="21664" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="21718" end="21731" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="21926" end="21940" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="22471" end="22494" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="22696" end="22716" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128849" start="22737" end="22743" title="Nagano (city)" label="Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="22817" end="22831" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390167" start="22996" end="23007" title="Mike Keenan" label="Mike Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="23498" end="23516" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q739843" start="23590" end="23603" title="Todd Bertuzzi" label="Todd Bertuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q776895" start="23723" end="23735" title="Bryan McCabe" label="Bryan McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960919" start="23824" end="23844" title="1999 NHL entry draft" label="1999 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q364739" start="24065" end="24076" title="Brian Burke (ice hockey)" label="Brian Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="24165" end="24180" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="subsequent year"/>
<link wikidata="Q385565" start="24232" end="24245" title="Marc Crawford" label="Marc Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591722" start="24306" end="24310" title="1996 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="24486" end="24502" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q739863" start="24570" end="24583" title="Ed Jovanovski" label="Ed Jovanovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960919" start="24758" end="24778" title="1999 NHL entry draft" label="1999 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="24827" end="24833" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="24838" end="24850" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="25022" end="25038" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="25132" end="25149" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187587" start="25163" end="25177" title="Denis Pederson" label="Denis Pederson"/>
<link wikidata="Q908752" start="25182" end="25198" title="Brendan Morrison" label="Brendan Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="25725" end="25732" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340205" start="25754" end="25767" title="NHL Challenge" label="NHL Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599125" start="25937" end="25941" title="2001 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q638541" start="25946" end="25950" title="2002 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="26073" end="26090" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q846353" start="26153" end="26171" title="Northwest Division (NHL)" label="Northwest Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="26399" end="26413" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984790" start="26449" end="26467" title="West Coast Express (ice hockey)" label="West Coast Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675085" start="26495" end="26524" title="West Coast Express" label="rail service of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="26645" end="26668" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Lester B. Pearson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="26680" end="26700" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="26713" end="26717" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="26839" end="26858" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q739863" start="27031" end="27044" title="Ed Jovanovski" label="Ed Jovanovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q944255" start="27049" end="27063" title="Mattias Öhlund" label="Mattias Ohlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q327861" start="27087" end="27099" title="Dan Cloutier" label="Dan Cloutier"/>
<link wikidata="Q348416" start="27341" end="27355" title="Peter Forsberg" label="Peter Forsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q960566" start="27360" end="27372" title="Milan Hejduk" label="Milan Hejduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="27381" end="27396" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="27401" end="27442" title="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy" label="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968226" start="27471" end="27484" title="2003 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2003 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="27606" end="27621" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="27658" end="27672" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="27969" end="27985" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q346073" start="28175" end="28186" title="Steve Moore (ice hockey)" label="Steve Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812271" start="28362" end="28374" title="Todd Bertuzzi–Steve Moore incident" label="The incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q190173" start="28533" end="28568" title="International Ice Hockey Federation" label="International Ice Hockey Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="28604" end="28618" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644885" start="28650" end="28672" title="Supreme Court of British Columbia" label="British Columbia court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148967" start="28745" end="28753" title="Colorado Supreme Court" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094643" start="28758" end="28765" title="Ontario Court of Justice" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968227" start="28887" end="28900" title="2004 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2004 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405478" start="29089" end="29099" title="Dave Nonis" label="Dave Nonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="29185" end="29196" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163263" start="29391" end="29402" title="Modo Hockey" label="Modo Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="29557" end="29571" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303383" start="30328" end="30343" title="Alain Vigneault" label="Alain Vigneault"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="30383" end="30405" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474448" start="30427" end="30441" title="Manitoba Moose" label="Manitoba Moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="30630" end="30644" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="30804" end="30811" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="30981" end="30987" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina"/>
<link wikidata="Q826579" start="31011" end="31024" title="Bernie Parent" label="Bernie Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968230" start="31123" end="31136" title="2007 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2007 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="31179" end="31191" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q578738" start="31473" end="31484" title="Marty Turco" label="Marty Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968224" start="31717" end="31726" title="2007 Stanley Cup Finals" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="31786" end="31802" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="31851" end="31865" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q978245" start="32371" end="32382" title="Mike Gillis" label="Mike Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="32423" end="32437" title="Markus Naslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q908752" start="32450" end="32466" title="Brendan Morrison" label="Brendan Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q943495" start="32574" end="32585" title="Luc Bourdon" label="Luc Bourdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006756" start="32635" end="32659" title="Shippagan, New Brunswick" label="Shippagan, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="32737" end="32751" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q862081" start="32810" end="32821" title="Bill Durnan" label="Bill Durnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754481" start="32851" end="32858" title="1947–48 NHL season" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q368528" start="33180" end="33191" title="Mats Sundin" label="Mats Sundin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="33219" end="33238" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008308" start="33521" end="33534" title="2009 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2009 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="33604" end="33619" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="33722" end="33740" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="33770" end="33784" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="33961" end="33981" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q218258" start="34071" end="34098" title="Ice hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="ice hockey during the games"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="34154" end="34162" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="34244" end="34254" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998 Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q640268" start="34349" end="34360" title="Ryan Kesler" label="Ryan Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="34368" end="34381" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="34415" end="34421" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="34545" end="34557" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="35010" end="35027" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983827" start="35133" end="35142" title="2010 Stanley Cup Finals" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="35275" end="35289" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q104214305" start="35323" end="35340" title="pre-game ceremony" label="pre-game ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="35393" end="35405" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="35474" end="35488" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="35567" end="35584" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="36106" end="36120" title="Markus Naslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="36309" end="36332" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="36509" end="36521" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="36530" end="36545" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q640268" start="36699" end="36710" title="Ryan Kesler" label="Ryan Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q194028" start="36811" end="36825" title="Cory Schneider" label="Cory Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="36839" end="36865" title="William M. Jennings Trophy" label="William M. Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="36939" end="36964" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="37039" end="37057" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q386036" start="37336" end="37353" title="Alexandre Burrows" label="Alexandre Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q513068" start="37426" end="37440" title="Corey Crawford" label="Corey Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077075" start="37499" end="37512" title="Chris Campoli" label="Chris Campoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="37589" end="37608" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="37765" end="37780" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563262" start="37873" end="37885" title="Kevin Bieksa" label="Kevin Bieksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q609762" start="37955" end="37966" title="Antti Niemi (ice hockey)" label="Antti Niemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q686507" start="37985" end="38003" title="2011 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q517318" start="38088" end="38096" title="Rogers Arena" label="home ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="38122" end="38135" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297592" start="38455" end="38472" title="2011 Vancouver Stanley Cup riot" label="riots and looting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="38610" end="38629" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q176748" start="38661" end="38672" title="Rick Rypien" label="Rick Rypien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067889" start="39073" end="39086" title="2012 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2012 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="39264" end="39278" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q163887" start="39298" end="39329" title="collective bargaining agreement" label="collective bargaining agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="39393" end="39400" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856497" start="39795" end="39808" title="2013 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2013 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="39829" end="39844" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378237" start="39932" end="39947" title="John Tortorella" label="John Tortorella"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="40045" end="40060" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q612227" start="40064" end="40072" title="BC Place" label="BC Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149005" start="40099" end="40120" title="2014 Heritage Classic" label="2014 Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="40152" end="40168" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689038" start="40495" end="40506" title="Jim Benning" label="Jim Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021464" start="40704" end="40721" title="Willie Desjardins" label="Willie Desjardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q640268" start="40849" end="40860" title="Ryan Kesler" label="Ryan Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="40879" end="40892" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q937713" start="40913" end="40927" title="Jason Garrison" label="Jason Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="40946" end="40965" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173781" start="40986" end="40997" title="David Booth (ice hockey)" label="David Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q250011" start="41031" end="41042" title="Ryan Miller" label="Ryan Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373494" start="41047" end="41059" title="Radim Vrbata" label="Radim Vrbata"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="41480" end="41494" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="41521" end="41534" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="41598" end="41612" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q386036" start="41648" end="41660" title="Alex Burrows" label="Alex Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q722111" start="41665" end="41678" title="Jannik Hansen" label="Jannik Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090315" start="41774" end="41786" title="Brock Boeser" label="Brock Boeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q718614" start="41911" end="41922" title="Doug Jarvis" label="Doug Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q454430" start="41974" end="41986" title="Travis Green" label="Travis Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q13459971" start="42022" end="42027" title="Utica Comets" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q837538" start="42045" end="42062" title="Nolan Baumgartner" label="Nolan Baumgartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269776" start="42064" end="42076" title="Newell Brown" label="Newell Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388544" start="42082" end="42096" title="Manny Malhotra" label="Manny Malhotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="42124" end="42138" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="42350" end="42372" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="42499" end="42514" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="42776" end="42790" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28057083" start="42855" end="42871" title="Elias Pettersson" label="Elias Pettersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q388631" start="42946" end="42957" title="Ivan Hlinka" label="Ivan Hlinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="42983" end="42993" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="43143" end="43157" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581453" start="43214" end="43223" title="Bo Horvat" label="Bo Horvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492979" start="43420" end="43432" title="Quinn Hughes" label="Quinn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="43683" end="43702" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759494" start="43755" end="43759" title="1956-57 NHL season" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960710" start="43763" end="43767" title="1958-59 NHL season" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="43994" end="44011" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="44110" end="44131" title="2020 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2020 Qualifying Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="44295" end="44315" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689038" start="44369" end="44380" title="Jim Benning" label="Jim Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q454430" start="44393" end="44405" title="Travis Green" label="Travis Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="44547" end="44565" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q991551" start="44584" end="44598" title="Bruce Boudreau" label="Bruce Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689207" start="44721" end="44735" title="Jim Rutherford" label="Jim Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547181" start="44815" end="44828" title="Patrik Allvin" label="Patrik Allvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q991551" start="44947" end="44961" title="Bruce Boudreau" label="Bruce Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q713811" start="44972" end="44984" title="Rick Tocchet" label="Rick Tocchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381588" start="45221" end="45239" title="Francesco Aquilini" label="Francesco Aquilini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689207" start="45267" end="45281" title="Jim Rutherford" label="Jim Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547181" start="45302" end="45315" title="Patrik Allvin" label="Patrik Allvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065960" start="45442" end="45461" title="Anthony Beauvillier" label="Anthony Beauvillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q70335876" start="45466" end="45475" title="Aatu Raty" label="Aatu Raty"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="45651" end="45665" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="45927" end="45945" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="46054" end="46058" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="46270" end="46279" title="Wild card (sports)" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="46280" end="46299" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="46371" end="46386" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="46453" end="46469" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="46489" end="46517" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="James Norris Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572029" start="46558" end="46603" title="Jim Gregory General Manager of the Year Award" label="Jim Gregory General Manager of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q517318" start="46684" end="46696" title="Rogers Arena" label="Rogers Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q218258" start="46826" end="46842" title="Ice hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="ice hockey games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="46854" end="46874" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034102" start="46963" end="46997" title="Canucks Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment" label="Canucks Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q832644" start="47069" end="47085" title="Pacific Coliseum" label="Pacific Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680423" start="47089" end="47102" title="Hastings Park" label="Hastings Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="47259" end="47273" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q193654" start="47278" end="47303" title="short-track speed skating" label="short-track speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q849096" start="47351" end="47372" title="Western Hockey League" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031079" start="47386" end="47402" title="Vancouver Giants" label="Vancouver Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="48288" end="48292" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="48889" end="48893" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="49330" end="49339" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q132408" start="49951" end="49954" title="CCM (The Hockey Company)" label="CCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="50149" end="50153" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="50198" end="50203" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034102" start="50387" end="50419" title="Canucks Sports and Entertainment" label="Canucks Sports and Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="50451" end="50460" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="50748" end="50752" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="50938" end="50952" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954087" start="51410" end="51418" title="Rbk Edge" label="Rbk Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877427" start="51993" end="52006" title="Johnny Canuck" label="Johnny Canuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="52146" end="52164" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="52483" end="52489" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q212543" start="54410" end="54431" title="North Shore Mountains" label="North Shore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q678951" start="54676" end="54687" title="Gino Odjick" label="Gino Odjick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="54753" end="54759" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="54766" end="54781" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="54782" end="54794" title="killer whale" label="killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="54849" end="54862" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="54914" end="54922" title="t-shirts" label="t-shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189864" start="55213" end="55219" title="zentai" label="zentai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738186" start="55295" end="55308" title="The Green Men" label="The Green Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q686507" start="55386" end="55409" title="2011 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2011 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="55417" end="55426" title="TD Garden" label="TD Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="55439" end="55452" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="55526" end="55530" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621997" start="55616" end="55628" title="List of halls and walks of fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="55677" end="55684" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="55796" end="55810" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="55965" end="55980" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125220378" start="55988" end="56013" title="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012466" start="56054" end="56058" title="CKNW" label="CKNW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012562" start="56177" end="56181" title="CKST (AM)" label="CKST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="56185" end="56187" title="AM broadcasting" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257742" start="56209" end="56224" title="John Shorthouse" label="John Shorthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="56247" end="56259" title="play-by-play" label="play-by-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q834663" start="56493" end="56507" title="Dave Tomlinson" label="Dave Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q714025" start="56522" end="56533" title="Ray Ferraro" label="Ray Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="56652" end="56668" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386987" start="56710" end="56722" title="Rogers Media" label="Rogers Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011869" start="56874" end="56878" title="CISL (AM)" label="CISL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017296" start="56884" end="56896" title="Newcap Radio" label="Newcap Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004870" start="56917" end="56929" title="sports radio" label="sports radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629768" start="56965" end="56974" title="Sportsnet" label="Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954072" start="57255" end="57287" title="NHL on Sportsnet" label="NHL national TV rights in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="57348" end="57370" title="Hockey Night in Canada" label="Hockey Night in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009043" start="57376" end="57379" title="CBC Sports" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381664" start="57475" end="57486" title="Tom Scallen" label="Tom Scallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486959" start="57729" end="57744" title="Frank Griffiths" label="Frank Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798897" start="57838" end="57854" title="Arthur Griffiths (businessman)" label="Arthur Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q517318" start="58074" end="58086" title="Rogers Arena" label="Rogers Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247486" start="58157" end="58171" title="John McCaw Jr." label="John McCaw Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6381588" start="58236" end="58254" title="Francesco Aquilini" label="Francesco Aquilini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034102" start="58281" end="58314" title="Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment" label="Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381650" start="58450" end="58462" title="Tom Gaglardi" label="Tom Gaglardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644885" start="59030" end="59063" title="Supreme Court of British Columbia" label="Supreme Court of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034102" start="59428" end="59462" title="Canucks Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment" label="Canucks Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640548" start="59530" end="59549" title="Rochester Americans" label="Rochester Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="59551" end="59554" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546393" start="59570" end="59584" title="Seattle Totems" label="Seattle Totems"/>
<link wikidata="Q976512" start="59586" end="59589" title="Western Hockey League (1952–1974)" label="WHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053809" start="59591" end="59594" title="Central Professional Hockey League" label="CHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238993" start="59610" end="59622" title="Tulsa Oilers (1964–1984)" label="Tulsa Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157987" start="59643" end="59661" title="Dallas Black Hawks" label="Dallas Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453090" start="59682" end="59701" title="Fredericton Express" label="Fredericton Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267828" start="59722" end="59740" title="Milwaukee Admirals" label="Milwaukee Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="59742" end="59745" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="IHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352481" start="59761" end="59777" title="Hamilton Canucks" label="Hamilton Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640569" start="59798" end="59813" title="Syracuse Crunch" label="Syracuse Crunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723902" start="59834" end="59852" title="Kansas City Blades" label="Kansas City Blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474448" start="59873" end="59887" title="Manitoba Moose" label="Manitoba Moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072030" start="59908" end="59922" title="Chicago Wolves" label="Chicago Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q13459971" start="59943" end="59955" title="Utica Comets" label="Utica Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q106982541" start="59979" end="59997" title="Abbotsford Canucks" label="Abbotsford Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q665204" start="60046" end="60059" title="Flint Spirits" label="Flint Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112747" start="60080" end="60094" title="Columbus Chill" label="Columbus Chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="60096" end="60100" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112503" start="60116" end="60132" title="Columbia Inferno" label="Columbia Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128892" start="60154" end="60175" title="Victoria Salmon Kings" label="Victoria Salmon Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498153" start="60197" end="60212" title="Kalamazoo Wings" label="Kalamazoo Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478447" start="60234" end="60245" title="Alaska Aces (ECHL)" label="Alaska Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902775" start="60455" end="60488" title="List of Vancouver Canucks seasons" label="List of Vancouver Canucks seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="60912" end="60925" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="60969" end="60991" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q453470" start="61042" end="61052" title="Wayne Maki" label="Wayne Maki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="61054" end="61056" title="Winger (ice hockey)" label="LW"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="61119" end="61131" title="brain cancer" label="brain cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964829" start="61148" end="61164" title="Chris Oddleifson" label="Chris Oddleifson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="61166" end="61167" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="61184" end="61196" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="61198" end="61199" title="Center (ice hockey)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q943495" start="61271" end="61282" title="Luc Bourdon" label="Luc Bourdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="61284" end="61285" title="Defenceman" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655486" start="61382" end="61390" title="Ian Cole" label="Ian Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q176748" start="61546" end="61557" title="Rick Rypien" label="Rick Rypien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="61559" end="61560" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="61623" end="61630" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="61754" end="61773" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914131" start="61944" end="61976" title="Vancouver Canucks Ring of Honour" label="Vancouver Canucks Ring of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377822" start="62138" end="62155" title="Orland Kurtenbach" label="Orland Kurtenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q728115" start="62203" end="62214" title="Kirk McLean" label="Kirk McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q513652" start="62263" end="62276" title="Thomas Gradin" label="Thomas Gradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q547452" start="62324" end="62338" title="Harold Snepsts" label="Harold Snepsts"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="62395" end="62404" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q944255" start="62521" end="62535" title="Mattias Öhlund" label="Mattias Ohlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q386036" start="62584" end="62596" title="Alex Burrows" label="Alex Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="62645" end="62659" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757103" start="63559" end="63568" title="Official (ice hockey)" label="officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785680" start="63761" end="63766" title="goaltender mask" label="masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="63823" end="63837" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377822" start="63842" end="63859" title="Orland Kurtenbach" label="Orland Kurtenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q387333" start="63873" end="63887" title="André Boudrias" label="Andre Boudrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964829" start="63901" end="63917" title="Chris Oddleifson" label="Chris Oddleifson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035826" start="63931" end="63940" title="Don Lever" label="Don Lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377709" start="63954" end="63968" title="Kevin McCarthy (ice hockey)" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357666" start="63982" end="63991" title="Stan Smyl" label="Stan Smyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013178" start="64005" end="64014" title="Dan Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Dan Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q290416" start="64016" end="64028" title="Doug Lidster" label="Doug Lidster"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="64033" end="64046" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="64088" end="64100" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="64114" end="64128" title="Markus Näslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="64142" end="64156" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="64170" end="64182" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581453" start="64196" end="64205" title="Bo Horvat" label="Bo Horvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492979" start="64219" end="64231" title="Quinn Hughes" label="Quinn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q110556" start="64286" end="64297" title="Dale Tallon" label="Dale Tallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="64301" end="64311" title="defenceman" label="defenceman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444371" start="64321" end="64338" title="Toronto Marlboros" label="Toronto Marlboros"/>
<link wikidata="Q141069" start="64384" end="64406" title="1970 NHL amateur draft" label="1970 NHL amateur draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q586578" start="64411" end="64415" title="1978 NHL amateur draft" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q357666" start="64430" end="64439" title="Stan Smyl" label="Stan Smyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982998" start="64449" end="64471" title="New Westminster Bruins" label="New Westminster Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="64515" end="64528" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515333" start="64538" end="64557" title="Medicine Hat Tigers" label="Medicine Hat Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q909673" start="64561" end="64565" title="1988 NHL entry draft" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q784519" start="64657" end="64675" title="List of first overall NHL draft picks" label="first overall pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="64795" end="64807" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="64827" end="64839" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960919" start="64857" end="64861" title="1999 NHL entry draft" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027913" start="64973" end="64982" title="Cam Neely" label="Cam Neely"/>
<link wikidata="Q568707" start="64986" end="64990" title="1983 NHL entry draft" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239001" start="64995" end="65008" title="Jake Virtanen" label="Jake Virtanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="65033" end="65037" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246315" start="65102" end="65112" title="head coach" label="head coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125888" start="65174" end="65184" title="Hal Laycoe" label="Hal Laycoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303383" start="65227" end="65242" title="Alain Vigneault" label="Alain Vigneault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="65377" end="65391" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="65404" end="65418" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q385565" start="65438" end="65451" title="Marc Crawford" label="Marc Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="65584" end="65598" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="65600" end="65613" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="65618" end="65627" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="65641" end="65660" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="65772" end="65788" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909801" start="65804" end="65816" title="Bill LaForge" label="Bill LaForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127879" start="65909" end="65920" title="Harry Neale" label="Harry Neale"/>
<link wikidata="Q713811" start="66035" end="66047" title="Rick Tocchet" label="Rick Tocchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q922116" start="66115" end="66140" title="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl" label="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="66143" end="66150" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="66152" end="66159" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="66161" end="66168" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="66170" end="66193" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="66196" end="66203" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="66205" end="66212" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="66214" end="66236" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="66239" end="66249" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="66251" end="66258" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q28057083" start="66261" end="66277" title="Elias Pettersson" label="Elias Pettersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="66279" end="66286" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="66288" end="66304" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="66307" end="66316" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="66318" end="66325" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303383" start="66328" end="66343" title="Alain Vigneault" label="Alain Vigneault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="66345" end="66352" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q713811" start="66355" end="66367" title="Rick Tocchet" label="Rick Tocchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="66369" end="66376" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="66378" end="66406" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="James Norris Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492979" start="66409" end="66421" title="Quinn Hughes" label="Quinn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="66423" end="66430" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001599" start="66432" end="66467" title="Budweiser NHL Man of the Year Award" label="Budweiser NHL Man of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q357659" start="66470" end="66481" title="Ryan Walter" label="Ryan Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="66483" end="66490" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q250753" start="66492" end="66519" title="King Clancy Memorial Trophy" label="King Clancy Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="66522" end="66535" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="66537" end="66544" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="66547" end="66559" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="66561" end="66568" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="66571" end="66583" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="66588" end="66600" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="66602" end="66609" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="66611" end="66634" title="Lester B. Pearson Award" label="Lester B. Pearson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q832447" start="66637" end="66654" title="Ted Lindsay Award" label="Ted Lindsay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="66657" end="66671" title="Markus Näslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="66673" end="66680" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="66683" end="66695" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="66697" end="66704" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q686354" start="66706" end="66726" title="NHL Plus/Minus Award" label="NHL Plus/Minus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q283459" start="66729" end="66740" title="Marek Malík" label="Marek Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="66742" end="66749" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789265" start="66752" end="66779" title="NHL Foundation Player Award" label="NHL Foundation Player Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="66782" end="66795" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="66797" end="66804" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465216" start="66807" end="66831" title="Scotiabank Fan Fav Award" label="Scotiabank Fan Fav Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="66834" end="66848" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="66850" end="66857" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="66859" end="66874" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="66877" end="66889" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="66891" end="66898" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="66901" end="66913" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="66915" end="66922" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="66924" end="66944" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="66947" end="66959" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="66961" end="66968" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="66970" end="66996" title="William M. Jennings Trophy" label="William M. Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="66999" end="67013" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q194028" start="67018" end="67032" title="Cory Schneider" label="Cory Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="67034" end="67041" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="67043" end="67064" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q640268" start="67067" end="67078" title="Ryan Kesler" label="Ryan Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="67080" end="67087" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572029" start="67089" end="67126" title="NHL General Manager of the Year Award" label="NHL General Manager of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q978245" start="67129" end="67140" title="Mike Gillis" label="Mike Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="67142" end="67149" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="67166" end="67185" title="NHL All-Star team" label="First All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="67188" end="67198" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="67200" end="67207" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q368511" start="67210" end="67224" title="Markus Näslund" label="Markus Naslund"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="67226" end="67233" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="67235" end="67242" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="67244" end="67251" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q739843" start="67254" end="67267" title="Todd Bertuzzi" label="Todd Bertuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="67269" end="67276" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="67279" end="67291" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="67293" end="67300" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="67302" end="67309" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="67312" end="67324" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="67326" end="67333" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492979" start="67336" end="67348" title="Quinn Hughes" label="Quinn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="67350" end="67357" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="67359" end="67379" title="NHL All-Star team" label="Second All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q728115" start="67382" end="67393" title="Kirk McLean" label="Kirk McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686390" start="67395" end="67402" title="1991–92 NHL season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q505507" start="67405" end="67422" title="Alexander Mogilny" label="Alexander Mogilny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="67424" end="67431" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="67434" end="67448" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="67450" end="67457" title="2006–07 NHL Season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="67460" end="67472" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="67474" end="67481" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151061" start="67484" end="67498" title="Thatcher Demko" label="Thatcher Demko"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="67500" end="67507" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960831" start="67508" end="67527" title="NHL All-Rookie Team" label="NHL All-Rookie Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q930275" start="67530" end="67541" title="Jim Sandlak" label="Jim Sandlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="67543" end="67550" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q739351" start="67553" end="67566" title="Trevor Linden" label="Trevor Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="67568" end="67575" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q365886" start="67578" end="67590" title="Corey Hirsch" label="Corey Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="67592" end="67599" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q944255" start="67602" end="67616" title="Mattias Öhlund" label="Mattias Ohlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="67618" end="67625" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090315" start="67628" end="67640" title="Brock Boeser" label="Brock Boeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="67642" end="67649" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q28057083" start="67652" end="67668" title="Elias Pettersson" label="Elias Pettersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="67670" end="67677" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492979" start="67680" end="67692" title="Quinn Hughes" label="Quinn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="67694" end="67701" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q375550" start="68096" end="68108" title="Henrik Sedin" label="Henrik Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q537416" start="68155" end="68167" title="Daniel Sedin" label="Daniel Sedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q678951" start="68341" end="68352" title="Gino Odjick" label="Gino Odjick"/>
<link wikidata="Q440741" start="68399" end="68409" title="Pavel Bure" label="Pavel Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="68415" end="68422" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="68427" end="68434" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="68483" end="68490" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="68539" end="68546" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q63097" start="68583" end="68600" title="Christian Ehrhoff" label="Christian Ehrhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="68606" end="68613" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="68634" end="68641" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q283795" start="68680" end="68695" title="Donald Brashear" label="Donald Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="68702" end="68709" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492979" start="68751" end="68763" title="Quinn Hughes" label="Quinn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="68769" end="68776" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q28057083" start="68814" end="68830" title="Elias Pettersson" label="Elias Pettersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="68836" end="68843" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q386036" start="68883" end="68895" title="Alex Burrows" label="Alex Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="68908" end="68915" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q728115" start="68976" end="68987" title="Kirk McLean" label="Kirk McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q471499" start="69031" end="69045" title="Roberto Luongo" label="Roberto Luongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="69170" end="69177" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69186" end="69194" title="Shutouts#Ice hockey" label="shutouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="69228" end="69235" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604309" start="69246" end="69249" title="Goals against average" label="GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520121" start="69271" end="69273" title="Games played" label="GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q194028" start="69277" end="69291" title="Cory Schneider" label="Cory Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="69299" end="69306" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="69315" end="69318" title="Save percentage" label="SV%"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="69368" end="69375" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73134" wikidata="Q192751" url="?curid=73134" title="Anaheim Ducks">
<text>The Anaheim Ducks are a professional ice hockey team based in Anaheim, California. The Ducks compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Pacific Division in the Western Conference. The team plays its home games at Honda Center, and is owned by Henry and Susan Samueli. The Ducks are affiliated with the San Diego Gulls of the American Hockey League (AHL) and the Tulsa Oilers of the ECHL. The Ducks are one of two teams based in the Greater Los Angeles area, along with the Los Angeles Kings.

The Ducks were founded as an expansion team for the 1993–94 season by the Walt Disney Company, and were known as the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, a name based on the 1992 film &quot;The Mighty Ducks&quot;. In 2005, Disney sold the franchise to the Samuelis, who, along with then-general manager Brian Burke, changed the name of the team to the Anaheim Ducks before the 2006–07 season. The Ducks have won six Pacific Division championships, and have advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals twice, losing to the New Jersey Devils in 2003, and winning the Stanley Cup in 2007 over the Ottawa Senators, becoming the first of the three California-based teams to win the Stanley Cup. Despite losing in 2003, the Ducks have produced two Conn Smythe Trophy winners as the most valuable player of the playoffs; Jean-Sébastien Giguère in 2003, and Scott Niedermayer in 2007.

==History==
===Start of a franchise (1993–1996)===
The Mighty Ducks of Anaheim were founded in 1993 by The Walt Disney Company. The franchise was awarded by the NHL in December 1992, alongside the rights to a Miami team founded by Wayne Huizenga that would become the Florida Panthers. An entrance fee of $50 million was required, half of which Disney would pay directly to the Los Angeles Kings in order to &quot;share&quot; the Los Angeles media market. On March 1, 1993, at the brand-new Anaheim Arena – located a short distance east of Disneyland and across the Orange Freeway from Angel Stadium – the team&#x27;s name was announced. The team&#x27;s name was inspired by the 1992 Disney film &quot;The Mighty Ducks&quot;, about a struggling youth hockey team who, with the help of their new coach, become champions. Philadelphia-arena management specialist Tony Tavares was chosen to be team president, and Jack Ferreira, who previously helped create the San Jose Sharks, became the Ducks&#x27; general manager. The Ducks selected Ron Wilson to be the first head coach in team history. The Ducks and the expansion Florida Panthers team filled out their rosters in the 1993 NHL expansion draft and the 1993 NHL entry draft. In the former, a focus on defense led to goaltenders Guy Hebert and Glenn Healy being the first picks, followed by Alexei Kasatonov and Steven King. In the latter, the Ducks selected as the fourth overall pick Paul Kariya, who only began play in 1994 but would turn out to be the face of the franchise for many years. The resulting roster had the lowest payroll of the NHL at only $7.9 million.

Led by captain Troy Loney, the Ducks finished the season 33–46–5, a record-breaking number of wins for an expansion team, which the Florida Panthers also achieved. The Ducks sold out 27 of 41 home games, including the last 25, and filled the Arrowhead Pond to 98.9% of its season capacity. Ducks licensed merchandise shot to number one in sales among NHL clubs, helped by their presence in Disney&#x27;s theme parks and Disney Stores. The lockout-shortened 1994–95 NHL season saw the debut of Paul Kariya, who would play 47 of the team&#x27;s 48 games that year, scoring 18 goals and 21 assists for 39 points. The Ducks had another respectable season, going 16–27–5.

===Paul Kariya era (1996–2003)===
During the 1995–96 season, Kariya was chosen to play for the Western Conference in the 1996 NHL All-Star Game as the lone Ducks representative. At the time of his selection (January 1996) Kariya was ranked 14th in league scoring with 51 points (23 goals and 28 assists) over 42 games, although the Ducks were overall a low-scoring team. Then a mid-season blockbuster deal with the Winnipeg Jets improved the franchise. The Ducks sent Chad Kilger, Oleg Tverdovsky and a third-round pick to the Jets in return for forward Marc Chouinard, a fourth-round draft pick and right winger Teemu Selanne. Following the trade, Ducks center Steve Rucchin commented, &quot;Paul [Kariya] had a lot of pressure on him... He single-handedly won some games for us this year... Now that we have Teemu, there&#x27;s no way everybody can just key on Paul.&quot; These three players formed one of the most potent lines of their time. Although the trade proved to be an important effort in the team, they still finished short of the playoffs, losing the eighth spot in the Western Conference to the Winnipeg Jets based on the number of wins.

During the 1996–97 season, Kariya became team captain following Randy Ladouceur&#x27;s retirement in the off-season, and led the Ducks to their first post-season appearance after recording the franchise&#x27;s first winning record of 36–33–13, good enough for home ice in the first round as the fourth seed against the Phoenix Coyotes. The Ducks trailed 3–2 going into Phoenix for Game 6. Kariya scored in overtime to force the franchise&#x27;s first Game 7, which they won. However, in the second round, they lost to the eventual Stanley Cup champions, the Detroit Red Wings, in a four-game sweep. After the season, Ron Wilson was fired after saying he would like to coach the Washington Capitals. Pierre Page succeeded him. The Ducks started out slowly in 1997–98, in part because Kariya missed the first 32 games of the season in a contract dispute. He came back in December, but on February 1, he suffered a season-ending concussion when Gary Suter of the Chicago Blackhawks cross-checked him in the face. With Kariya playing only a total of 22 games that season, the Ducks missed the playoffs and fired Page. The Ducks followed that season up by finishing sixth in the Western Conference in 1998–99 with new head coach Craig Hartsburg. However, they were swept by Detroit again, this time in the first round.

In the 1999–2000 season, the Ducks finished with the same number of points as the previous season, but a much more competitive Western Conference had them miss the playoffs by four points behind rival San Jose Sharks. Despite this, the Mighty Ducks scored more goals than the conference champion Dallas Stars. In the following season, 2000–01, the Ducks ended up performing worse, as Kariya and Selanne&#x27;s point production significantly declined from the previous season – Kariya went from 86 points to 67 points and Selanne went from 85 points to 57 points. Selanne was subsequently dealt to San Jose at the trade deadline for Jeff Friesen, Steve Shields and a second-round draft pick, while head coach Craig Hartsburg was fired during the season. The team ended up with a losing record and last place in the Western Conference that season. Without Selanne, Kariya&#x27;s numbers continued to drop in the 2001–02 season with new coach Bryan Murray. The Mighty Ducks finished in 13th place in the Western Conference.

====Western Conference champions (2002–2003)====
The Mighty Ducks did not reach the post-season again until the 2002–03 season with head coach Mike Babcock. They entered the playoffs in seventh place with a 40–27–9–6 record, good enough for 95 points. In the first round, the Ducks were once again matched up with the Detroit Red Wings, the defending Stanley Cup champions. They shocked the hockey world by sweeping the Red Wings in four games. Steve Rucchin scored the series-winning goal in overtime in Game 4. In the second round, the Ducks faced the Dallas Stars. Game 1 turned out to be the fourth-longest game in NHL history, with Petr Sykora scoring in the fifth overtime to give the Mighty Ducks the series lead. The Ducks would finish off the Stars in Game 6 at home. In the team&#x27;s first trip to the Western Conference finals, they were matched up against another Cinderella team, the sixth-seeded, three-year-old Minnesota Wild. Jean-Sebastien Giguere strung together three consecutive shutouts and allowed only one total goal in the series in an eventual sweep.

The 2003 Stanley Cup Finals, to be played against the New Jersey Devils, had multiple interesting story lines. Anaheim forward Rob Niedermayer was playing against his brother Scott, while Giguere faced off against fellow French-Canadian goaltender Martin Brodeur. The series began with the home team winning the first five games. In Game 6 at home, Kariya was knocked unconscious from a hit by Devils captain Scott Stevens. However, Kariya would return in the second period and score the fourth goal of the game. In an exciting third period, the Mighty Ducks defeated the Devils 5–2 to send the series back to New Jersey for Game 7. Anaheim, however, could not complete their winning streak, as they lost a hard-fought Game 7 to the Devils 3–0. For his brilliant play during the post-season, Giguere was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as the Most Valuable Player (MVP) of the playoffs. He became only the fifth player in NHL history to have won the trophy as a member of the losing team. Giguere posted a 15–6 record, 7–0 in overtime, with a 1.62 goals against average, a .945 save percentage and a record 168-minute, 27-second shutout streak in overtime.

===Pronger era, Selanne&#x27;s return and franchise rebrand (2003–2007)===

After the season, Kariya promised to bring the Mighty Ducks back to the Stanley Cup Finals the following year. However, Kariya left the Ducks in the summer and joined former teammate Teemu Selanne on the Colorado Avalanche. The 2003–04 season was a season to forget, as Jean-Sebastien Giguere could not repeat his stellar goaltending from the previous year. Even with newcomers Sergei Fedorov and Vaclav Prospal, the team finished in 12th place in the standings with a 29–35–10–8 record. Giguere&#x27;s stats subsequently declined from the previous season, as he only won half the games he did the year before, his goals-against average increased from 2.30 to 2.62, his save percentage went down from .914 to .907 and he went from eight shutouts recorded to just three. The team also went from 203 goals to 174.

During the 2004 off-season, as the NHL and the National Hockey League Players&#x27; Association (NHLPA)&#x27;s labor dispute was headed towards a long lockout, Disney tried to sell the team but received a low offer of US$40 million, less than the franchise&#x27;s original price. In 2005, Broadcom Corporation co-founder Henry Samueli of Irvine, California, and his wife Susan bought the Mighty Ducks from The Walt Disney Company for a reported US$75 million. The Samuelis family pledged to keep the team in Anaheim. Brian Burke, former Vancouver Canucks general manager and president, was appointed general manager and executive vice-president of the Mighty Ducks on June 20, 2005.
On August 1, 2005, former Norris Trophy-winning defenseman Randy Carlyle was hired as the seventh head coach in team history. Burke was familiar with Carlyle&#x27;s coaching ability, as the latter had coached the Manitoba Moose from 1996 to 2001 (International Hockey League) and 2004–05 (American Hockey League); the Moose had been the Canucks farm club since 2001. Carlyle replaced Mike Babcock, who later signed on to coach Detroit. On August 4, 2005, free-agent defenseman Scott Niedermayer signed with the Mighty Ducks to play with his brother Rob; Scott Niedermayer was almost immediately named team captain. On August 22, Selanne returned to Anaheim after undergoing knee surgery. He led the team in scoring during the season with 40 goals and 50 assists for 90 points. He would also record his 1,000th NHL point on January 30, 2006.
The 2005–06 season also saw the emergence of rookies Ryan Getzlaf, Corey Perry and Chris Kunitz (Kunitz also played for the Ducks in 2003–04, but immediately returned to the Mighty Ducks&#x27; AHL affiliate, the Cincinnati Mighty Ducks). On November 15, 2005, Anaheim traded Sergei Fedorov and a fifth-round draft pick to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for defenseman Francois Beauchemin and forward Tyler Wright.

The Ducks finished the season with a 43–27–12 record, good enough for 98 points and the sixth seed. The Ducks faced the Calgary Flames in the conference quarterfinals and forced a seventh game in Calgary, shutting out the Flames to reach the conference semifinals. In an interesting playoffs, all the bottom seeds won in the first round, so the Ducks matched-up against the seventh-seeded Colorado Avalanche. Goaltender Ilya Bryzgalov shined as the Ducks swept the Avalanche in four-straight games, Bryzgalov breaking Giguere&#x27;s scoreless streak record from the 2003 Stanley Cup playoffs. In the franchise&#x27;s second conference finals appearance, they faced the eighth-seeded Edmonton Oilers, a series the Ducks would ultimately lose in five games.

In January 2006, Samueli announced the team would be renamed as simply the &quot;Anaheim Ducks&quot; as of the following season.

====Stanley Cup champions (2006–2007)====
Prior to the 2006–07 season, the Ducks adopted a completely new look to go along with their new name; their team colors became black, gold and orange, and the logo of a duck-shaped goalie mask was dropped in favor of the word &quot;Ducks&quot;, with a webbed foot in place of the &quot;D&quot;.
The Ducks traded Joffrey Lupul, Ladislav Smid and a first-round draft pick to the Edmonton Oilers in exchange for star defenseman Chris Pronger. With this trade, solid scoring lines, a shut-down line featuring Rob Niedermayer, Samuel Pahlsson and Travis Moen and an enviable defense, the Ducks were considered by many to be a Stanley Cup favorite. On November 9, 2006, the Ducks defeated the Vancouver Canucks 6–0 at General Motors Place in Vancouver to improve their season record to 12–0–4. The win set an NHL open era record by remaining undefeated in regulation for the first 16 games of the season, eclipsing the previous mark set by the 1983–84 Edmonton Oilers (the record has since been broken by the Chicago Blackhawks&#x27; 21–0–3 start during the 2012–13 season). Anaheim were subsequently shut out by the Flames the following game, 3–0, ending their streak. On January 16, 2007, the Ducks played in franchise&#x27;s 1,000th regular season game, and on March 11, the Ducks recorded franchise&#x27;s 1,000th point with a 4–2 win over the Canucks, which improved their franchise all-time record to 423–444–155, with 1,001 points. On April 7, the Ducks won their first division title in franchise history when the Canucks defeated the second-place San Jose Sharks in the final game of the season. The Ducks ended the regular season with a 48–20–14 record and 110 points. It was the franchise&#x27;s first 100-point season. Although they had three fewer wins than the Nashville Predators, the Ducks won the second seed in the West by virtue of winning the Pacific Division title; the Predators finished second in the Central Division behind the Detroit Red Wings (the top seed in the West).

The Ducks defeated the Minnesota Wild in the conference quarterfinals in five games and the Canucks in the semifinals, also in five games. Once again, the Ducks faced the Detroit Red Wings in the franchise&#x27;s third trip to the conference finals. In Game 3, Pronger elbowed Tomas Holmstrom and subsequently received a one-game suspension for the illegal check. However, the Ducks won Game 4 without Pronger and Game 5 in Detroit, with Selanne scoring the latter game&#x27;s overtime winner. The Ducks then finished off the Red Wings in Game 6 for their second-ever Stanley Cup Finals appearance.
In the Finals, the Ducks won the first two games at home against the Ottawa Senators. However, the Ducks lost Game 3 and Pronger received his second one-game suspension, this time for elbowing Dean McAmmond. The Ducks were again able to win without Pronger, defeating the Senators in Game 4 for an opportunity to win the Stanley Cup on home ice in Game 5. On June 6, the Ducks defeated the Senators 6–2 at Honda Center to claim their first Stanley Cup in franchise history. Moen was credited with the Cup game-winning goal. Scott Niedermayer, the only player on the team who had previously won a Stanley Cup, was awarded the second Conn Smythe Trophy in Ducks history. The Ducks became the first California team, and the fourth West Coast team since the 1915 Vancouver Millionaires, 1917 Seattle Metropolitans and 1925 Victoria Cougars, to win the Stanley Cup.

===Post-Stanley Cup, Bob Murray replaces Burke (2007–2010)===

The Ducks began their title defense in the 2007–08 season without two fan favorites, Scott Niedermayer and Teemu Selanne, who were both contemplating retirement. To offset those losses, Burke signed forward Todd Bertuzzi and defenseman Mathieu Schneider. During the season, Burke put goaltender Ilya Bryzgalov on waivers, where he was picked up by the Phoenix Coyotes. Free-agent signee Jonas Hiller then became the back-up to starter Jean-Sebastien Giguere. Both Selanne and Niedermayer would ultimately return and the team finished with a 47–27–8 record, good enough to earn home-ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs finishing as the fourth seed in the Western Conference. They were eliminated in the quarterfinals in six games by the Dallas Stars. In the off-season, Burke bought out the remaining year on Bertuzzi&#x27;s contract and traded Schneider to the Atlanta Thrashers.
After an extremely slow start to the 2008–09 season, on November 12, 2008, Burke resigned to take the same position for the Toronto Maple Leafs. Bob Murray replaced him as general manager, but the team struggled to make the playoffs as the eighth seed in the Western Conference. A bevy of trade deadline deals saw the departure of some mainstays from the Cup team, including Chris Kunitz, who was traded to the Pittsburgh Penguins for defenseman Ryan Whitney; Samuel Pahlsson, who was traded to the Chicago Blackhawks for defenseman James Wisniewski; and Travis Moen, who was traded to the San Jose Sharks for two prospects. The trades gave the Ducks new life as a hot streak to end the season launched the team into the playoffs. Jonas Hiller emerged as the new number one goalie during the stretch drive. The Ducks defeated the number one seed and Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning San Jose Sharks in six games in the first round before being eliminated in the conference semifinals by the eventual Western Conference champion Detroit Red Wings in seven games. Before the 2009–10 season, the Ducks traded Chris Pronger to the Philadelphia Flyers for Joffrey Lupul, Luca Sbisa and two first-round draft picks. Francois Beauchemin and Rob Niedermayer also left via free agency for the Toronto Maple Leafs and New Jersey Devils, respectively. The Ducks then signed free agent center and former Montreal Canadiens captain Saku Koivu to a one-year deal.

Another slow start would doom the Ducks. Before the trade deadline, the Ducks traded Giguere to the Toronto Maple Leafs for Jason Blake and Vesa Toskala after signing Hiller to a contract extension. The trade deadline saw the Ducks trade Ryan Whitney to Edmonton for offensive defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky, as well as the acquisitions of defenseman Aaron Ward from the Carolina Hurricanes and goalie Curtis McElhinney from the Calgary Flames. The Ducks played through frequent injuries and picked up play in the second half of the season, but struggled coming out of the Olympic break. For the first time since the lockout, the Ducks failed to make the playoffs with a 39–32–11 record. The 2010 off-season was also busy for the Ducks, as Scott Niedermayer announced his retirement in a June press conference. Niedermayer decided to stay a member of the Ducks as a team consultant. The Ducks re-signed Saku Koivu for two years and signed free agent defenseman Toni Lydman to a three-year contract. In addition to Lydman, the Ducks were able to get defenseman Cam Fowler via the draft, and 35-year-old strong-willed defenseman Andy Sutton signed to a two-year deal. Restricted free agent Bobby Ryan was signed to a five-year deal.

===Getzlaf and Perry era (2010–2018)===

The 2010–11 season did not begin well for the Ducks, who would lose their first three games. They maintained a .500 throughout record through the first half of the season, but would find their rhythm and finish 47–30–5, good for 99 points and fourth place in the Western Conference. Corey Perry and Jonas Hiller represented the Ducks at the All-Star Game, and Corey Perry went on to have a 50-goal, 98-point season, which won him the Maurice &quot;Rocket&quot; Richard Trophy and Hart Memorial Trophy. He became the first-ever Duck to win the Hart, as well as the first Richard winner as a Duck since Teemu Selanne won the award in 1999. However, Hiller was injured at the All-Star Game and missed the rest of the season. Even though the Ducks had a great season led by Perry, Hiller, Selanne, Visnovsky and Getzlaf, they would end up losing in the first round of the 2011 playoffs to the fifth-seeded Nashville Predators.

Before the 2011–12 season began, the team mourned the loss of former Mighty Duck Ruslan Salei, who died in a plane crash with several other former NHL players of Kontinental Hockey League (KHL) club Lokomotiv Yaroslavl. The team wore a black patch with his former jersey number, 24, in current team numbering. The Ducks started the season with 2011 NHL Premiere games in Helsinki and Stockholm. This was the third time in franchise history that they started the regular season with games in Europe. They lost 4–1 to the Buffalo Sabres in Helsinki but defeated the New York Rangers 2–1 after a shootout in Stockholm. After a slow start to the season, the Ducks replaced head coach Randy Carlyle with former Washington Capitals head coach Bruce Boudreau. The rest of the season was mostly forgettable, as the Ducks could not get out of the hole they dug themselves in the first half of the season, and ultimately failed to reach the playoffs in the 2011–12 season.
The 2012–13 season was shortened to 48 games due to a labor lockout. When play resumed in January 2013 after a new collective bargaining agreement was signed, the Ducks opened the season by sweeping a two-game Canadian road trip with a decisive 7–3 victory against the Vancouver Canucks on January 19, followed by a 5–4 decision against the Calgary Flames on January 21. Their home opener came on January 25, also against the Canucks, who would prevail 5–0. The distinction of the Ducks&#x27; longest homestand was split between two five-game stretches from March 18–25 and from April 3–10. Anaheim&#x27;s lengthiest road trip was a six-game haul from February 6–16. Due to the shortened season and the compacted game scheduling, all games were to be played against the Ducks&#x27; own Western Conference opponents, and no games were played against Eastern Conference teams. The Ducks finished the season with a 30–12–6 record and would win their second Pacific Division title in franchise history. In the conference quarterfinals, they ended up losing to the seventh-seeded Detroit Red Wings in seven games, despite holding a 3–2 series lead after Game 5.

Entering the 2013–14 season, the 20th anniversary of the franchise, it was announced that Teemu Selanne would be playing in his final NHL season. In the off-season, star forward Bobby Ryan was traded to the Ottawa Senators in exchange for forwards Jakob Silfverberg, Stefan Noesen and Ottawa&#x27;s first-round pick in the 2014 NHL entry draft, and the Ducks also signed defenseman Mark Fistric, center Mathieu Perreault and a returning Dustin Penner. Despite a bad start suffering a 6–1 mauling at the hands of the Colorado Avalanche, the Ducks followed the opener with seven-straight wins, a run which was repeated and surpassed twice more during the season, including a franchise-record setting ten consecutive wins from December 6 to 28, 2013. At one point of the season, the Ducks won 18 of 19 games, the longest run of one-loss play in the NHL for 45 years. A 9–1 victory over the Vancouver Canucks on January 15 saw Anaheim establish a 20–0–2 record at Honda Center, which matched the longest season-opening home points streak in 34 years, as well as setting a franchise record for goals scored in a game (9), and powerplay goals scored in a game (6). Dustin Penner was eventually traded to the Washington Capitals, and prior to the NHL trade deadline, the Ducks acquired veteran defenseman Stephane Robidas from the Dallas Stars. Behind a Hart Trophy-caliber season from club captain Ryan Getzlaf, solid depth scoring, a steady if unspectacular defense and solid goaltending in the form of Jonas Hiller and rookie Frederik Andersen, many felt that the Ducks were primed to be a top contender for the Stanley Cup.

The Ducks remained towards the top of the NHL standings for the entire season, ending the regular season with a franchise-best 54–20–8 record (116 points) and eventually finishing one point behind the Boston Bruins in the race for the Presidents&#x27; Trophy, awarded to the team finishing the regular season with the best record. The Ducks secured a second consecutive Pacific Division title and the number one seed in the Western Conference. Anaheim faced the eighth-seeded Dallas Stars in the conference quarterfinals and were victorious in six games, marking the first time since 2009 that the Ducks had won a playoff series. In the Western Conference semifinals, the Ducks faced their geographic rival and eventual Stanley Cup champion Los Angeles Kings for the first time ever in the playoffs. In a hotly contested series, the Ducks ultimately went down in seven games to their Southern Californian rivals, losing Game 7 by a score of 6–2 at Honda Center.

On June 27, 2014, the Ducks acquired center Ryan Kesler and a third-round pick in 2015 from the Vancouver Canucks. In the following season, they would win their third-straight Pacific Division title and finish as the top seed in the West with 109 points. In the 2015 playoffs, they swept the Winnipeg Jets in the first round and beat the Calgary Flames in five games to set up a conference final against the Chicago Blackhawks. After taking three games to two series lead on the strong play of goaltender Frederik Andersen, the Ducks lost the final two games of the series, including Game 7 on home ice. This marked the third-straight season the Ducks had lost a series in Game 7 at home after leading the series three games to two.
On July 15, 2015, the Ducks signed Ryan Kesler to a six-year contract extension totaling a reported $41.25 million. Just prior to the 2015 NHL entry draft, the Ducks sent Emerson Etem and a draft pick to the New York Rangers in exchange for speedy left-wing Carl Hagelin. They also traded for Vancouver Canucks defenseman Kevin Bieksa and adding veterans Shawn Horcoff, Chris Stewart and Mike Santorelli. Entering the 2015–16 NHL season, many analysts pegged the Ducks as Stanley Cup favorites. However, scoring struggles led to a slow start, with the team still out of a playoff spot in December. The team improved afterwards riding the goaltending of John Gibson. On March 6, 2016, the Ducks set a franchise record with an 11-game winning streak which ended the following night. On March 24, 2016, the Ducks clinched a playoff spot in a 6–5 overtime loss to the Maple Leafs. However, in the first round of the playoffs, they fell in seven games to the Nashville Predators, which led to the firing of head coach Bruce Boudreau. On June 14, 2016, the Ducks announced they re-hired former head coach Randy Carlyle.

The Ducks finished first in the Pacific Division in 2017 and swept the wild-card Calgary Flames in the first round. On May 10, 2017, the Ducks ended their Game 7 losing streak when they defeated the Edmonton Oilers in the second round, winning the series 4–3 and advancing to the conference finals for the second time in three seasons. They would fall to the Nashville Predators in Game 6, ending their playoff run. In the following season, the Ducks failed to win the Pacific Division for the first time since the 2011–12 season. They clinched a playoff berth, but were swept by the San Jose Sharks in the first round.

===Rebuild (2018–present)===
In 2019, the Ducks fired Carlyle and replaced him with Bob Murray as interim head coach; however, the Ducks missed the playoffs for the second time since the 2002–03 NHL season. On June 17, 2019, the team named Dallas Eakins as the franchise&#x27;s tenth head coach.

On November 9, 2021, Murray was placed on administrative leave by the Ducks pending the results of an ongoing investigation. The investigation is reportedly focused on Murray&#x27;s alleged history of verbal abuse to players and staff members. Assistant general manager Jeff Solomon was initially named as acting general manager but was then named interim general manager when Murray resigned on November 10. Pat Verbeek was named general manager on February 3, 2022. In 2023, Eakins left as head coach, with the team finishing last in the league in his final year. His record with Anaheim was 100 wins, 147 losses and 47 overtime losses and suffered through Anaheim&#x27;s rebuild where the Ducks lost many of their star players. During his tenure, the Ducks failed to make the playoffs and in his final season, set a record as the league&#x27;s worst defense.

Though the Ducks finished last in the league during the 2022–23 season, the Chicago Blackhawks won the draft lottery and Anaheim&#x27;s pick fell to second overall. The team hired Greg Cronin as the Ducks&#x27; eleventh head coach on June 5, 2023. At the 2023 NHL entry draft, the team selected Leo Carlsson second overall.

==Team information==

===Name===
Founded in 1993, the then-called Mighty Ducks of Anaheim were directly named for &quot;The Mighty Ducks&quot; movies. When the Walt Disney Company, which produced the movies and owned the NHL team, sold the team in 2005, the name was shortened to Anaheim Ducks.

===Uniforms===

====1993–2006====

The Mighty Ducks&#x27; original road (later home) jersey features an eggplant and jade base, divided by silver, purple and white diagonal stripes. The home (later road) jersey has a white and jade base, divided by purple, white and silver diagonal stripes. For most of its history, purple pants were used with this set; from 1993 to 1997, and from 1999 to 2003, the pants featured jade and white stripes. In 1996, an alternate front-facing &quot;angry duck mask&quot; logo is added on the shoulders.

In 1995, as part of the NHL&#x27;s third jersey program, the Mighty Ducks wore alternate &quot;Wild Wing&quot; jerseys, featuring the current mascot breaking out of a sheet of ice amid a jade base and purple trim. The primary logo appears on both shoulders. Even though the Mighty Ducks won two of three games with this uniform, it was immediately retired.

From 1997 to 1999, the Mighty Ducks wore two alternate jerseys. The road alternate has a jade base with purple, jade and silver stripes along the chest and sleeves, and the home alternate has a white base with jade, purple and silver stripes along the chest and sleeves. During this period, the Mighty Ducks switched to black pants and helmets, but in 1999, returned to wearing purple pants and helmets while retiring the road alternate jerseys.

In 2003, the Mighty Ducks released a black alternate jersey with purple and silver trim. This design features the full team name written in a classic script style, and the interlocking &quot;MD&quot; on both shoulders.

====2006–2014====

After rebranding as the Anaheim Ducks, the uniforms became black and white with metallic gold and orange stripes. The crest featured the full team name in front. This set was worn until the 2013–14 season, with a few adjustments after Reebok moved to the Edge template in 2007.

In 2010, the Ducks unveiled a black alternate jersey, featuring the &quot;webbed D&quot; as the main crest and thick orange stripes. The original Mighty Ducks logo, this time recolored to the current scheme and placed inside a white oval with the full team name, was placed on the shoulders.

For their Stadium Series game on January 25, 2014, the Ducks created a special jersey. This jersey is primarily orange with black lettering and numbers. The chromed Ducks logo, designed for the Stadium Series, is on the chest. There are gold, black and white stripes on the sleeves as well as black trim around the bottom and sleeves. The jersey has old fashion black lace on the neck and also has a unique &quot;OC&quot; logo on the left shoulder to represent Orange County where the Ducks are from.

====2014–2024====
In 2014, the &quot;webbed D&quot; alternate became the primary jersey, and a corresponding white jersey was also unveiled. The letters, previously with a gold accent, now featured orange accents. This set was later tweaked in 2017 after Adidas became the NHL&#x27;s uniform provider.

In 2015, an orange third jersey was unveiled, with the modified Mighty Ducks crest in front. The &quot;webbed D&quot; was moved to the shoulders. This set is used until 2017, and was brought back in a modern Adidas template starting in 2019.

The Ducks announced for their 25th anniversary season of 2018–19 the adoption of a new third jersey, featuring the original Mighty Ducks logo, striping pattern, and purple and jade colors. While it had the elements of the original jersey, it kept the modern-day aspects of the Ducks identity such as the &quot;webbed D&quot; on the shoulders, black base and current lettering. The uniform was only used for that particular season, after which the Ducks returned to the orange thirds last used from 2015 to 2017.

For the 2020–21 season, Adidas released a special alternate uniform called the &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; series, which were alternate color versions of throwback uniform designs. The Ducks&#x27; version was a white rendition of their 1995–96 Wild Wing alternates. A second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform was unveiled in the 2022–23 season, this time with the 1993–2006 white uniform recolored to the current orange, black and gold colors.

The Ducks unveiled a 30th-anniversary alternate uniform for the 2023–24 season. The design brought back the purple and jade look the team originally sported from 1993 to 2006, and debuted a new version of the &quot;Wild Wing&quot; mask logo inside a jade circle with the &quot;Anaheim Ducks&quot; name and current logo.

====2024–present====

Beginning on June 14, 2024, the Anaheim Ducks&#x27; social media accounts posted various teases of a new logo, which is said to be a modernized take on their original &quot;Mighty Ducks&quot; logo. On June 24, the Ducks fully unveiled their new logo and their new Fanatics-produced jerseys. The home jersey is fully orange with black, gold, and white striping on the bottom and sleeves of the jersey, while the away jersey is white with orange shoulders and the same colored stripes as the home jersey. Both jerseys feature a revised version of the Duck foot logo of 2006–2024 on the shoulders.

====Colors and logos====
The team&#x27;s colors were eggplant and jade until the change of ownership in 2006. At this point, they became orange, black and gold, with white in place of black for the away jersey. The only exception is the alternate jersey, which is mostly orange. Orange, which has become one of the team&#x27;s primary colors, is in reference to Orange County, where Anaheim is located.

The original Mighty Ducks logo featured an old-style goaltender mask, shaped to form the appearance of a duck bill. Behind the mask are two intersecting hockey sticks, a black hockey puck, and a triangle; the color of the triangle was either green or gray, depending on how the logo is used. This is now used on a shoulder patch of the current uniforms, with the triangle in orange.

Upon renaming, the Ducks&#x27; logo changed into a webbed foot forming a &quot;D&quot;. The text itself is gold (which sometimes may appear as bronze as well) with orange and black accents (forming a three-dimensional appearance). The entire logo is in turn outlined by silver. This is shortened from a prior version that spelled out the word &quot;Ducks&quot; in all capital letters.

The current logo of the Ducks is similar to that of the one used in 1993–2006. The current version has orange hockey sticks which are flat and more curved than that of the original. The triangle is gold and does not change depending on the jersey it is on. The shading of the mask is no longer grey, but gold. The new mask now features an orange eye and a gold eyebrow. The sticks of the logo still retains the &quot;W&quot; tape, and when shown together shows WW as a nod to the mascot Wild Wing. A revised duck foot, dropping the orange stripe, grey and white outlines is featured as a secondary logo on the shoulders.

===Mascot===
The official mascot for the Anaheim Ducks is an anthropomorphized duck by the name of Wild Wing. He has been the team&#x27;s mascot since its inaugural season, and his name was chosen through fan voting. He wears a Ducks jersey with the number 93 on the back, referring to the year the Ducks became an NHL team.
He regularly descends from the rafters of the arena when making his in-game entrances. In one such descent the rigging that lowered Wild Wing from the rafters malfunctioned leaving the mascot trapped fifty feet above the ice for several minutes. Another well known blunder occurred in October 1995 when Wild Wing, attempting to jump through a &quot;wall of fire&quot;, accidentally tripped causing the mascot to land on the fire and set his costume ablaze.

His physical appearance is similar to the duck mask in the original Mighty Ducks logo. A bronze statue of Wild Wing was located outside the south doors of Honda Center from 1993 to 2012, until construction began on the &#x27;Grand Terrace&#x27; addition to the arena. When construction was completed and the Grand Terrace opened in October 2013, the statue was noticeably absent. The statue was later returned from storage in 2017 and sits at the southeast entrance of the arena.

The mascot was the inspiration for the character Wildwing Flashblade in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Mighty Ducks&quot; cartoon series.

During the same time in which the team announced a name change as well as change in jersey designs, there was an attempt by the team&#x27;s owners to change or replace the mascot, Wild Wing, but was halted after a highly successful petition by fans.

The Mighty Ducks also used a secondary &quot;mascot&quot;, a person (with no particular costume) called the Iceman, during the team&#x27;s first game in 1993. The Iceman appeared occasionally in the stands, played an electric guitar, and attempted to liven up the crowd. However, the Iceman was poorly received by fans and was quickly eliminated after the Ducks lost to the Red Wings in their inaugural game, 7–2.

==Rivalries==

The Ducks have two rivalries with two teams out of geographical proximity. Their rivalry with the Los Angeles Kings is known as the Freeway Face-Off because both of the teams&#x27; arenas are accessible via Interstate 5 in California and because both teams are within the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area.

The Ducks also have a rivalry with the San Jose Sharks. Despite the arenas being six hours away from each other, the teams have developed a strong rivalry, primarily from the 2009 and 2018 Stanley Cup playoffs. The Ducks won the series in 2009, but the Sharks came back in 2018.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Ducks. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Anaheim Ducks seasons.&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players and personnel==
===Current roster===
===Team captains===

* Troy Loney, 1993–1994
* Randy Ladouceur, 1994–1996
* Paul Kariya, 1996–2003
* Teemu Selanne, 1998 (interim)
* Steve Rucchin, 2003–2004
* Scott Niedermayer, 2005–2007, 2008–2010
* Chris Pronger, 2007–2008
* Ryan Getzlaf, 2010–2022
* Radko Gudas, 2024–present
===Coaches===
* Ron Wilson, 1993–1997
* Pierre Page, 1997–1998
* Craig Hartsburg, 1998–2000
* Guy Charron, 2000–2001
* Bryan Murray, 2001–2002
* Mike Babcock, 2002–2004
* Randy Carlyle, 2005–2011, 2016–2019
* Bruce Boudreau, 2011–2016
* Bob Murray, 2019 (interim)
* Dallas Eakins, 2019–2023
* Greg Cronin, 2023–present
===General managers===
* Jack Ferreira, 1993–1998
* Pierre Gauthier, 1998–2002
* Bryan Murray, 2002–2004
* Al Coates, 2004–2005 (interim)
* Brian Burke, 2005–2008
* Bob Murray, 2008–2021
* Jeff Solomon, 2021–2022 (interim)
* Pat Verbeek, 2022–present
===First-round draft picks===
* 1993: Paul Kariya (4th overall)
* 1994: Oleg Tverdovsky (2nd overall)
* 1995: Chad Kilger (4th overall)
* 1996: Ruslan Salei (9th overall)
* 1997: Michael Holmqvist (18th overall)
* 1998: Vitaly Vishnevskiy (5th overall)
* 2000: Alexei Smirnov (12th overall)
* 2001: Stanislav Chistov (5th overall)
* 2002: Joffrey Lupul (7th overall)
* 2003: Ryan Getzlaf (19th overall), Corey Perry (28th overall)
* 2004: Ladislav Smid (9th overall)
* 2005: Bobby Ryan (2nd overall)
* 2006: Mark Mitera (19th overall)
* 2007: Logan MacMillan (19th overall)
* 2008: Jake Gardiner (17th overall)
* 2009: Peter Holland (15th overall), Kyle Palmieri (26th overall)
* 2010: Cam Fowler (12th overall), Emerson Etem (29th overall)
* 2011: Rickard Rakell (30th overall)
* 2012: Hampus Lindholm (6th overall)
* 2013: Shea Theodore (26th overall)
* 2014: Nick Ritchie (10th overall)
* 2015: Jacob Larsson (27th overall)
* 2016: Max Jones (24th overall), Sam Steel (30th overall)
* 2018: Isac Lundestrom (23rd overall)
* 2019: Trevor Zegras (9th overall), Brayden Tracey (29th overall)
* 2020: Jamie Drysdale (6th overall), Jacob Perreault (27th overall)
* 2021: Mason McTavish (3rd overall)
* 2022: Pavel Mintyukov (10th overall), Nathan Gaucher (22nd overall)
* 2023: Leo Carlsson (2nd overall)
* 2024: Beckett Sennecke (3rd overall), Stian Solberg (23rd overall)
==League and team honors==
===NHL awards and trophies===

Stanley Cup
* 2006–07

Clarence S. Campbell Bowl
* 2002–03, 2006–07

Conn Smythe Trophy
* Jean-Sebastien Giguere: 2002–03
* Scott Niedermayer: 2006–07

Hart Memorial Trophy
* Corey Perry: 2010–11

William M. Jennings Trophy
* Frederik Andersen and John Gibson: 2015–16

Lady Byng Memorial Trophy
* Paul Kariya: 1995–96, 1996–97

Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy
* Teemu Selanne: 2005–06

Maurice &quot;Rocket&quot; Richard Trophy
* Teemu Selanne: 1998–99
* Corey Perry: 2010–11

NHL General Manager of the Year Award
* Bob Murray: 2013–14

First All-Star team
* Paul Kariya: 1995–96, 1996–97, 1998–99
* Teemu Selanne: 1996–97
* Scott Niedermayer: 2005–06, 2006–07
* Corey Perry: 2010–11, 2013–14

Second All-Star team
* Teemu Selanne: 1997–98, 1998–99
* Paul Kariya: 1999–2000, 2002–03
* Chris Pronger: 2006–07
* Lubomir Visnovsky: 2010–11
* Francois Beauchemin: 2012–13
* Ryan Getzlaf: 2013–14

NHL All-Rookie Team
* Paul Kariya: 1994–95
* Bobby Ryan: 2008–09
* Hampus Lindholm: 2013–14
* Frederik Andersen: 2013–14
* John Gibson: 2015–16
* Trevor Zegras: 2021–22
===Retired numbers===

The Anaheim Ducks currently have three retired numbers, Teemu Selanne&#x27;s no. 8, which was retired on January 11, 2015, before a game against the Winnipeg Jets, Paul Kariya&#x27;s no. 9, retired on October 21, 2018, before a game against the Buffalo Sabres, and Scott Niedermayer&#x27;s no. 27 on February 17, 2019, before a game against the Washington Capitals.

The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.
;Notes
* Selanne wore number 8 for 14 of his 15 seasons with the Ducks, he would wear number 13 during the 2005–06 season before returning to number 8 from the 2006–07 season onward.

===Hall of Fame===
The Anaheim Ducks hold an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame, including seven inductees from the players category. Of those seven, Kariya and Selanne earned their credentials primarily with the Ducks.
* Sergei Fedorov
* Paul Kariya
* Jari Kurri
* Scott Niedermayer
* Adam Oates
* Chris Pronger
* Teemu Selanne

===Franchise scoring leaders===
These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Ducks player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;



===Franchise playoff scoring leaders===

These are the top-ten playoff point-scorers in franchise playoff history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL season.
* – current Ducks player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game



===Franchise single-season records===
* Most goals: Teemu Selanne, 52 (1997–98)
* Most assists: Ryan Getzlaf, 66 (2008–09)
* Most points: Teemu Selanne, 109 (1996–97)
* Most penalty minutes: Todd Ewen, 285 (1995–96)
* Most goals, defenseman: Lubomir Visnovsky, 18 (2010–11)
* Most assists, defenseman: Scott Niedermayer, 54 (2006–07)
* Most points, defenseman: Scott Niedermayer, 69 (2006–07)
* Most goals, rookie: Bobby Ryan, 31 (2008–09)
* Most assists, rookie: Trevor Zegras, 38 (2021–22)
* Most points, rookie: Trevor Zegras, 61 (2021–22)
* Most wins: Jean-Sebastien Giguere, 36 (2006–07)
* Most shutouts: Jean-Sebastien Giguere, 8 (2002–03)
===All-time franchise records===

;Regular season

* Most games: Ryan Getzlaf, 1,157
* Most goals: Teemu Selanne, 457
* Most assists: Ryan Getzlaf, 737
* Most points: Ryan Getzlaf, 1019
* Best plus/minus: Teemu Selanne, 120
* Most power-play goals: Teemu Selanne, 182
* Most game-winning goals: Teemu Selanne, 77
* Most overtime goals: Ryan Getzlaf, 11
* Most shots: Teemu Selanne, 2,964

;Playoffs

* Most playoff games: Ryan Getzlaf, 121
* Most playoff goals: Ryan Getzlaf, 37
* Most playoff assists: Ryan Getzlaf, 81
* Most playoff points: Ryan Getzlaf, 118
* Most playoff power-play goals: Ryan Getzlaf and Teemu Selanne, 15
* Most playoff game-winning goals: Corey Perry and Teemu Selanne, 8
* Most playoff shots: Corey Perry, 328
==Broadcasters==
* John Ahlers, TV play-by-play
* Brian Hayward, TV color analyst
* Steve Carroll, Radio play-by-play
* Emerson Etem, Radio color

Past announcers include Matt McConnell (who was the radio play-by-play announcer from 1993 to 1996), Charlie Simmer (who was the radio analyst alongside McConnell from 1993 to 1996), Brian Hamilton (who was the radio play-by-play announcer from 1996 to 1999), Pat Conacher (who was the radio analyst from 1996–97), Darren Eliot (who was the radio analyst alongside Hamilton from 1996 to 1999), Mike Greenlay (who was the radio analyst from 1999 to 2001), Brent Severyn (who became the radio analyst beginning in 2005), and Chris Madsen (who was the television play-by-play announcer from 1993 to 2002).

All games are streamed for free on Victory+. Most games are also aired on television by Fox Television Stations&#x27; owned KCOP-TV or KTTV. Radio broadcasts are hosted on Ducks Stream, an online radio station available via TuneIn. Local over-the-air broadcasts were produced by KCAL-TV (1993–2006) and KDOC-TV (2006–2014). Before moving off local broadcast radio, KLAA was the team&#x27;s radio flagship; KRDC (which was owned by the Ducks former team owner Disney) aired select games when in conflict. The Ducks were the last remaining NHL team from California to air games on broadcast radio prior to moving to streaming-only, as the crosstown rival Kings and Pacific division rival Sharks did so in 2018 and 2022, respectively. However, the Kings have since returned to broadcast radio via KSPN for a reduced schedule of broadcasts.

Disney planned to start an ESPN West regional sports network for the 1998–99 season, which would also carry Anaheim Angels baseball games, but the plan was abandoned. Until the 2024–25 NHL season, television broadcasts were on Bally Sports SoCal or Bally Sports West, as well as KCOP for scheduling conflicts.

==See also==
* List of Anaheim Ducks draft picks
* List of Anaheim Ducks players

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="4" end="17" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="37" end="47" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="62" end="81" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="108" end="130" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="156" end="172" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="180" end="198" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q774138" start="233" end="245" title="Honda Center" label="Honda Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q944937" start="263" end="286" title="Henry Samueli" label="Henry and Susan Samueli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577747" start="322" end="337" title="San Diego Gulls" label="San Diego Gulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="345" end="367" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459566" start="382" end="394" title="Tulsa Oilers" label="Tulsa Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="402" end="406" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="452" end="471" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="493" end="510" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="542" end="556" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="565" end="579" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="583" end="606" title="the Walt Disney Company" label="the Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="630" end="653" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536259" start="691" end="707" title="The Mighty Ducks (film)" label="The Mighty Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q364739" start="804" end="815" title="Brian Burke (ice hockey)" label="Brian Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="878" end="892" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="974" end="992" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="1014" end="1031" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968222" start="1035" end="1039" title="2003 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968224" start="1072" end="1076" title="2007 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="1086" end="1101" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="1234" end="1252" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="1268" end="1288" title="most valuable player" label="most valuable player"/>
<link wikidata="Q963464" start="1306" end="1328" title="Jean-Sébastien Giguère" label="Jean-Sébastien Giguère"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="1342" end="1359" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="1473" end="1496" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="1579" end="1584" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689956" start="1601" end="1615" title="Wayne Huizenga" label="Wayne Huizenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="1638" end="1654" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q774138" start="1861" end="1874" title="Honda Center" label="Anaheim Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="1910" end="1920" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19189" start="1936" end="1950" title="Orange Freeway" label="Orange Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q531897" start="1956" end="1969" title="Angel Stadium" label="Angel Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536259" start="2072" end="2088" title="The Mighty Ducks (film)" label="The Mighty Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2190" end="2202" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062854" start="2231" end="2243" title="Tony Tavares" label="Tony Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677031" start="2281" end="2294" title="Jack Ferreira" label="Jack Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="2329" end="2344" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758337" start="2405" end="2415" title="Ron Wilson (ice hockey, born 1955)" label="Ron Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960934" start="2542" end="2566" title="1993 NHL expansion draft" label="1993 NHL expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523956" start="2575" end="2595" title="1993 NHL entry draft" label="1993 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q840494" start="2650" end="2660" title="Guy Hebert" label="Guy Hebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108800" start="2665" end="2676" title="Glenn Healy" label="Glenn Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348811" start="2712" end="2728" title="Alexei Kasatonov" label="Alexei Kasatonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378717" start="2733" end="2744" title="Steven King (ice hockey)" label="Steven King"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="2807" end="2818" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="3000" end="3007" title="Captain (ice hockey)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q955689" start="3008" end="3018" title="Troy Loney" label="Troy Loney"/>
<link wikidata="Q774138" start="3235" end="3249" title="Arrowhead Pond" label="Arrowhead Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431781" start="3383" end="3408" title="Walt Disney Parks and Resorts" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s theme parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047009" start="3413" end="3425" title="Disney Store" label="Disney Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590028" start="3432" end="3449" title="1994–95 NHL lockout" label="lockout-shortened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="3450" end="3468" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q235407" start="3782" end="3804" title="1996 NHL All-Star Game" label="1996 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550236" start="3932" end="3938" title="Point (ice hockey)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317522" start="3943" end="3948" title="Goal (ice hockey)" label="goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q742407" start="3956" end="3963" title="Assist (ice hockey)" label="assists"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="4076" end="4089" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q446002" start="4129" end="4140" title="Chad Kilger" label="Chad Kilger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185283" start="4142" end="4157" title="Oleg Tverdovsky" label="Oleg Tverdovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892578" start="4215" end="4229" title="Marc Chouinard" label="Marc Chouinard"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="4274" end="4287" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q569840" start="4323" end="4336" title="Steve Rucchin" label="Steve Rucchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="4826" end="4840" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130799" start="4879" end="4894" title="Randy Ladouceur" label="Randy Ladouceur"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="5134" end="5149" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="5346" end="5357" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="5373" end="5390" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="5493" end="5512" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093764" start="5514" end="5525" title="Pierre Pagé" label="Pierre Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="5741" end="5751" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360724" start="5757" end="5767" title="Gary Suter" label="Gary Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="5775" end="5793" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188123" start="5794" end="5807" title="Cross-checking" label="cross-checked"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="6011" end="6018" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q367783" start="6039" end="6054" title="Craig Hartsburg" label="Craig Hartsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="6137" end="6153" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="6426" end="6438" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="6465" end="6472" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360861" start="6762" end="6774" title="Jeff Friesen" label="Jeff Friesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q330144" start="6776" end="6789" title="Steve Shields (ice hockey)" label="Steve Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="7040" end="7054" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q995073" start="7070" end="7082" title="Bryan Murray (ice hockey)" label="Bryan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="7264" end="7278" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q646123" start="7295" end="7307" title="Mike Babcock" label="Mike Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q722746" start="7789" end="7800" title="Petr Sýkora" label="Petr Sykora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975393" start="8030" end="8045" title="Cinderella (sports)" label="Cinderella team"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="8080" end="8094" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q963464" start="8096" end="8118" title="Jean-Sébastien Giguère" label="Jean-Sebastien Giguere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968222" start="8235" end="8258" title="2003 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2003 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="8285" end="8302" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q122588" start="8358" end="8373" title="Rob Niedermayer" label="Rob Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="8406" end="8411" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q357465" start="8479" end="8493" title="Martin Brodeur" label="Martin Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q281303" start="8640" end="8653" title="Scott Stevens" label="Scott Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="9047" end="9065" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="9073" end="9093" title="Most Valuable Player" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604309" start="9278" end="9299" title="goals against average" label="goals against average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="9308" end="9323" title="save percentage" label="save percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="9668" end="9686" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="9692" end="9706" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q368501" start="9842" end="9856" title="Sergei Fedorov" label="Sergei Fedorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q678896" start="9861" end="9875" title="Václav Prospal" label="Vaclav Prospal"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="10324" end="10372" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="10423" end="10435" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="long lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q555925" start="10566" end="10586" title="Broadcom Corporation" label="Broadcom Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944937" start="10598" end="10611" title="Henry Samueli" label="Henry Samueli"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="10615" end="10633" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q364739" start="10794" end="10805" title="Brian Burke (ice hockey)" label="Brian Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="10814" end="10831" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q752423" start="10986" end="10999" title="James Norris Memorial Trophy" label="Norris Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q597514" start="11019" end="11032" title="Randy Carlyle" label="Randy Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474448" start="11173" end="11187" title="Manitoba Moose" label="Manitoba Moose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11207" end="11234" title="International Hockey League (1946–2001)" label="International Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="11249" end="11271" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="11805" end="11819" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="11854" end="11866" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="11868" end="11879" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077443" start="11884" end="11896" title="Chris Kunitz" label="Chris Kunitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q833737" start="12013" end="12036" title="Cincinnati Mighty Ducks" label="Cincinnati Mighty Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="12127" end="12148" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383345" start="12176" end="12195" title="François Beauchemin" label="Francois Beauchemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q346098" start="12208" end="12220" title="Tyler Wright" label="Tyler Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="12343" end="12357" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q129201" start="12643" end="12657" title="Ilya Bryzgalov" label="Ilya Bryzgalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="12906" end="12921" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="13165" end="13179" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q36886" start="13464" end="13477" title="Joffrey Lupul" label="Joffrey Lupul"/>
<link wikidata="Q719298" start="13479" end="13492" title="Ladislav Šmíd" label="Ladislav Smid"/>
<link wikidata="Q553286" start="13577" end="13590" title="Chris Pronger" label="Chris Pronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001168" start="13674" end="13689" title="Samuel Påhlsson" label="Samuel Pahlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369556" start="13694" end="13705" title="Travis Moen" label="Travis Moen"/>
<link wikidata="Q517318" start="13864" end="13884" title="General Motors Place" label="General Motors Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="14204" end="14218" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="14921" end="14940" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="15070" end="15086" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344532" start="15422" end="15437" title="Tomas Holmstrom" label="Tomas Holmstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968224" start="15751" end="15757" title="2007 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="15813" end="15828" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q349601" start="15937" end="15950" title="Dean McAmmond" label="Dean McAmmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="16376" end="16394" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="16472" end="16482" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560081" start="16498" end="16502" title="1915 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785037" start="16503" end="16525" title="Vancouver Millionaires" label="Vancouver Millionaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560385" start="16527" end="16531" title="1917 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094660" start="16532" end="16553" title="Seattle Metropolitans" label="Seattle Metropolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561769" start="16558" end="16562" title="1925 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787575" start="16563" end="16579" title="Victoria Cougars" label="Victoria Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="16712" end="16726" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q739843" start="16876" end="16889" title="Todd Bertuzzi" label="Todd Bertuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344150" start="16905" end="16922" title="Mathieu Schneider" label="Mathieu Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q680364" start="16982" end="16989" title="Waivers (NHL)" label="waivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q666825" start="17056" end="17068" title="Jonas Hiller" label="Jonas Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="17543" end="17560" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="17599" end="17613" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="17686" end="17705" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q888159" start="17707" end="17717" title="Bob Murray (ice hockey, born 1954)" label="Bob Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="17973" end="17992" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004775" start="18008" end="18020" title="Ryan Whitney (ice hockey)" label="Ryan Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271921" start="18095" end="18111" title="James Wisniewski" label="James Wisniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="18412" end="18435" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="18634" end="18648" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="18688" end="18707" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q688834" start="18727" end="18737" title="Luca Sbisa" label="Luca Sbisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="18953" end="18971" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q347963" start="18980" end="18990" title="Saku Koivu" label="Saku Koivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342463" start="19136" end="19147" title="Jason Blake (ice hockey)" label="Jason Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386101" start="19152" end="19164" title="Vesa Toskala" label="Vesa Toskala"/>
<link wikidata="Q345018" start="19300" end="19317" title="Ľubomír Višňovský" label="Lubomir Visnovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q302903" start="19361" end="19371" title="Aaron Ward (ice hockey)" label="Aaron Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="19381" end="19400" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q382160" start="19412" end="19429" title="Curtis McElhinney" label="Curtis McElhinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q943033" start="19971" end="19982" title="Toni Lydman" label="Toni Lydman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027905" start="20070" end="20080" title="Cam Fowler" label="Cam Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q527802" start="20137" end="20148" title="Andy Sutton" label="Andy Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q561610" start="20198" end="20208" title="Bobby Ryan" label="Bobby Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="20717" end="20758" title="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy" label="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="20763" end="20783" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="21151" end="21164" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2011 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="21218" end="21232" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q376357" start="21288" end="21300" title="Ruslan Salei" label="Ruslan Salei"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="21369" end="21394" title="Kontinental Hockey League" label="Kontinental Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q275825" start="21406" end="21425" title="Lokomotiv Yaroslavl" label="Lokomotiv Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621939" start="21551" end="21568" title="2011 NHL Premiere" label="2011 NHL Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="21578" end="21586" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="21591" end="21600" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="21727" end="21741" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="21771" end="21787" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q991551" start="21944" end="21958" title="Bruce Boudreau" label="Bruce Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="22174" end="22188" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="22224" end="22237" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="labor lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q163887" start="22285" end="22316" title="collective bargaining agreement" label="collective bargaining agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="23341" end="23355" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q525338" start="23576" end="23593" title="Jakob Silfverberg" label="Jakob Silfverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q524005" start="23595" end="23608" title="Stefan Noesen" label="Stefan Noesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="23651" end="23671" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q930113" start="23710" end="23722" title="Mark Fistric" label="Mark Fistric"/>
<link wikidata="Q952470" start="23731" end="23748" title="Mathieu Perreault" label="Mathieu Perreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267736" start="23765" end="23778" title="Dustin Penner" label="Dustin Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365307" start="24626" end="24642" title="Stéphane Robidas" label="Stephane Robidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q984048" start="24850" end="24867" title="Frederik Andersen" label="Frederik Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="25151" end="25164" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q640268" start="25957" end="25968" title="Ryan Kesler" label="Ryan Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="25995" end="25999" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="26175" end="26188" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="26205" end="26218" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="26780" end="26800" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q472428" start="26817" end="26829" title="Emerson Etem" label="Emerson Etem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038576" start="26904" end="26916" title="Carl Hagelin" label="Carl Hagelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563262" start="26968" end="26980" title="Kevin Bieksa" label="Kevin Bieksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342293" start="27001" end="27014" title="Shawn Horcoff" label="Shawn Horcoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077782" start="27016" end="27029" title="Chris Stewart (ice hockey, born 1987)" label="Chris Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q433536" start="27034" end="27049" title="Mike Santorelli" label="Mike Santorelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="27064" end="27082" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739452" start="27299" end="27310" title="John Gibson (ice hockey, born 1993)" label="John Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="28184" end="28200" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="28569" end="28587" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012442" start="28622" end="28635" title="Dallas Eakins" label="Dallas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345680" start="29088" end="29099" title="Pat Verbeek" label="Pat Verbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="29598" end="29612" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605456" start="29722" end="29733" title="Greg Cronin" label="Greg Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="29797" end="29817" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q115703445" start="29837" end="29849" title="Leo Carlsson" label="Leo Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248197" start="29987" end="30003" title="The Mighty Ducks (film series)" label="The Mighty Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="30023" end="30046" title="the Walt Disney Company" label="the Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="31978" end="31984" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="33072" end="33078" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798535" start="34028" end="34045" title="throwback uniform" label="throwback uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150640" start="34926" end="34934" title="Fanatics, Inc." label="Fanatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="35620" end="35633" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785680" start="35715" end="35730" title="goaltender mask" label="goaltender mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="36246" end="36263" title="Three-dimensional space" label="three-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="37115" end="37132" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="37133" end="37137" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38410" end="38422" title="Mighty Ducks: The Animated Series" label="Mighty Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="39225" end="39242" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501242" start="39259" end="39275" title="Freeway Face-Off" label="Freeway Face-Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q270355" start="39334" end="39360" title="Interstate 5 in California" label="Interstate 5 in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="39399" end="39436" title="Greater Los Angeles area" label="greater Los Angeles metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="39478" end="39493" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567935" start="39628" end="39648" title="Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902787" start="39868" end="39897" title="List of Anaheim Ducks seasons" label="List of Anaheim Ducks seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q955689" start="40117" end="40127" title="Troy Loney" label="Troy Loney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130799" start="40141" end="40156" title="Randy Ladouceur" label="Randy Ladouceur"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="40170" end="40181" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="40195" end="40208" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q569840" start="40227" end="40240" title="Steve Rucchin" label="Steve Rucchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="40254" end="40271" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q553286" start="40296" end="40309" title="Chris Pronger" label="Chris Pronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="40323" end="40335" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501342" start="40349" end="40360" title="Radko Gudas" label="Radko Gudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758337" start="40391" end="40401" title="Ron Wilson (ice hockey, born 1955)" label="Ron Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093764" start="40415" end="40426" title="Pierre Pagé" label="Pierre Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q367783" start="40440" end="40455" title="Craig Hartsburg" label="Craig Hartsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q941454" start="40469" end="40480" title="Guy Charron" label="Guy Charron"/>
<link wikidata="Q995073" start="40494" end="40506" title="Bryan Murray (ice hockey)" label="Bryan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q646123" start="40520" end="40532" title="Mike Babcock" label="Mike Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q597514" start="40546" end="40559" title="Randy Carlyle" label="Randy Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q991551" start="40584" end="40598" title="Bruce Boudreau" label="Bruce Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q888159" start="40612" end="40622" title="Bob Murray (ice hockey, born 1954)" label="Bob Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012442" start="40641" end="40654" title="Dallas Eakins" label="Dallas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605456" start="40668" end="40679" title="Greg Cronin" label="Greg Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677031" start="40719" end="40732" title="Jack Ferreira" label="Jack Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093481" start="40746" end="40761" title="Pierre Gauthier" label="Pierre Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q995073" start="40775" end="40787" title="Bryan Murray (ice hockey)" label="Bryan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636048" start="40801" end="40810" title="Al Coates (ice hockey)" label="Al Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q364739" start="40834" end="40845" title="Brian Burke (ice hockey)" label="Brian Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q888159" start="40859" end="40869" title="Bob Murray (ice hockey, born 1954)" label="Bob Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q110722020" start="40883" end="40895" title="Jeff Solomon" label="Jeff Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345680" start="40919" end="40930" title="Pat Verbeek" label="Pat Verbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523956" start="40977" end="40981" title="1993 NHL entry draft" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="40983" end="40994" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122726" start="41011" end="41015" title="1994 NHL entry draft" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185283" start="41017" end="41032" title="Oleg Tverdovsky" label="Oleg Tverdovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960916" start="41049" end="41053" title="1995 NHL entry draft" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q446002" start="41055" end="41066" title="Chad Kilger" label="Chad Kilger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960907" start="41083" end="41087" title="1996 NHL entry draft" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q376357" start="41089" end="41101" title="Ruslan Salei" label="Ruslan Salei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493690" start="41118" end="41122" title="1997 NHL entry draft" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q951318" start="41124" end="41141" title="Michael Holmqvist" label="Michael Holmqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q776656" start="41159" end="41163" title="1998 NHL entry draft" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q129206" start="41165" end="41183" title="Vitaly Vishnevskiy" label="Vitaly Vishnevskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="41200" end="41204" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q454759" start="41206" end="41220" title="Alexei Smirnov (ice hockey)" label="Alexei Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="41238" end="41242" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067546" start="41244" end="41261" title="Stanislav Chistov" label="Stanislav Chistov"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="41278" end="41282" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q36886" start="41284" end="41297" title="Joffrey Lupul" label="Joffrey Lupul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854869" start="41314" end="41318" title="2003 NHL entry draft" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="41320" end="41332" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="41349" end="41360" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="41378" end="41382" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q719298" start="41384" end="41397" title="Ladislav Šmíd" label="Ladislav Smid"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="41414" end="41418" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q561610" start="41420" end="41430" title="Bobby Ryan" label="Bobby Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="41447" end="41451" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900290" start="41453" end="41464" title="Mark Mitera" label="Mark Mitera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="41482" end="41486" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375412" start="41488" end="41503" title="Logan MacMillan" label="Logan MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="41521" end="41525" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q539211" start="41527" end="41540" title="Jake Gardiner" label="Jake Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="41558" end="41562" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q445672" start="41564" end="41577" title="Peter Holland (ice hockey)" label="Peter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q526935" start="41594" end="41607" title="Kyle Palmieri" label="Kyle Palmieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="41625" end="41629" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027905" start="41631" end="41641" title="Cam Fowler" label="Cam Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q472428" start="41658" end="41670" title="Emerson Etem" label="Emerson Etem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="41688" end="41692" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731789" start="41694" end="41708" title="Rickard Rakell" label="Rickard Rakell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="41726" end="41730" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077684" start="41732" end="41747" title="Hampus Lindholm" label="Hampus Lindholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="41764" end="41768" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581460" start="41770" end="41783" title="Shea Theodore" label="Shea Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="41801" end="41805" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236981" start="41807" end="41819" title="Nick Ritchie" label="Nick Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="41837" end="41841" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518913" start="41843" end="41856" title="Jacob Larsson" label="Jacob Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="41874" end="41878" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621612" start="41880" end="41889" title="Max Jones (ice hockey)" label="Max Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24805711" start="41906" end="41915" title="Sam Steel" label="Sam Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="41933" end="41937" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q23869474" start="41939" end="41954" title="Isac Lundeström" label="Isac Lundestrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="41972" end="41976" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781751" start="41978" end="41991" title="Trevor Zegras" label="Trevor Zegras"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781765" start="42007" end="42021" title="Brayden Tracey" label="Brayden Tracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="42039" end="42043" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q80677472" start="42045" end="42059" title="Jamie Drysdale" label="Jamie Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q100176902" start="42075" end="42090" title="Jacob Perreault" label="Jacob Perreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="42108" end="42112" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q107684199" start="42114" end="42128" title="Mason McTavish" label="Mason McTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="42145" end="42149" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967556" start="42151" end="42166" title="Pavel Mintyukov" label="Pavel Mintyukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967545" start="42183" end="42197" title="Nathan Gaucher" label="Nathan Gaucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="42215" end="42219" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q115703445" start="42221" end="42233" title="Leo Carlsson" label="Leo Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127690" start="42250" end="42254" title="2024 NHL entry draft" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q126930004" start="42256" end="42272" title="Beckett Sennecke" label="Beckett Sennecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q125906910" start="42288" end="42301" title="Stian Solberg" label="Stian Solberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="42375" end="42386" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="42389" end="42396" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q922116" start="42398" end="42423" title="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl" label="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="42426" end="42433" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="42435" end="42442" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="42444" end="42462" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q963464" start="42465" end="42487" title="Jean-Sébastien Giguère" label="Jean-Sebastien Giguere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="42489" end="42496" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="42499" end="42516" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="42518" end="42525" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="42527" end="42547" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="42550" end="42561" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="42563" end="42570" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="42572" end="42598" title="William M. Jennings Trophy" label="William M. Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q984048" start="42601" end="42618" title="Frederik Andersen" label="Frederik Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739452" start="42623" end="42634" title="John Gibson (ice hockey, born 1993)" label="John Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="42636" end="42643" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q516636" start="42645" end="42670" title="Lady Byng Memorial Trophy" label="Lady Byng Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="42673" end="42684" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="42686" end="42693" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="42695" end="42702" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="42704" end="42734" title="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="42737" end="42750" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="42752" end="42759" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q826079" start="42761" end="42802" title="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy" label="Maurice &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot; Richard Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="42805" end="42818" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="42820" end="42827" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="42830" end="42841" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="42843" end="42850" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572029" start="42852" end="42889" title="NHL General Manager of the Year Award" label="NHL General Manager of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q888159" start="42892" end="42902" title="Bob Murray (ice hockey, born 1954)" label="Bob Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="42904" end="42911" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="42913" end="42932" title="NHL All-Star team" label="First All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="42935" end="42946" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="42948" end="42955" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="42957" end="42964" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="42966" end="42973" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="42976" end="42989" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="42991" end="42998" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="43001" end="43018" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="43020" end="43027" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="43029" end="43036" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="43039" end="43050" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="43052" end="43059" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="43061" end="43068" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193358" start="43070" end="43090" title="NHL All-Star team" label="Second All-Star team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="43093" end="43106" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="43108" end="43115" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="43117" end="43124" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="43127" end="43138" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="43140" end="43149" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="43151" end="43158" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q553286" start="43161" end="43174" title="Chris Pronger" label="Chris Pronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="43176" end="43183" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q345018" start="43186" end="43203" title="Ľubomír Višňovský" label="Lubomir Visnovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="43205" end="43212" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383345" start="43215" end="43234" title="François Beauchemin" label="Francois Beauchemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="43236" end="43243" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="43246" end="43258" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="43260" end="43267" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960831" start="43269" end="43288" title="NHL All-Rookie Team" label="NHL All-Rookie Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="43291" end="43302" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556571" start="43304" end="43311" title="1994–95 NHL season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q561610" start="43314" end="43324" title="Bobby Ryan" label="Bobby Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="43326" end="43333" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077684" start="43336" end="43351" title="Hampus Lindholm" label="Hampus Lindholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="43353" end="43360" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q984048" start="43363" end="43380" title="Frederik Andersen" label="Frederik Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="43382" end="43389" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739452" start="43392" end="43403" title="John Gibson (ice hockey, born 1993)" label="John Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="43405" end="43412" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781751" start="43415" end="43428" title="Trevor Zegras" label="Trevor Zegras"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="43430" end="43437" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="43517" end="43530" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="43610" end="43623" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="43625" end="43636" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="43706" end="43720" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="43726" end="43743" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="43806" end="43825" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="43844" end="43857" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="43904" end="43926" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="44203" end="44222" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q368501" start="44365" end="44379" title="Sergei Fedorov" label="Sergei Fedorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q449212" start="44382" end="44393" title="Paul Kariya" label="Paul Kariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q363621" start="44396" end="44406" title="Jari Kurri" label="Jari Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="44409" end="44426" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q350538" start="44429" end="44439" title="Adam Oates" label="Adam Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q553286" start="44442" end="44455" title="Chris Pronger" label="Chris Pronger"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="44458" end="44471" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="45120" end="45133" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="45164" end="45176" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q355559" start="45259" end="45268" title="Todd Ewen" label="Todd Ewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q345018" start="45310" end="45327" title="Ľubomír Višňovský" label="Lubomir Visnovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q449145" start="45370" end="45387" title="Scott Niedermayer" label="Scott Niedermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q561610" start="45483" end="45493" title="Bobby Ryan" label="Bobby Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781751" start="45532" end="45545" title="Trevor Zegras" label="Trevor Zegras"/>
<link wikidata="Q963464" start="45624" end="45646" title="Jean-Sébastien Giguère" label="Jean-Sebastien Giguere"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="45779" end="45791" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="45813" end="45826" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q114068" start="46136" end="46148" title="Ryan Getzlaf" label="Ryan Getzlaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="46325" end="46338" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="46378" end="46389" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218324" start="46469" end="46480" title="John Ahlers" label="John Ahlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q351834" start="46500" end="46513" title="Brian Hayward" label="Brian Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382974" start="46534" end="46547" title="Steve Carroll" label="Steve Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q472428" start="46570" end="46582" title="Emerson Etem" label="Emerson Etem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381999" start="46621" end="46635" title="Matt McConnell" label="Matt McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="46683" end="46687" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="46691" end="46695" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q705465" start="46698" end="46712" title="Charlie Simmer" label="Charlie Simmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="46842" end="46846" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="46850" end="46854" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380463" start="46857" end="46869" title="Pat Conacher" label="Pat Conacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="46902" end="46909" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801343" start="46912" end="46924" title="Darren Eliot" label="Darren Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="46976" end="46980" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="46984" end="46988" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379804" start="46991" end="47004" title="Mike Greenlay" label="Mike Greenlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="47037" end="47041" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="47045" end="47049" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q326912" start="47052" end="47065" title="Brent Severyn" label="Brent Severyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="47109" end="47113" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="47185" end="47189" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="47193" end="47197" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283911" start="47236" end="47244" title="Victory+" label="Victory+"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476982" start="47289" end="47312" title="Fox Television Stations" label="Fox Television Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327204" start="47325" end="47332" title="KCOP-TV" label="KCOP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="47336" end="47340" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305253" start="47425" end="47431" title="TuneIn" label="TuneIn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="47480" end="47487" title="KCAL-TV" label="KCAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327992" start="47504" end="47511" title="KDOC-TV" label="KDOC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332354" start="47566" end="47570" title="KLAA (AM)" label="KLAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q605758" start="47607" end="47611" title="KWVE (AM)" label="KRDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191501" start="47995" end="47999" title="KSPN (AM)" label="KSPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="48147" end="48161" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Anaheim Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q125388817" start="48216" end="48234" title="2024–25 NHL season" label="2024–25 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q105987111" start="48266" end="48284" title="Bally Sports SoCal" label="Bally Sports SoCal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080194" start="48288" end="48305" title="Bally Sports West" label="Bally Sports West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247917" start="48365" end="48398" title="List of Anaheim Ducks draft picks" label="List of Anaheim Ducks draft picks"/>
<link wikidata="Q783864" start="48401" end="48430" title="List of Anaheim Ducks players" label="List of Anaheim Ducks players"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73135" wikidata="Q208652" url="?curid=73135" title="Dallas Stars">
<text>The Dallas Stars are a professional ice hockey team based in Dallas. The Stars compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Central Division in the Western Conference. The Stars played in Reunion Arena in downtown Dallas from 1993 to 2001, when they moved into American Airlines Center in Dallas&#x27;s nearby Victory Park neighborhood, an arena they share with the Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association.

The Stars were founded during the 1967 NHL expansion as the Minnesota North Stars, based in Bloomington, Minnesota. Before the 1978–79 NHL season, the team merged with the Cleveland Barons after the league granted them permission due to each team&#x27;s respective financial struggles. The franchise relocated to Dallas for the 1993–94 NHL season and was renamed the Dallas Stars.

The Stars have won nine division titles in Dallas, two Presidents&#x27; Trophies as the top regular season team in the league, the Western Conference championship three times, and the Stanley Cup in 1999, when center Joe Nieuwendyk won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs. Over the course of the franchise&#x27;s history in both Minnesota and Dallas, it has appeared in the Stanley Cup Finals five times (1981, 1991, 1999, 2000, and 2020).

In 2000, Neal Broten was inducted into the United States Hockey Hall of Fame. In 2009, Brett Hull became the first Dallas Stars player inducted into the Hall of Fame, followed by Ed Belfour and Joe Nieuwendyk in 2011 and Mike Modano in 2014; Modano is the highest-scoring player in franchise history. In 2010, brothers Derian and Kevin Hatcher were also inducted.

==History==

===1967–1993: Minnesota North Stars===

The Minnesota North Stars began play in 1967 as part of the league&#x27;s six-team expansion. Home games were played at the newly constructed Metropolitan Sports Center (&quot;Met Center&quot;) in Bloomington, Minnesota. Initially successful both on the ice and at the gate, the North Stars fell victim to financial problems after several poor seasons in the mid-1970s.
In 1978, the North Stars merged with the Cleveland Barons (formerly the California Golden Seals), owned by George III and Gordon Gund. With both teams on the verge of folding, the league permitted the two failing franchises to merge. The merged team continued as the Minnesota North Stars, while the Seals/Barons franchise records were retired. However, the Gunds were the merged team&#x27;s principal owners, and the North Stars assumed the Barons&#x27; place in the Adams Division in order to balance out the divisions. The merger brought with it a number of talented players, and the North Stars were revived—they reached the Stanley Cup Finals in 1981, where they lost in five games to the New York Islanders. However, by the early 1990s, declining attendance and the inability to secure a new downtown revenue-generating arena led ownership to request permission to move the team to the San Francisco Bay Area in 1990. The league rejected the request and instead agreed to award an expansion franchise, the San Jose Sharks, to the Gund brothers. The North Stars were sold to a group of investors that were originally looking to place a team in San Jose, although one of the group&#x27;s members, former Calgary Flames part-owner Norman Green, would eventually gain control of the team. In the following season, the North Stars made it to the Stanley Cup Finals, only to lose to the Pittsburgh Penguins.

After the 1990–91 season, the North Stars suffered through declining profits coupled with distraction and uncertainty caused by relocation attempts. The team&#x27;s fortunes were further impeded by the terms of the settlement with the Gund brothers, in which they were permitted to take a number of North Stars players to San Jose. In their final two seasons in Minnesota, the team adopted a new logo which omitted any reference to the word &quot;North&quot; from &quot;North Stars&quot;, leading many fans to anticipate the team heading south. Green explored the possibility of moving the team to Anaheim to play at a new arena (which is now the Honda Center) under construction, and intended to call the team the Los Angeles Stars. However, in 1992 the league decided to award an expansion franchise to The Walt Disney Company to play in Anaheim&#x27;s new arena, this franchise eventually became the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim.

===1993–1998: Relocation and early years in Dallas===

In 1993, amid further attendance woes and bitter personal controversy, Green obtained permission from the league to move the team to Dallas, for the 1993–94 season, with the decision announced on March 10, 1993. Green was convinced by former Dallas Cowboys quarterback Roger Staubach that Dallas would be a suitable market for an NHL team. With the team&#x27;s move to the Southern United States, Green decided to drop the &quot;North&quot; adjective but otherwise retained the &quot;Stars&quot; nickname, which in its shortened form quickly proved popular as it matched the state of Texas&#x27; official nickname as &quot;The Lone Star State.&quot; An NHL franchise Dallas was an experiment for the league, as at that time the Stars would be one of the three southernmost teams in the league along with two recently created expansion teams in the Tampa Bay Lightning and Florida Panthers as the league&#x27;s first real ventures into southern non-traditional hockey markets. The Stars would move into Reunion Arena, built in 1980, the downtown arena already occupied by the National Basketball Association&#x27;s Dallas Mavericks.

To quell the ensuing controversy surrounding the North Stars move to Dallas, the NHL promised that the Twin Cities would receive an expansion franchise in the near future; that promise was fulfilled in 2000 in the form of the Minnesota Wild.

With the league changing the names of the conferences and divisions that season, the newly relocated Stars were placed in the Central Division of the Western Conference, although these were essentially continuations of the Norris Division and Campbell Conference respectively, both of which the North Stars had been part of. The first NHL game in Dallas was played on October 5, 1993, and was a 6–4 win against the Detroit Red Wings. Somewhat ironically, Minnesota native Neal Broten scored the first Stars goal in Dallas. Though the Stars were relatively still low on the Dallas-Fort Worth sports pecking order upon their arrival, popularity of the team grew rapidly and the immediate success of the team on the ice, as well as Mike Modano&#x27;s career-best season (50 goals, 93 points) helped spur the team&#x27;s popularity in North Texas. The Stars set franchise bests in wins (42) and points (97) in their first season in Dallas, qualifying for the 1994 playoffs. The Stars further shocked the hockey world by sweeping the St. Louis Blues in the first round, but lost to the eventual Western Conference Champion Vancouver Canucks in the second round. The Stars&#x27; success in their first season along with Modano&#x27;s spectacular on-ice performances, would be an integral part of the Stars&#x27; eventual franchise success in the immediate years to come.

The almost immediate success of the Stars was also helped by the long legacy of minor-league hockey in the area. Both incarnations of the Central Hockey League had two teams in the area, the Dallas Black Hawks and the Fort Worth Texans for years before the Stars&#x27; arrival. Amateur and youth hockey in North Texas were also extremely popular because of the long presence of the minor league teams.

====1994–1998: Arrival of Tom Hicks and building for a championship====
The 1994–95 season was shortened by an owners&#x27; lockout. The Stars traded captain Mark Tinordi along with Rick Mrozik to the Washington Capitals before the season began for Kevin Hatcher. Longtime North Stars hold-over Neal Broten was named his replacement, although he was traded too after only 17 games to the New Jersey Devils. Broten was replaced by Kevin&#x27;s younger brother Derian Hatcher as team captain, a role he would serve in for the next decade. The Stars played only 48 games that season posting a record of 17–23–8. Despite the shortened season and the losing record, the Stars again made the playoffs, losing in five games to the Red Wings in the first round. Green, who had run into financial problems stemming from his business ventures outside of ice hockey, was forced to sell the team to businessman Tom Hicks in December 1995.
The 1995–96 season would be the first season under new owner Tom Hicks. In the off-season, the Stars traded for former Montreal Canadiens&#x27; captain and three-time Frank J. Selke Trophy winner Guy Carbonneau, who was then with the St. Louis Blues. With the Stars struggling to begin the season, general manager and head coach Bob Gainey traded for center Joe Nieuwendyk from the Calgary Flames in exchange for Corey Millen and Jarome Iginla, then a Stars prospect. The Stars recorded only 11 wins in the first half of the season, and Bob Gainey relinquished his coaching duties in January to be the full-time general manager of the team. The Stars soon hired Michigan K-Wings head coach Ken Hitchcock to replace him; it would be his first NHL head coaching position. The Stars then traded for Benoit Hogue from the Toronto Maple Leafs late in the season, but ultimately finished in sixth place in the Central Division, missing the playoffs for the first time since moving to Texas.

In the 1996 off-season, the Stars continued to revamp their roster, adding defensemen Darryl Sydor from the Los Angeles Kings followed by Sergei Zubov from the Pittsburgh Penguins for Kevin Hatcher. Zubov would serve as the Stars&#x27; top defenseman and powerplay quarterback until leaving the league in 2009. On the ice, Ken Hitchcock&#x27;s first season proved to be a good one. The Stars bested their 1994 totals, posting 48 wins and reaching the 100-point mark for the first time in franchise history. The Stars won the Central Division, their first division title since 1983–84 (when they were still the Minnesota North Stars) and were seeded second in the playoffs. Despite the regular season success, the youthful Stars were upset in the first round by the Edmonton Oilers in seven games. Defenseman Grant Ledyard tripped in overtime of game 7, allowing Todd Marchant to score the game- and series-winning goal on a breakaway against goaltender Andy Moog.

During the 1997 off-season, the Stars signed star goaltender Ed Belfour as a free agent after a well-publicized falling-out with the San Jose Sharks, which had traded a number of players to the Chicago Blackhawks to obtain him in January in the previous season. Andy Moog was allowed to leave via free agency, but later returned to the Stars as an assistant coach. The 1997–98 season was another banner year for the Stars. The Stars again set franchise records in wins (49) and points (109). Dallas acquired Mike Keane at the deadline from the New York Rangers. The Stars won the franchise&#x27;s first Presidents&#x27; Trophy as the league&#x27;s best regular season team, as well as the Central Division title for the second season in a row. Belfour set franchise season records for goals against average (1.88), wins (37) and just missed out on the Jennings Trophy by one goal to Martin Brodeur of the New Jersey Devils. The Stars were the first overall seed for the 1998 Stanley Cup playoffs and defeated the eighth-seeded San Jose Sharks in six games in the first round. Notorious enforcer Bryan Marchment injured Joe Nieuwendyk&#x27;s right knee, forcing him to miss the rest of the playoffs with torn ligaments. In the second round, they again met the Edmonton Oilers, this time defeating them in five games. However, without Nieuwendyk, the Stars lacked the firepower to overcome the defending Stanley Cup champion Detroit Red Wings in the conference finals and lost in six games. The Red Wings went on to win their second consecutive Stanley Cup.

===1998–2004: Stanley Cup contention and 1999 Stanley Cup championship===

====1999 Stanley Cup title and 2000 Stanley Cup Finals run====

In the 1998 off-season, after falling just short in the conference finals, the Stars added what they believed was the final piece toward winning a championship: star goalscoring winger Brett Hull. Hull had already had a successful career with the St. Louis Blues, with three consecutive 70-goal seasons and a Hart Memorial Trophy, but a fallout with Blues management led Hull to leave St. Louis via free agency. Additionally, this was the first season for the Stars in the Pacific Division after the 1998 NHL division re-alignment.

In the 1998–99 season, the Stars won 51 games, surpassing the 50-win mark for the first time in franchise history. They also recorded 114 points, which still stands today as a franchise record. They won their first Pacific Division by 24 points (their third consecutive division title), a second consecutive Presidents&#x27; Trophy, the Jennings Trophy as the league&#x27;s top defensive team, and were awarded home-ice advantage throughout the 1999 playoffs. Winger Jere Lehtinen was also awarded the Frank J. Selke Trophy.
In the first round of the playoffs, Dallas faced the Edmonton Oilers. The Stars swept the Oilers in four close games, winning game 4 in the third overtime on a goal by Joe Nieuwendyk. They then faced the St. Louis Blues in the second round. After taking a 2–0 series lead, the Blues came back to tie the series. The Stars then won the next two games to beat the Blues in six games. The series again ended on an overtime goal, this time in game 6 from Mike Modano. In the conference finals, they faced the Colorado Avalanche for the first time in Stars playoff history. This would be the first of four playoff meetings between the Stars and Avalanche in the next seven years. After both the Stars and the Avalanche split the first four games at a 2–2 series tie, the Avalanche won game 5 by a score of 7–5, taking a 3–2 series lead, The Stars rallied winning game six on the road, and game 7 at home, both by 4–1 scorelines.

This was the Stars&#x27; first Stanley Cup Finals appearance as the Dallas Stars, although they made the finals twice as the Minnesota North Stars. They faced the Eastern Conference champion Buffalo Sabres, who had defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs 4–1 in the conference finals. After splitting the first four games, the Stars vaunted defense would hold the Sabres to only one goal in the next two, winning game 5 2–0 and game 6 2–1 on a triple-overtime goal by Brett Hull. Hull&#x27;s goal at 14:51 of the third overtime was allowed to stand only after a lengthy official review. That season, the league still had the &quot;crease rule&quot; in effect, which provided that if any player of the attacking team who did not have possession of the puck entered the crease before the puck, then any resulting goal was disallowed. Hull had initially gained possession of the puck outside the crease and had made a shot that was blocked by Buffalo goaltender Dominik Hasek. One of Hull&#x27;s skates entered the crease as he corralled the rebound, and Hull&#x27;s second shot scored the Cup-winning goal. The goal was eventually allowed, as having simply blocked Hull&#x27;s shot rather than catching it, Hasek never took possession of the puck away from Hull. Officials therefore determined that rather than calling it a loose puck, Hull would be considered to have had continuous possession of the puck from before his first shot outside the crease. The complexity of the crease rule, and the attendant difficulties in understanding its application by fans and players alike, combined with the controversy arising out of the disputed Stanley Cup-winning goal, resulted in the crease rule being repealed the following season. Hull&#x27;s goal marked the 13th time a Stanley Cup-winning goal was scored in overtime, and only the fourth to be scored in multiple overtimes. This was the only time between 1995 and 2003 that a team other than the New Jersey Devils, Colorado Avalanche or Detroit Red Wings won the Stanley Cup.

The team added veterans Kirk Muller, Dave Manson and Sylvain Cote in an effort to defend their Stanley Cup championship in . On December 31, 1999, Brett Hull scored his 600 and 601st career goals in a 5–4 win over the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. The Stars ultimately won the Pacific Division for the second year in a row, and were seeded second in the Western Conference. Dallas then defeated the Edmonton Oilers and San Jose Sharks in the first and second rounds, both 4–1 series victories. The Stars, for the second season in a row, defeated the Colorado Avalanche in the conference finals in seven games to reach their second consecutive Stanley Cup Finals, where they met the New Jersey Devils. Because the Devils finished the regular season with one more point than Dallas, the Stars had to play their first playoff series without home-ice advantage since 1995. The Stars lost all three games at the Reunion Arena in the Finals, and lost the series in game 6 on a double-overtime goal by New Jersey forward Jason Arnott.

====2001–2004: Continued playoff contention====
Hoping to win back the Stanley Cup, the Stars again captured the Pacific Division, posting a solid 48–24–8–2 record in the 2000–01 season. In the playoffs, the Stars and the Edmonton Oilers met in the first round, battling back-and-forth through the first four games, with each game decided by one goal, including three going into overtime. Game 5 would also go to overtime, as the Stars took a 3–2 series lead on a goal by Kirk Muller. However, in game 6 in Edmonton, the Stars did not need overtime, advancing to the second round with a 3–1 win. Facing the St. Louis Blues, the Stars would run out of gas, being swept in four straight games. The game 2 loss would be the last NHL game played in Reunion Arena.
Moving into the brand new American Airlines Center for the 2001–02 season, the Stars had a slow start to the season, as goaltender Ed Belfour struggled through one of his worst seasons. Head coach Ken Hitchcock was eventually fired, being replaced by Rick Wilson. Despite the coaching change, the Stars continued to play poor hockey. With the prospect of missing the playoffs, the Stars traded 1999 Conn Smythe winner Joe Nieuwendyk and Jamie Langenbrunner to the New Jersey Devils in exchange for Randy McKay and Jason Arnott, who scored the game-winning goal in the 2000 Finals against Dallas. The Stars would eventually go on to post a respectable record of 35–28–13–5. However, it would not be enough for the playoffs, as they fell four points short of the final eighth spot in the Western Conference. Following the season, coach Rick Wilson would return to assistant coaching duties, as the Stars brought in Dave Tippett as his replacement.

As in the 2002 off-season, Ed Belfour left via free agency to the Toronto Maple Leafs. To begin the 2002–03 season, the Stars awarded the starting goaltending position to Marty Turco, who went on to have one of the best seasons in NHL history, posting the lowest goals-against average (GAA) since 1940, at 1.76. However, missing 18 games late in the season likely cost him a shot at the Vezina Trophy, awarded to the league&#x27;s top regular season goaltender. Regardless, the Stars posted the best record in the Western Conference at 46–17–15–4, and along the way, two-way star Jere Lehtinen won his third Frank J. Selke Trophy. In the playoffs, the Stars once again met the Edmonton Oilers, and once again the Oilers would prove a contentious opponent, winning two of the first three games. However, the Stars would prove the better team again by winning the next three games to take the series in six games. The Stars&#x27; second-round series against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim got off to an unbelievable start, as the game went deep into overtime tied 3–3. However, Mighty Ducks goaltender Jean-Sebastien Giguere stopped 60 shots as the Ducks scored early in the fifth overtime. Game 2 would be more of the same, as the Ducks stunned the Stars in overtime. Desperately needing a win, the Stars bounced back to take game 3 in Anaheim. However, the Ducks would take a 3–1 series lead by breaking a scoreless tie late in the third period of game 4. In game 5, the Stars finally solved Giguere by scoring four goals to keep their playoff hopes alive. However, the Stars&#x27; dreams of a return trip to the Stanley Cup Finals would end in heartbreaking fashion as the Ducks broke a 3–3 tie with 1:06 left in game 6 on a goal by defenseman Sandis Ozolinsh.

Coming off their disappointing playoff loss, the Stars would get off to a shaky start to the 2003–04 season, as they played mediocre hockey through the first three months of the season, posting a sub-.500 record. However, as the calendar turned to 2004, the Stars began to find their game, as they posted a 9–4–3 record in January. As the season wore on, the Stars would get stronger, climbing up the playoff ladder and eventually reaching second place in the Pacific Division, where they finished with a solid 41–26–13–2 record; Marty Turco had another outstanding season, recording a 1.98 GAA. However, the Stars could not carry their momentum into the playoffs, as they were beaten by the Colorado Avalanche in five games in the first round.

===2005–2011: Early years of the post-lockout era===

====2005–2008: Return from lockout, 2008 Western Conference Finals run====
Coming out of the owners&#x27; lockout that cancelled the entire 2004–05 season, the Stars remained one of the strongest teams in the Western Conference for the start of 2005–06, as they won four of their first five games on the way to a solid October. November would be even better for Dallas, as they won 10 of 13 games and took over first place in the Pacific Division, a position they would hold most of the season, as they went on to finish with a terrific record of 53–23–6. One reason for the Stars&#x27; success was their strong play in shootouts, as forward Jussi Jokinen was nearly automatic, making 10-of-13 shot attempts. Also performing strongly in shootouts was Sergei Zubov, who used a slow-but-steady backhand to go 7-for-12, as the Stars ultimately won 12 of 13 games that were settled by a shootout. As the number two seed in the Western Conference, the Stars faced the seventh-seeded Colorado Avalanche. The Stars were favorited to win the Western Conference, and some even predicted them to win the Stanley Cup. However, the Stars would stumble right from the start, losing game 1 by a score of 5–2 as the Avalanche scored five unanswered goals after the Stars jumped out to a promising 2–0 lead. Game 2 would see the Stars suffer another setback at home, as the Stars lost in overtime 5–4 on a goal by Joe Sakic. On the road in game 3, the Stars led 3–2 in the final minute before the Avalanche forced overtime on a goal by Andrew Brunette, while Alex Tanguay won the game just 69 seconds into overtime to put the Stars in a 3–0 hole. The Stars would avoid the sweep with a 4–1 win in game 4, but overtime would doom them again in game 5, as Andrew Brunette scored the series winner at 6:05, ending the Stars&#x27; playoffs hopes after just five games.

Following the previous season&#x27;s disappointing first-round playoff loss at the hands of the seventh-seeded Avalanche, the Stars made a number of changes during the 2006 off-season. Former Stars goalkeeper Andy Moog was promoted to assistant general manager for player development (he kept his job as goaltending coach) and former player Ulf Dahlen was hired as an assistant coach. The Stars allowed center Jason Arnott, defenseman Willie Mitchell and goaltender Johan Hedberg to leave as free agents. Forward Niko Kapanen was traded to the Atlanta Thrashers and the remaining two years on fan-favorite right winger Bill Guerin&#x27;s contract were bought out. The Stars also received Patrik Stefan and Jaroslav Modry in the Atlanta trade, and signed Eric Lindros, Jeff Halpern, Matthew Barnaby and Darryl Sydor as free agents. Young goaltender Mike Smith was promoted to the NHL to serve as Marty Turco&#x27;s backup. During the season, key future pieces – center Mike Ribeiro and defenseman Mattias Norstrom – were added through separate trades. Young players Joel Lundqvist, Krys Barch, Nicklas Grossmann and Chris Conner all saw significant ice time while other players were out of the lineup with injuries.
On September 29, 2006, Brenden Morrow was announced as new team captain, taking the role over from Mike Modano, who had served as the incumbent since 2003. On March 13, 2007, Modano scored his 500th career NHL goal, making him only the 39th player and second American to ever reach the milestone. On March 17, Modano scored his 502nd and 503rd NHL goals, breaking the record for an American-born player, previously held by Joe Mullen.

On January 24, 2007, the NHL All-Star Game was held at American Airlines Center. Defenseman Philippe Boucher and goaltender Marty Turco would represent the Stars as part of the Western Conference All-Star roster. The Stars qualified for the playoffs as the sixth seed in the Western Conference and squared off against the Vancouver Canucks in the first round. Marty Turco delivered three shutout wins in games 2, 5 and 6, but the Stars&#x27; offense failed to capitalize and they lost the series in seven games, the third season in a row that they lost in the first round.

In the 2007 NHL entry draft, the Stars drafted the relatively unknown Jamie Benn 129th overall. After starting a lackluster 7–7–3 in the 2007–08 season, general manager Doug Armstrong was fired by the team. He was replaced by an unusual &quot;co-general manager&quot; arrangement of former assistant GM Les Jackson and former Stars player Brett Hull. On November 8, 2007, Mike Modano became the top American born point scorer of all time, finishing off a shorthanded breakaway opportunity on San Jose Sharks goaltender Evgeni Nabokov.

On February 26, 2008, just hours before the trade deadline, the Stars traded for All-Star center Brad Richards from the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for backup goaltender Mike Smith and forwards Jussi Jokinen and Jeff Halpern. The Stars rallied to a final record of 45–30–7 and qualified for the playoffs as the fifth seed, matching up with the defending Stanley Cup champion, the Anaheim Ducks, in the first round. After a rough end to the season, only winning two games in March of that year, the Stars shocked everyone by winning the first two games of the series in Anaheim, and then would go on to finish off the Ducks in six games, their first playoff series win since 2003. In the second round, the Stars matched up with the Pacific Division champion San Jose Sharks. Once again, the Stars surprised everyone by winning the first two games of the series on the road. In game 2, Brad Richards tied an NHL record by recording four points in the third period. The Stars would then take a 3–0 series lead after a Mattias Norstrom overtime goal in game 3. After the Sharks staved off elimination with back to back wins in games 4 and 5, captain Brenden Morrow finished the Sharks off in game 6 with a powerplay goal nearly halfway into the fourth overtime, a moment nicknamed &quot;Cinco De Morrow&quot; by Stars fans as game 6 ended in the early morning hours of the Cinco De Mayo holiday on May 5. The win sent the Stars to their first conference finals since 2000, where they met the powerhouse Detroit Red Wings. After falling behind in the series 3–0, the Stars made a series of it winning games 4 and 5 before ultimately being ousted by the Red Wings in six games.

====2008–2011: Team difficulties and transition seasons====

The 2008–09 season saw the early loss for the season of captain Brenden Morrow to an ACL tear. Off-season free agent acquisition Sean Avery caused a media uproar over comments he made to a Canadian reporter about ex-girlfriend Elisha Cuthbert and her relationship with Calgary Flames&#x27; defenseman Dion Phaneuf before a game in Calgary. The incident forced the team to suspend Avery for the season; he was later waived by the Stars. That incident, plus injuries to key players Brad Richards and Sergei Zubov, caused the Stars to tailspin to a 12th-place finish and the first missed playoffs for Dallas since 2002.

In the wake of the season, the Stars hired a new general manager, former player and alternate captain Joe Nieuwendyk. Hull and Jackson remained with the Stars, but were reassigned to new roles within the organization. Less than a week after he was hired, Nieuwendyk fired six-season head coach Dave Tippett on June 10, 2009, and hired Marc Crawford the next day as his replacement. Other off-season moves included the addition of Charlie Huddy as assistant coach in charge of defense and the promotions of Stu Barnes and Andy Moog to assistant coaches. The Stars&#x27; 2009–10 season was similar to the previous one. Inconsistent play and defensive struggles plagued the team throughout the season, as they failed to adjust to Marc Crawford&#x27;s new offensively-minded system, and owner Tom Hicks&#x27; financial troubles prevented the team from spending more than $45 million on payroll, over $11 million beneath the league salary cap. The Stars failed to win more than three games in a row all season, finished in last in the Pacific Division and repeated their 12th place conference finish from the year before with a record of 37–31–14 for 88 points, seven points back from the last playoff spot. This was the first time that they would miss the playoffs two seasons in a row since the Stars moved to Texas.
In the 2010 off-season, long-time goaltender Marty Turco was let go in favor of Kari Lehtonen to become the team&#x27;s number one goaltender for the future. In the Star&#x27;s last game of the season, away against the Minnesota Wild, Mike Modano was named the game&#x27;s first star and skated around the rink after the game wearing his North Stars uniform, receiving a rousing ovation. The Stars also let Mike Modano walk in free agency, the face of the franchise for the past two decades. Modano subsequently signed with his hometown team, the Detroit Red Wings while Turco joined the newly defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks. Winger Jere Lehtinen, who played his entire career with the Stars, announced his retirement. The team also made key acquisitions both in trades or in free agency, such as winger Adam Burish (who was on the 2010 Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks) and goaltender Andrew Raycroft. They also gave Jonathan Cheechoo a try-out, but he was cut and later signed with division rivals San Jose Sharks. To begin the 2010–11 season, the Stars won their first three games in a row, going on a three-game win streak for the first time since the 2008–09 season by beating the New Jersey Devils 4–3 in overtime in the season opener on October 8, 2010, New York Islanders 5–4 in a shootout on October 9, and against the Red Wings in the Stars&#x27; home opener on October 14, respectively. The home opener against the Red Wings featured an emotional return for Mike Modano, as the Stars crowd gave Modano a standing ovation as he was shown on the American Airlines Center jumbotron during a timeout in the game. After a hot start to the season, the Stars would continue to dominate within the first 50 games of the season, staying in both the Pacific Division lead and within the top three spots of the Western Conference. Through the first 50 games of the season up until the All-Star Break, they compiled a 30–15–5 record. However, after the All-Star Break the Stars went into a slump, going on numerous losing streaks which included one-goal losses and blowing late leads in numerous games. Through this though, the Stars still remained in the playoff picture. On the day of the trade deadline (February 28, 2011), the Stars traded up and comer James Neal and Matt Niskanen to the Pittsburgh Penguins in exchange for defenseman Alex Goligoski. Despite these late-season struggles, the Stars still had a chance to make the playoffs by winning their season finale on April 10, as they lost on the road at the Minnesota Wild 5–3 and a 42–29–11 record, costing them the last playoff spot despite the winning record and a vastly improved season overall compared to the previous two seasons, finishing 9th in the Western Conference only two points behind the defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks for the eighth and final playoff spot. After missing the playoffs for the third consecutive season, Dallas fired coach Marc Crawford after just one season with the club on April 12.

===2011–present: Arrival of Tom Gaglardi and &quot;Victory Green&quot; era===
====2011–2013: Continued team struggles====
To start the 2011 off-season, according to Darren Dreger of TSN, the team had been &quot;financially managed&quot; by the league for over a year. On June 16, 2011, Dallas hired Glen Gulutzan to be head coach, making him the sixth coach since the franchise&#x27;s move from Minnesota. On September 13, 2011, lenders voted to agree to have the Stars file for bankruptcy and sold at auction. On September 21, 2011, Mike Modano announced his retirement from the league. By October 22, 2011, competing bids to buy the club were due. Vancouver businessman and Kamloops Blazers owner Tom Gaglardi&#x27;s bid was the only one submitted, clearing the way for him to enter the final stages of taking over ownership of the team. Gaglardi&#x27;s purchase was approved by the NHL Board of Governors on November 18, 2011. A bankruptcy court judge approved the bid for an enterprise value of $240 million. First lien creditors got about 75 cents on the dollar. The Stars lost $38 million during their last fiscal year and $92 million over the last three seasons.

As the new owner, Gaglardi&#x27;s first move was bringing back former Stars President Jim Lites to once again take the reins as team president and CEO. To begin the 2011–12 season, the Stars once again jumped out to a fast start, going 23-17-1 through the first 41 games of the season. However, when the second half of the season began, the Stars slumped through the months of January and February, before getting hot again in late February. Throughout March, the Stars regained the lead of the Pacific Division. Beginning on March 26, 2012, the Stars embarked on a western road trip that saw them visit the Calgary Flames, Edmonton Oilers, Vancouver Canucks and San Jose Sharks. Going into the road trip, the Stars were in control of their own destiny, having to gain four points on the road trip to win their first Pacific Division title since the 2005–06 season. After the Stars lost 5–4 in Calgary to the Flames on March 26, the Stars beat the Oilers two nights later, 3–1. This would be their last win of the season, as the Stars were rolled over by the Canucks and Sharks the next two games. The Stars were eliminated from playoff contention on April 5 in a 2–0 loss to the playoff-bound Nashville Predators. Despite a winning record once again of 42–35–5 record, the team failed to qualify for the playoffs for the fourth consecutive year missing the 2012 playoffs by six points, setting a franchise record for consecutive seasons without a playoff appearance.
On July 1, 2012, the team signed free agent veterans Jaromir Jagr, Ray Whitney, and Aaron Rome. The next day, the Stars traded fan-favorite Steve Ott and Adam Pardy to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for center Derek Roy. When the 2012–13 NHL lockout ended in January 2013 and a 48-game season began the Stars embarked on an up-and-down season, though staying in the race for one of the eight Western Conference playoff spots most of the shortened season. In mid-season, forward Michael Ryder was traded to his former team, the Montreal Canadiens, for Erik Cole. This shocked many as Ryder has become an almost overnight fan-favorite to Stars fans in his time with Dallas thanks to his stellar 35-goal campaign the previous season in 2011–12. Before the trade deadline in early April, the Stars began to falter and team captain Brenden Morrow was traded to the Pittsburgh Penguins; Roy was traded to the Vancouver Canucks; Jagr to the Boston Bruins; and Tomas Vincour to the Colorado Avalanche to close out the NHL trade deadline, all in exchange for draft picks and prospects. After all of the trades at the trade deadline, the Stars&#x27; remaining young players pulled together to win six of their next eight games, thus propelling the Stars back into the 2013 playoff race. However, the Stars would drop their final five games, losing all of them while gaining only one point, eliminating them from playoff contention. The Stars had now missed the playoffs for the five straight seasons, continuing to set the all-time record for the franchise (dating back to the franchise&#x27;s history in Minnesota) for most consecutive seasons without a playoff appearance.

====2013–2020: Return to playoff contention and third appearance in the Stanley Cup Finals====
The day after their final regular season game of the 2012–13 season (a 3–0 loss to the Detroit Red Wings), the Stars fired general manager Joe Nieuwendyk. The next day, the Stars introduced their 11th all-time general manager, Jim Nill, the former assistant general manager of the Red Wings. On May 14, 2013, the coaching staff was also fired, and on May 31, 2013, Scott White was re-introduced as the director of hockey operations. The Stars hired Lindy Ruff as their new head coach on June 21, 2013. Nill made his first big trade as general manager when he acquired the former second overall draft pick from the 2010 NHL entry draft in Tyler Seguin, as well as Rich Peverley and Ryan Button from the Boston Bruins in exchange for Loui Eriksson, Reilly Smith, Matt Fraser and Joe Morrow. During the 2013 off-season, the league underwent a major realignment. Dallas&#x27; returned to a revamped Central Division, bringing them a much more broadcast-friendly schedule for divisional away games. The Stars had long lobbied for this, as they were unhappy with the large number of games they had to play on the road in the Pacific Time Zone as a member of the Pacific Division since the 1998–99 season. Under new head coach Lindy Ruff and led by 84-point and 79-point campaigns from Seguin and newly minted captain Jamie Benn respectively, the Stars narrowly made it to the 2014 playoffs, returning to the Playoffs for the first time since 2008 with a successful 40–31–11 record, finishing with 91 points, fifth in the Central Division and eighth in the Western Conference during the 2013–14 season. They lost in the first round of the playoffs to the top-seeded Anaheim Ducks in six games with a 5–4 overtime loss in game 6.
Nill made another big trade as general manager when he acquired Jason Spezza and Ludwig Karlsson from the Ottawa Senators in exchange for Alex Chiasson, Nick Paul, Alex Guptill and a second-round pick in the 2015 NHL entry draft. He also signed Senators player Ales Hemsky as a free agent on a three-year, $12 million contract on July 1, 2014. Despite these moves and a 92-point 41–31–10 campaign, the Stars finished with the second-lowest goaltender save percentage in the league during the 2014–15 season, which resulted in them failing to qualify for the 2015 playoffs due to their sixth-place finish in the Central Division and being seven points behind of the last playoff spot. The lone bright spot of the 2014–15 season was captain Jamie Benn winning the Art Ross Trophy. On April 11, 2015, Benn scored four points in the Stars&#x27; last regular season game to finish with 87 points on the season and win the Art Ross Trophy. His final point, a secondary assist with 8.5 seconds left in regulation in the game, allowed him to overtake New York Islanders centre and captain John Tavares for the award by one point.

In the 2015 off-season the Stars made a couple additions to the team, first trading with the Chicago Blackhawks for three-time Stanley Cup champion Patrick Sharp as well as defenseman Stephen Johns in exchange for Trevor Daley and Ryan Garbutt. The Stars also signed via free agency Sharp&#x27;s teammate from the Blackhawks Johnny Oduya to a two-year contract. In the 2015–16 season, the Stars won their first Central Division title since 1998 and posted the best regular season record in the Western Conference with a 50–23–9 record good enough for 109 points and the runner up to the Presidents&#x27; Trophy as the regular season champions, only behind the Washington Capitals. In the first round of the 2016 playoffs, they defeated the Minnesota Wild in six games. In the second round, they faced the St. Louis Blues in the playoffs for the first time since 2001, but lost the series in seven games.

The Stars finished with a 34–37–11 record in an injury-plagued 2016–17 season, missing the playoffs for the seventh time in the past nine seasons, missing the 2017 playoffs by 15 points. As a result, the team announced that head coach Lindy Ruff&#x27;s contract would not be renewed.

In the 2017 off-season the Stars lost goaltender Antti Niemi and forward Patrick Sharp in free agency.

Ken Hitchcock returned as head coach for the 2017–18 season, however once again the Stars missed the playoffs, this time narrowly missing having only missed by just three points in the standings after posting a winning record of 42–32–8 in the season.

Hitchcock retired after the season and was succeeded at the head coaching spot by Jim Montgomery. Montgomery&#x27;s first season as the Stars coach saw the team finish with a 43–32–7 record, good enough to return to the playoffs for the first time since 2016 as the first wild card team and seventh seed in the Western Conference. The Stars defeated the Central Division-champion and second-seeded Nashville Predators in a six-game series the first round, but fell to the sixth-seeded and eventual Stanley Cup champion St. Louis Blues in seven games, losing game 7 on the road in double-overtime by a score of 2–1 despite a 52-save performance by starting goaltender Ben Bishop.

Going into the 2019–20 season, the Stars added veteran forwards Joe Pavelski from the San Jose Sharks and Corey Perry of the Anaheim Ducks in free agency on July 1, 2019. To start the 2019–20 season, the Stars sputtered to a 1–7–1 start through their first nine games. However the Stars soon rallied and rattled off a 14–1–1 record between October 19 and November 25, which catapulted the Stars to an eventual season record of 37–24–8 through 69 games, as the regular season was suspended in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Barely two full months into his second season as Stars head coach, on December 10, the Stars fired head coach Jim Montgomery for &quot;unprofessional conduct inconsistent with the core values and beliefs of the Dallas Stars and the National Hockey League.&quot; General manager Jim Nill said the situation had come to light the previous weekend, and involved &quot;a material act of unprofessionalism&quot; egregious enough to demand Montgomery&#x27;s immediate firing. He did not offer specifics &quot;out of respect for everyone involved,&quot; only saying that it did not involve abuse of players or criminal conduct. Rick Bowness, who joined the team as an assistant coach a month after Montgomery&#x27;s hiring in May 2018, was named interim coach, while Derek Laxdal (who was the head coach of the Stars&#x27; AHL affiliate Texas Stars at the time) would be promoted to the assistant coaching position that was vacated by Bowness. On January 1, 2020, the Stars hosted the Nashville Predators in the 2020 Winter Classic at the Cotton Bowl in a rematch of the previous seasons&#x27; first-round playoff series, where the Stars prevailed with a 4–2 victory. This was the first NHL outdoor game for both teams and with a sold-out crowd of 85,630 at the Cotton Bowl, it was the second-most attended game in NHL history. The NHL returned from the March 2020 abrupt regular season stoppage three weeks before completion due to the COVID-19 pandemic a little under five months later in August 2020, where the Stars advanced to the playoffs. By virtue of having one of the top four highest point percentages in the Western Conference at the time the season was suspended, the Stars played in a round-robin tournament against three of the other top four teams in the Western Conference (Vegas Golden Knights, Colorado Avalanche, and St. Louis Blues) in order to determine the team&#x27;s seed for the playoffs; Dallas was ultimately seeded as the no. 3 seed in the Western Conference, entering them into a first-round series against the Calgary Flames. The Stars defeated the Flames in six games in the first round, and then defeated the Colorado Avalanche in a seven-game series that ended with a Joel Kiviranta hat-trick performance in game 7, which included his series-winning overtime goal. The Stars would defeat the Vegas Golden Knights in five games in the conference finals to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 2000, as the Stars would end a second consecutive series of the playoffs with a series-winning overtime goal when Denis Gurianov scored 3:36 into the first overtime period of game 5, winning the game 3–2 for the Stars. The Stars would go on to face the Eastern Conference champion Tampa Bay Lightning in the Stanley Cup Finals, the Stars won game 1 of the series by a 4–1 score, but would eventually fall to the Lightning in six games.

====2020–present: Back-to-back runs to the Western Conference Finals====
A month after the Stars&#x27; run to the 2020 Stanley Cup Finals, interim head coach Rick Bowness was named full-time head coach on October 29, 2020. In the following season, an injury-plagued campaign for the team (most notably with veteran forwards Tyler Seguin and Alexander Radulov along with veteran goaltender Ben Bishop) caused the Stars to finish the COVID-shortened 56-game schedule with a 23–19–14 record, finishing fifth in the Central Division with 60 points and missing the playoffs by four points marking the first time since 2018 where the team failed to qualify for a playoff spot.

The Stars would rebound in the 2021–22 season with a 98-point 46–30–6 record, good enough for the first wild-card spot and seventh seed in the Western Conference playoffs where they played the Pacific Division-champion and second-seeded Calgary Flames in the first round. They were defeated by the Flames in seven games, losing 3–2 in overtime of game 7 in Calgary. In game 7 the Stars took the game to overtime despite the Flames making twice as many shots and attempts as the Stars, with the Stars&#x27; young starting netminder Jake Oettinger recording 64 saves, the second-highest in playoff history behind only Kelly Hrudey&#x27;s 73 during the 1987 Easter Epic. The Stars were eliminated when Flames forward Johnny Gaudreau finally scored 15:09 into the first overtime period to end the game 3–2. After the team&#x27;s playoff elimination, head coach Rick Bowness announced that he would be resigning from his coaching duties with the team.

On June 21, 2022, the Stars hired Peter DeBoer to replace Bowness as their head coach, the 10th in franchise history since the team moved to Dallas in 1993. In the 2022 off-season the Stars added in free agency both forward Mason Marchment, and defenseman Colin Miller, however lost veteran defenseman John Klingberg to the Anaheim Ducks via free agency after eight seasons with the Stars. Led by their trio of veteran forwards Tyler Seguin, Joe Pavelski, and captain Jamie Benn, as well as the emergence of a young core of players including netminder Jake Oettinger, forwards Jason Robertson, Roope Hintz, and Wyatt Johnston, and defenseman Miro Heiskanen, the Stars completed their first season under Peter DeBoer with a 108-point 47–21–14 regular season record, just barely being beat out by the Colorado Avalanche by one point for the 2022–23 Central Division title. In only his third full season with the Stars and fourth season altogether, Jason Robertson set a new Dallas Stars record for total points in a season with 109 points, surpassing the previous record of 93 points set by Mike Modano in the Stars&#x27; first season in Dallas back in 1993–94. Robertson accomplished this feat in a game against the Arizona Coyotes on March 31, 2023, when he scored a goal as part of a Stars 5–2 win over the Coyotes, his goal was his record-breaking 94th point of the season and 100th goal of his career. Captain Jamie Benn also had a resurgent season, finishing with a 78-point season that included 33 goals and 45 assists recorded in all 82 contests played for a season nicknamed by both Stars fans and pundits alike as the &quot;Bennaissance&quot; for his first 75-plus point season since 2017–18. Along with trade deadline acquisitions Max Domi, and Evgenii Dadonov, the Stars entered the 2023 playoffs as the number two seed in the Central Division, matching them up in a first round series against the Minnesota Wild for their first playoff series versus one another since 2016. The Stars opened the playoffs at home with a double-overtime loss in game 1, as nearly midway through regulation of game 1 Joe Pavelski was knocked out with a concussion for the remainder of the first round series on a hit by Wild defenseman Matt Dumba. The Stars responded with a win in game 2 fueled by a Roope Hintz hat-trick performance, winning four of the next five games in the series after game 1 to eliminate the Wild in six games. The Stars then faced the Seattle Kraken in the second round of the playoffs. The Kraken, in only their second season of existence, had upset the defending Stanley Cup champion Colorado Avalanche in the first round in seven games. Pavelski returned to the Stars for game 1 of the series, scoring all four of the Stars&#x27; goals in the game, however the Stars lost by a score of 5–4 in overtime. The Stars would go on to win the series, winning game 7 at home by a score of 2–1, sending the Stars to the conference finals and setting up a rematch of the 2020 conference finals versus the Vegas Golden Knights. The Stars would immediately go down 3–0 in the series versus Vegas after dropping the first two games in overtime on the road and a 4–0 loss at home in game 3. In game 3 captain Jamie Benn was suspended for two games for an illegal cross-check on Vegas captain Mark Stone. Though the Stars would win games 4 and 5 without Benn and extend the series, the eventual Stanley Cup champion Golden Knights would ultimately defeat the Stars in six games with a 6–0 win in game 6.

The next season saw the Stars clinch their fourth Central Division title and finished as the top seed in the Western Conference and placed second in the League overall as the runner up for the Presidents&#x27; Trophy, only behind the New York Rangers. They defeated the defending Stanley Cup champion and eighth-seeded Vegas Golden Knights in seven games in the first round of the 2024 playoffs, then defeated the Colorado Avalanche in six games in the second round, and then lost to the Edmonton Oilers in six games in the conference finals.

==Team information==

===Arena===

When the Stars first moved from Minnesota, they played in Reunion Arena, which they shared with the National Basketball Association&#x27;s Dallas Mavericks. For hockey, Reunion Arena held 17,001 for NHL games. Throughout the hockey history of Reunion Arena, the arena was known for having one of the worst ice surfaces in the league, especially in its final days hosting the Stars. The Stars played at Reunion for eight years, from 1993 to 2001. Before the 2001–02 NHL season, both the Stars and the Mavericks moved into the new American Airlines Center, which is in the Victory Park neighborhood of Dallas, just north of Reunion Arena. American Airlines Center holds 18,584 for Stars and NHL games. On January 24, 2007, the AAC hosted the 2007 National Hockey League All-Star Game. The AAC and the Dallas Stars have won several local and NHL awards for the &quot;Best Fan Experience&quot;.

===Broadcast===
All Dallas Stars games are broadcast on radio on KTCK under a five-year deal announced in January 2009. KTCK replaced WBAP, which had broadcast games since the beginning of the 1994 season after KLIF has broadcast the first season in Dallas in 1993. Television coverage occurred primarily on Bally Sports Southwest, with KTXA (Channel 21) or BSSW+ broadcasting games when BSSW has a conflict.

The Stars, along with the Buffalo Sabres and Carolina Hurricanes are one of only three NHL teams to simulcast the entirety of their games on TV and radio, which the team has done since their 1993 arrival in Dallas. The original broadcast team from 1993 to 1996 was Mike Fornes (play-by-play) and Ralph Strangis (color). Fornes left the broadcast team after the 1995–96 season; Strangis moved to the play-by-play role and color commentator Daryl &quot;Razor&quot; Reaugh was added. Although both the DFW area&#x27;s large media market and the team&#x27;s fan base could theoretically support separate television and radio broadcast teams, the Stars have continued simulcasting due to the popularity of &quot;Ralph and Razor&quot; (as they are known) among local listeners and viewers. Like other NHL teams, the Stars now have a live radio broadcast transmitted inside American Airlines Center on 97.5 FM. This is done because AM radio signals often cannot penetrate concrete and steel building exteriors.

Strangis retired from the booth after the 2014–15 season and was replaced by Dave Strader. In June 2016, Strader was diagnosed with cholangiocarcinoma, a fairly rare and aggressive form of cancer of the bile duct. To begin the 2016–17 season, Reaugh assumed play-by-play duties while Strader underwent treatment. Studio analyst and former Stars defenseman, Craig Ludwig, took over as color commentator. During a break in Strader&#x27;s treatment, he returned to the broadcast booth on February 18, 2017, a 4–3 overtime home win against the Tampa Bay Lightning. After the game, the Stars saluted Strader at center ice. On October 1, 2017, Strader died of cancer at age 62, leaving Reaugh and Ludwig to call the 2017–18 season. In July 2018, the Stars announced that Reaugh would return to color commentary for the 2018–19 season, with former studio host Josh Bogorad taking over the play-by-play.

On July 3, 2024, Diamond Sports Group, the owner of Bally Sports Southwest agreed to terminate their contract with the Stars. 5 days later, the Stars announced a deal with tech company A Parent Media Co, Inc., which would broadcast games on their streaming service &quot;Victory+&quot;.

===Logo and jersey design===

When they debuted in Dallas for the 1993–94 season, they kept the same uniform design from their later Minnesota days, except for the addition of the Texas logo patch on the shoulders. Away uniforms were black and home uniforms were white. With minor trim changes, a darker shade of green, and the word &#x27;Dallas&#x27; added in the 1994–95 season, they kept this original design until after their 1999 Stanley Cup-winning campaign. During this time the black pants included the word &quot;Dallas&quot; in gold run through the sides with green stripes.

In the 1997–98 season, the Stars introduced an alternate uniform that partly resembled those worn during the NHL All-Star Game at the time. The uniform was mostly green on top and black at the bottom, in a star-shaped design. For the 1999–2000 season, it became the primary away uniform, and was paired with a new home uniform featuring the same basic design, with white on top and green at the bottom. They kept this design until the 2006–07 season, during which the league switched color designations on home and away jerseys in the 2003–04 season. The striping was also eliminated on the black pants.

The Stars introduced an alternate jersey for the 2003–04 season that proved both embarrassing and unpopular to critics and fans. The uniform, which introduced a red as a new trim color, was black with a green bottom and featured a modern representation of the constellation Taurus topped by a trailing green star with red trail marks. However, fans and critics derided the uniform crest for its resemblance to a uterus, nicknaming it the &quot;Mooterus.&quot; The uniform was used until the 2005–06 season.

With the switch to the Reebok Edge uniform system, the jerseys underwent a complete redesign. The home black jersey, introduced for the 2007–08 season, features the player&#x27;s number on the chest and an arched &#x27;Dallas&#x27; in white with gold trim, with the primary logo on the shoulders. The primary away jerseys, which were used from 2007 to 2010 and was used as an alternate for its final season, had the Stars logo crest in front and the uniform number on the top right, with the Texas alternate logo on the shoulders. An alternate white jersey based on the home black jersey was introduced for the 2008–09 season; they became the regular away uniforms for the 2010–11 season. The lettering is in green with gold and black trim. Both uniforms were used until the 2012–13 season.

A new logo and uniforms were introduced for the 2013–14 season. Silver replaced gold as the tertiary color, while green (in a new shade called &quot;Victory Green,&quot; similar to the old North Stars&#x27; shade of green) was reintroduced as a primary uniform color. The new logo features the letter D centering a star, symbolizing Dallas&#x27; nickname as &quot;The Big D.&quot; The home uniforms are in green with black and white striping, while the away uniforms are in white with a green shoulder yoke, and black and green striping. The inner collar features the team name on the home uniforms, and the city name on the away uniforms. The secondary logo, with the primary inside a roundel with the team name, is featured in the shoulders. This design was retained once Adidas took over as uniform supplier prior to the 2017–18 season, the only exception being &quot;Victory Green&quot; replacing both &quot;Stars&quot; and &quot;Dallas&quot; on the inner collar of the home and away uniforms respectively.

The Stars unveiled a special edition uniform for the 2020 Winter Classic, featuring a design inspired from the defunct Dallas Texans of the United States Hockey League (USHL). The uniform features the word &quot;Stars&quot; (with the star substituting for the letter A) in the middle of the big letter &quot;D&quot;. Both are in white with silver trim. A silhouette of the state of Texas in silver and green trim with the letter &quot;D&quot; inside adorns the left sleeve.

For the 2020–21 season, the Stars added a black alternate uniform with neon green accents (presumably in honor of the Bank of America Plaza tower in downtown Dallas) featuring the alternate &quot;Texas D&quot; logo in front. A neon green star is added on the left side of the collar, symbolizing Texas&#x27; &quot;Lone Star State&quot; nickname. Numbers are in 3D-accented black with neon green accents. The Stars also released a &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniform for the 2020–21 season in collaboration with Adidas, bringing back the 1999–2007 uniform design but with the current color scheme in place of the original green, gold and black colors. The design also featured white pants. A second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate was released in the 2022–23 season, using the 1993–94 black uniform but with the current Victory Green and silver stripes.

===Minor league affiliates===

The Dallas Stars are presently affiliated with two minor league teams. The Texas Stars are the American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate of the Dallas Stars, who after becoming unaffiliated with the Iowa Stars in 2008, did not have an AHL affiliate for the 2008–09 season. The Texas Stars began play in the AHL in the 2009–10 season as an affiliate for Dallas. They are located in Cedar Park, Texas (northwest of Austin).

In addition to their AHL affiliate, the Dallas Stars are also affiliated with the Idaho Steelheads of the ECHL. Based in Boise, the Steelheads play home games at the Idaho Central Arena since 2003.

===Traditions===
Since the 2005–06 season, national anthems are performed by Celena Rae, a Fort Worth native and a former semifinalist on &quot;American Idol&quot;. During &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;, the fans yell the team name &quot;stars&quot; in the lines &quot;whose broad stripes and bright stars&quot; and &quot;O say does that star spangled banner yet wave&quot;. At games, as part of the entertainment, a Kahlenberg KDT-123 fog horn sounds after every Stars goal.

When the Stars take the ice at the beginning of each game, the song &quot;Puck Off&quot; (also referred to as the &quot;Dallas Stars Fight Song&quot;) by Pantera, is played in the arena. Members of the Dallas–Fort Worth–Arlington metropolitan area band had become friends with members of the Stars in the 1990s, especially following the team&#x27;s Stanley Cup win in 1999. &quot;Puck Off&quot; later also became the team&#x27;s goal celebration song. During the song, fans chant the only lyrics in the song, &quot;Dallas! Stars! Dallas! Stars!&quot; while pumping their fists in the air. After a penalty on the opposing team is announced, Stars public address announcer shouts, &quot;Your Dallas Stars are on...the...&quot; with the fans finishing &quot;power play!&quot;, immediately after which a clip of the Muse song &quot;Knights of Cydonia&quot; is played. After each Stars win, the Stevie Ray Vaughan (a Dallas native) and Double Trouble song &quot;The House is a Rockin&#x27;&quot; is played. A song of unknown origin called &quot;The Darkness Music&quot; is played after nearly every away goal. In recent years, fans have usually yelled, &quot;Who cares!?&quot; after away team goals are announced by the public address announcer.

The Stars have hosted a home game on New Year&#x27;s Eve every year since 1997, except in 2004, 2012, 2019, 2020 and 2021 (the first two being due to lockouts, the third being due to their participation in the 2020 Winter Classic, the fourth being due to the delayed off-season caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the fifth was postponed to February 13 due to a team-wide COVID-19 outbreak). For a period of time, the game coincided with the &quot;Big D NYE&quot; celebration (now on hiatus) on the south side of the arena in AT&amp;T Plaza.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Stars. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Dallas Stars seasons&quot;.

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, OTL = Overtime losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;

==Players and personnel==

===Current roster===
===Team captains===
&quot;Note: This list does not include former captains of the Minnesota North Stars and Oakland Seals&quot;

* Mark Tinordi, 1993–1995
* Neal Broten, 1995 
* Derian Hatcher, 1995–2003
* Mike Modano, 2003–2006
* Brenden Morrow, 2006–2013
* Jamie Benn, 2013–present
===Hall of Famers===
The Dallas Stars presently acknowledge an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame. Hall of Fame inductees acknowledged by the Stars include 13 former players and four builders of the sport. The four individuals recognized as builders by the Hall of Fame includes former Stars executives, and head coaches. The tenure of five player inductees, and the three builders acknowledged by the Stars occurred when the franchise was based in Minnesota (1967–1993). Mike Modano is the only Hall of Fame inductee that played with the franchise before and after its relocation to Dallas.

In addition to players and builders, the Stars also acknowledge an affiliation Hockey Hall of Fame inductee Dave Strader. Providing play-by-play for the Stars, he was a recipient of the Hall of Fame&#x27;s Foster Hewitt Memorial Award for his contributions in hockey broadcasting.

Players
Builders
* Herb Brooks
* Walter Bush
* Ken Hitchcock
* John Mariucci

===Retired numbers===
Notes:
* The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.

===Dallas Stars Hall of Fame===
2022
* Derian Hatcher
* Bob Gainey

2023
* Ed Belfour
* Ken Hitchcock

2024
* Brenden Morrow
* Jim Lites

===First-round draft picks===

&quot;Note: This list does not include selections of the Minnesota North Stars.&quot;

* 1993: Todd Harvey (9th overall)
* 1994: Jason Botterill (20th overall)
* 1995: Jarome Iginla (11th overall)
* 1996: Ric Jackman (5th overall)
* 1997: Brenden Morrow (25th overall)
* 2000: Steve Ott (25th overall)
* 2001: Jason Bacashihua (26th overall)
* 2002: Martin Vagner (26th overall)
* 2004: Mark Fistric (28th overall)
* 2005: Matt Niskanen (28th overall)
* 2006: Ivan Vishnevskiy (27th overall)
* 2009: Scott Glennie (8th overall)
* 2010: Jack Campbell (11th overall)
* 2011: Jamie Oleksiak (14th overall)
* 2012: Radek Faksa (13th overall)
* 2013: Valeri Nichushkin (10th overall)
* 2013: Jason Dickinson (29th overall)
* 2014: Julius Honka (14th overall)
* 2015: Denis Guryanov (12th overall)
* 2016: Riley Tufte (25th overall)
* 2017: Miro Heiskanen (3rd overall) and Jake Oettinger (26th overall)
* 2018: Ty Dellandrea (13th overall)
* 2019: Thomas Harley (18th overall)
* 2020: Mavrik Bourque (30th overall)
* 2021: Wyatt Johnston (23rd overall)
* 2022: Lian Bichsel (18th overall)
* 2024: Emil Hemming (29th overall)
==Awards and trophies==
Stanley Cup
* 1998–99

Presidents&#x27; Trophy
* 1997–98, 1998–99

Clarence S. Campbell Bowl
* 1998–99, 1999–2000, 2019–20

Art Ross Trophy
* Jamie Benn: 2014–15

Conn Smythe Trophy
* Joe Nieuwendyk: 1998–99

Frank J. Selke Trophy
* Jere Lehtinen: 1997–98, 1998–99, 2002–03

Lester Patrick Trophy
* Neal Broten: 1997–98

Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award
* Ed Belfour: 1999–2000
* Marty Turco: 2000–01, 2002–03

William M. Jennings Trophy
* Ed Belfour and Roman Turek: 1998–99
==Franchise records==

===Scoring leaders===

These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise (Minnesota and Dallas) history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Stars player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;




===Individual records===

* Most goals in a season: Dino Ciccarelli; Brian Bellows, 55 (1981–82; 1989–90)
* Most assists in a season: Neal Broten, 76 (1985–86)
* Most points in a season: Bobby Smith, 114 (1981–82)
* Most penalty minutes in a season: Basil McRae, 378 (1987–88)
* Most points in a season, defenseman: Miro Heiskanen, 79 (2022-23)
* Most points in a season, rookie: Neal Broten, 98 (1981–82)
* Most goals in a season, rookie: Neal Broten, 38 (1981–82)*
* Most wins in a season: Marty Turco, 41 (2005–06)
* Most shutouts in a season: Marty Turco, 9 (2003–04)
==See also==
* List of Dallas Stars head coaches
* List of Dallas Stars players
* List of Minnesota North Stars/Dallas Stars general managers

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="4" end="16" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="36" end="46" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="61" end="67" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="94" end="116" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="142" end="158" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="166" end="184" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859962" start="206" end="219" title="Reunion Arena" label="Reunion Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038331" start="223" end="238" title="downtown Dallas" label="downtown Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q463345" start="279" end="303" title="American Airlines Center" label="American Airlines Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927526" start="328" end="340" title="Victory Park, Dallas" label="Victory Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="384" end="400" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="408" end="439" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="476" end="494" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="1967 NHL expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="502" end="523" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q490737" start="534" end="556" title="Bloomington, Minnesota" label="Bloomington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="569" end="587" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978–79 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q546839" start="614" end="630" title="Cleveland Barons (NHL)" label="Cleveland Barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="770" end="788" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="879" end="904" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="955" end="973" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="1008" end="1019" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595127" start="1023" end="1027" title="1999 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q693585" start="1041" end="1055" title="Joe Nieuwendyk" label="Joe Nieuwendyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="1064" end="1082" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971881" start="1260" end="1264" title="1981 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968220" start="1266" end="1270" title="1991 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595127" start="1272" end="1276" title="1999 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597868" start="1278" end="1282" title="2000 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359910" start="1288" end="1292" title="2020 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="1305" end="1316" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688049" start="1339" end="1372" title="United States Hockey Hall of Fame" label="United States Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q440363" start="1383" end="1393" title="Brett Hull" label="Brett Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q928110" start="1475" end="1485" title="Ed Belfour" label="Ed Belfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q368568" start="1517" end="1528" title="Mike Modano" label="Mike Modano"/>
<link wikidata="Q904173" start="1615" end="1621" title="Derian Hatcher" label="Derian"/>
<link wikidata="Q632863" start="1626" end="1639" title="Kevin Hatcher" label="Kevin Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="1754" end="1758" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="1788" end="1806" title="1967 NHL Expansion" label="six-team expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307175" start="1890" end="1900" title="Met Center" label="Met Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q490737" start="1911" end="1933" title="Bloomington, Minnesota" label="Bloomington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="2087" end="2091" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q546839" start="2125" end="2141" title="Cleveland Barons (NHL)" label="Cleveland Barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q849315" start="2156" end="2179" title="California Golden Seals" label="California Golden Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539971" start="2191" end="2201" title="George Gund III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585215" start="2206" end="2217" title="Gordon Gund" label="Gordon Gund"/>
<link wikidata="Q351894" start="2552" end="2566" title="Adams Division" label="Adams Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2713" end="2724" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="2735" end="2739" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="2778" end="2796" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="2976" end="2998" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="3071" end="3090" title="expansion team" label="expansion franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="3096" end="3111" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="3292" end="3306" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381617" start="3318" end="3330" title="Norman Green" label="Norman Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="3471" end="3490" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="4091" end="4098" title="Anaheim" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q774138" start="4140" end="4152" title="Honda Center" label="Honda Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="4298" end="4321" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="4396" end="4419" title="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim" label="Mighty Ducks of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="4626" end="4640" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="4719" end="4733" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q736932" start="4746" end="4760" title="Roger Staubach" label="Roger Staubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4850" end="4872" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="5325" end="5344" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="5349" end="5365" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859962" start="5479" end="5492" title="Reunion Arena" label="Reunion Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="5552" end="5583" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="5591" end="5607" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="5836" end="5850" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="5979" end="5995" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="6003" end="6021" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q115175" start="6076" end="6091" title="Norris Division" label="Norris Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="6096" end="6115" title="Campbell Conference" label="Campbell Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="6268" end="6285" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="6325" end="6336" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q368568" start="6582" end="6593" title="Mike Modano" label="Mike Modano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589741" start="6808" end="6821" title="1994 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1994 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="6882" end="6897" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="6971" end="6988" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053826" start="7357" end="7378" title="Central Hockey League" label="Central Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157987" start="7410" end="7428" title="Dallas Black Hawks" label="Dallas Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438834" start="7437" end="7454" title="Fort Worth Texans" label="Fort Worth Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590028" start="7733" end="7753" title="1994–95 NHL lockout" label="owners&amp;#x27; lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890891" start="7780" end="7792" title="Mark Tinordi" label="Mark Tinordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249107" start="7804" end="7815" title="Rick Mrozik" label="Rick Mrozik"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="7823" end="7842" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q632863" start="7871" end="7884" title="Kevin Hatcher" label="Kevin Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="7917" end="7928" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="8010" end="8027" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q904173" start="8081" end="8095" title="Derian Hatcher" label="Derian Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q553219" start="8521" end="8530" title="Tom Hicks" label="Tom Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="8553" end="8567" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="8668" end="8686" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="8716" end="8737" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537010" start="8745" end="8759" title="Guy Carbonneau" label="Guy Carbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q887935" start="8878" end="8888" title="Bob Gainey" label="Bob Gainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q693585" start="8907" end="8921" title="Joe Nieuwendyk" label="Joe Nieuwendyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="8931" end="8945" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q873622" start="8962" end="8974" title="Corey Millen" label="Corey Millen"/>
<link wikidata="Q456708" start="8979" end="8992" title="Jarome Iginla" label="Jarome Iginla"/>
<link wikidata="Q974626" start="9211" end="9227" title="Michigan K-Wings" label="Michigan K-Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="9239" end="9252" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q818115" start="9345" end="9357" title="Benoît Hogue" label="Benoit Hogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="9367" end="9386" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q743807" start="9621" end="9633" title="Darryl Sydor" label="Darryl Sydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="9643" end="9660" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q606201" start="9673" end="9685" title="Sergei Zubov" label="Sergei Zubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="10060" end="10076" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592812" start="10198" end="10206" title="1997 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="10300" end="10315" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115397" start="10343" end="10356" title="Grant Ledyard" label="Grant Ledyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342380" start="10397" end="10410" title="Todd Marchant" label="Todd Marchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q526778" start="10488" end="10497" title="Andy Moog" label="Andy Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q928110" start="10561" end="10571" title="Ed Belfour" label="Ed Belfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="10694" end="10712" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="10869" end="10883" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q923505" start="11008" end="11018" title="Mike Keane" label="Mike Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="11044" end="11060" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="11103" end="11126" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604309" start="11285" end="11306" title="goals against average" label="goals against average"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="11352" end="11367" title="Jennings Trophy" label="Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357465" start="11383" end="11397" title="Martin Brodeur" label="Martin Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="11405" end="11422" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593997" start="11470" end="11495" title="1998 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1998 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q995059" start="11595" end="11610" title="Bryan Marchment" label="Bryan Marchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="11902" end="11913" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q440363" start="12381" end="12391" title="Brett Hull" label="Brett Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="12505" end="12525" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="12669" end="12685" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="13066" end="13081" title="William M. Jennings Trophy" label="Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595125" start="13174" end="13187" title="1999 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1999 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q539344" start="13196" end="13209" title="Jere Lehtinen" label="Jere Lehtinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="13231" end="13252" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="13759" end="13777" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783598" start="14210" end="14228" title="List of Stanley Cup champions" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="14370" end="14384" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q312695" start="15131" end="15144" title="Dominik Hašek" label="Dominik Hasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590671" start="16075" end="16079" title="1995 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968222" start="16084" end="16088" title="2003 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q935070" start="16221" end="16232" title="Kirk Muller" label="Kirk Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173279" start="16234" end="16245" title="Dave Manson" label="Dave Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q541204" start="16250" end="16262" title="Sylvain Côté" label="Sylvain Cote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597868" start="16835" end="16853" title="2000 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="16874" end="16891" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q706130" start="17206" end="17218" title="Jason Arnott" label="Jason Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="17392" end="17406" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="17728" end="17736" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q463345" start="18007" end="18031" title="American Airlines Center" label="American Airlines Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="18040" end="18054" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431613" start="18232" end="18243" title="Rick Wilson (ice hockey)" label="Rick Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q639539" start="18418" end="18437" title="Jamie Langenbrunner" label="Jamie Langenbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000678" start="18479" end="18490" title="Randy McKay" label="Randy McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q726452" start="18894" end="18906" title="Dave Tippett" label="Dave Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="19028" end="19042" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q578738" start="19099" end="19110" title="Marty Turco" label="Marty Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q221401" start="19315" end="19328" title="Vezina Trophy" label="Vezina Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968226" start="19566" end="19574" title="2003 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q963464" start="20025" end="20047" title="Jean-Sébastien Giguère" label="Jean-Sebastien Giguere"/>
<link wikidata="Q463191" start="20670" end="20685" title="Sandis Ozoliņš" label="Sandis Ozolinsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="20781" end="20795" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q936020" start="21581" end="21601" title="2004–05 NHL lockout" label="owners&amp;#x27; lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q377382" start="21628" end="21642" title="2004–05 NHL season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="21733" end="21740" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q537505" start="22130" end="22143" title="Jussi Jokinen" label="Jussi Jokinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316190" start="22886" end="22895" title="Joe Sakic" label="Joe Sakic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503954" start="23008" end="23023" title="Andrew Brunette" label="Andrew Brunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342513" start="23031" end="23043" title="Alex Tanguay" label="Alex Tanguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q947768" start="23679" end="23689" title="Ulf Dahlén" label="Ulf Dahlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037725" start="23773" end="23788" title="Willie Mitchell (ice hockey)" label="Willie Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344583" start="23804" end="23817" title="Johan Hedberg" label="Johan Hedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499733" start="23830" end="23841" title="free agents" label="free agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q155307" start="23851" end="23863" title="Niko Kapanen" label="Niko Kapanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="23882" end="23899" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="23944" end="23956" title="winger (ice hockey)" label="right winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q795013" start="23957" end="23968" title="Bill Guerin" label="Bill Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125614" start="24026" end="24039" title="Patrik Štefan" label="Patrik Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723676" start="24044" end="24058" title="Jaroslav Modrý" label="Jaroslav Modry"/>
<link wikidata="Q960614" start="24092" end="24104" title="Eric Lindros" label="Eric Lindros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378771" start="24106" end="24118" title="Jeff Halpern" label="Jeff Halpern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909465" start="24120" end="24135" title="Matthew Barnaby" label="Matthew Barnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q743807" start="24140" end="24152" title="Darryl Sydor" label="Darryl Sydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q930846" start="24186" end="24196" title="Mike Smith (ice hockey, born 1982)" label="Mike Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q762260" start="24306" end="24318" title="Mike Ribeiro" label="Mike Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910718" start="24334" end="24350" title="Mattias Norström" label="Mattias Norstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q931343" start="24403" end="24417" title="Joel Lundqvist" label="Joel Lundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q599507" start="24419" end="24429" title="Krys Barch" label="Krys Barch"/>
<link wikidata="Q632944" start="24431" end="24448" title="Nicklas Grossmann" label="Nicklas Grossmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q836377" start="24453" end="24465" title="Chris Conner" label="Chris Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q573587" start="24576" end="24590" title="Brenden Morrow" label="Brenden Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143193" start="24976" end="24986" title="Joe Mullen" label="Joe Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q243657" start="25014" end="25031" title="2007 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q463345" start="25044" end="25068" title="American Airlines Center" label="American Airlines Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q898410" start="25081" end="25097" title="Philippe Boucher" label="Philippe Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="25570" end="25590" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064791" start="25633" end="25643" title="Jamie Benn" label="Jamie Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="25700" end="25714" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300254" start="25732" end="25746" title="Doug Armstrong" label="Doug Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500529" start="25866" end="25877" title="Les Jackson (ice hockey)" label="Les Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q390913" start="26082" end="26096" title="Evgeni Nabokov" label="Evgeni Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q739793" start="26196" end="26209" title="Brad Richards" label="Brad Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q660447" start="27472" end="27485" title="Cinco De Mayo" label="Cinco De Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q909426" start="27841" end="27855" title="2008–09 NHL season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q573587" start="27901" end="27915" title="Brenden Morrow" label="Brenden Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q725726" start="27966" end="27976" title="Sean Avery" label="Sean Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q188500" start="28064" end="28079" title="Elisha Cuthbert" label="Elisha Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="28106" end="28120" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q739160" start="28138" end="28150" title="Dion Phaneuf" label="Dion Phaneuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="28168" end="28175" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q693585" start="28557" end="28571" title="Joe Nieuwendyk" label="Joe Nieuwendyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385565" start="28790" end="28803" title="Marc Crawford" label="Marc Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066910" start="28885" end="28898" title="Charlie Huddy" label="Charlie Huddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361701" start="28961" end="28971" title="Stu Barnes" label="Stu Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="29024" end="29038" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q578738" start="29814" end="29825" title="Marty Turco" label="Marty Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q585152" start="29849" end="29862" title="Kari Lehtonen" label="Kari Lehtonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q368568" start="30176" end="30187" title="Mike Modano" label="Mike Modano"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="30316" end="30333" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="30394" end="30412" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q348930" start="30592" end="30603" title="Adam Burish" label="Adam Burish"/>
<link wikidata="Q506880" start="30681" end="30696" title="Andrew Raycroft" label="Andrew Raycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353841" start="30713" end="30730" title="Jonathan Cheechoo" label="Jonathan Cheechoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="30825" end="30839" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="30981" end="30998" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="31056" end="31074" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q539743" start="32051" end="32061" title="James Neal (ice hockey)" label="James Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q929135" start="32066" end="32079" title="Matt Niskanen" label="Matt Niskanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390408" start="32134" end="32148" title="Alex Goligoski" label="Alex Goligoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="32313" end="32327" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="32377" end="32384" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224886" start="32957" end="32970" title="Darren Dreger" label="Darren Dreger"/>
<link wikidata="Q617903" start="32974" end="32977" title="The Sports Network" label="TSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530783" start="33091" end="33104" title="Glen Gulutzan" label="Glen Gulutzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="33442" end="33451" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723120" start="33468" end="33484" title="Kamloops Blazers" label="Kamloops Blazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381650" start="33491" end="33503" title="Tom Gaglardi" label="Tom Gaglardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344727" start="33771" end="33787" title="enterprise value" label="enterprise value"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196450" start="34049" end="34058" title="Jim Lites" label="Jim Lites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="34128" end="34142" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="34571" end="34585" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="34587" end="34602" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="34604" end="34621" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="34626" end="34641" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="35157" end="35176" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q295345" start="35484" end="35496" title="Jaromír Jágr" label="Jaromir Jagr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342855" start="35498" end="35509" title="Ray Whitney (ice hockey)" label="Ray Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q302601" start="35515" end="35525" title="Aaron Rome" label="Aaron Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q632055" start="35571" end="35580" title="Steve Ott" label="Steve Ott"/>
<link wikidata="Q350592" start="35585" end="35595" title="Adam Pardy" label="Adam Pardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200117" start="35641" end="35650" title="Derek Roy" label="Derek Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="35661" end="35680" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="2012–13 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="35717" end="35723" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336949" start="35909" end="35922" title="Michael Ryder" label="Michael Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q687420" start="35982" end="35991" title="Erik Cole" label="Erik Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="36365" end="36378" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q981770" start="36384" end="36397" title="Tomáš Vincour" label="Tomas Vincour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246603" start="36441" end="36459" title="NHL trade deadline" label="NHL trade deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="37279" end="37296" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689177" start="37419" end="37427" title="Jim Nill" label="Jim Nill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201872" start="37557" end="37568" title="Scott White (ice hockey)" label="Scott White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061825" start="37641" end="37651" title="Lindy Ruff" label="Lindy Ruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="37806" end="37826" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q772640" start="37830" end="37842" title="Tyler Seguin" label="Tyler Seguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530074" start="37855" end="37868" title="Rich Peverley" label="Rich Peverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453751" start="37873" end="37884" title="Ryan Button" label="Ryan Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="37894" end="37907" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q497781" start="37924" end="37937" title="Loui Eriksson" label="Loui Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588453" start="37939" end="37951" title="Reilly Smith" label="Reilly Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299450" start="37953" end="37964" title="Matt Fraser" label="Matt Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q431307" start="37969" end="37979" title="Joe Morrow" label="Joe Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="38087" end="38103" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q847142" start="38311" end="38328" title="Pacific Time Zone" label="Pacific Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061825" start="38412" end="38422" title="Lindy Ruff" label="Lindy Ruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064791" start="38503" end="38513" title="Jamie Benn" label="Jamie Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="38562" end="38575" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="38772" end="38786" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="38851" end="38864" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q537476" start="38978" end="38990" title="Jason Spezza" label="Jason Spezza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233977" start="38995" end="39010" title="Ludwig Karlsson" label="Ludwig Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="39020" end="39035" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716814" start="39052" end="39065" title="Alex Chiasson" label="Alex Chiasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22891534" start="39067" end="39076" title="Nick Paul" label="Nick Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="39122" end="39142" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q737730" start="39175" end="39186" title="Aleš Hemský" label="Ales Hemsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="39406" end="39420" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="39472" end="39485" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="39676" end="39691" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="39957" end="39975" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q537353" start="39995" end="40007" title="John Tavares" label="John Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="40130" end="40148" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336130" start="40185" end="40198" title="Patrick Sharp" label="Patrick Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229174" start="40221" end="40234" title="Stephen Johns (ice hockey)" label="Stephen Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q682629" start="40251" end="40263" title="Trevor Daley" label="Trevor Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588444" start="40268" end="40280" title="Ryan Garbutt" label="Ryan Garbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702376" start="40362" end="40374" title="Johnny Oduya" label="Johnny Oduya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="40406" end="40420" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="40624" end="40647" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="40697" end="40716" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="40777" end="40791" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="40842" end="40857" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190193" start="41005" end="41019" title="2016–17 NHL season" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q609762" start="41276" end="41287" title="Antti Niemi (ice hockey)" label="Antti Niemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="41331" end="41344" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="41376" end="41390" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q656533" start="41666" end="41680" title="Jim Montgomery (ice hockey)" label="Jim Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q62004249" start="41804" end="41812" title="2019 NHL playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q816445" start="42251" end="42261" title="Ben Bishop" label="Ben Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="42279" end="42293" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339283" start="42328" end="42340" title="Joe Pavelski" label="Joe Pavelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q948963" start="42370" end="42381" title="Corey Perry" label="Corey Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="42778" end="42795" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431531" start="43418" end="43430" title="Rick Bowness" label="Rick Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262134" start="43557" end="43569" title="Derek Laxdal" label="Derek Laxdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q682872" start="43627" end="43638" title="Texas Stars" label="Texas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764074" start="43802" end="43821" title="2020 NHL Winter Classic" label="2020 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136764" start="43829" end="43840" title="Cotton Bowl (stadium)" label="Cotton Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q95679142" start="44326" end="44334" title="2020 NHL playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="44488" end="44510" title="round-robin tournament" label="round-robin tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="44580" end="44600" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="44602" end="44620" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="44830" end="44844" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q16299903" start="44991" end="45005" title="Joel Kiviranta" label="Joel Kiviranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359910" start="45193" end="45211" title="2020 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597868" start="45237" end="45241" title="2000 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661749" start="45351" end="45365" title="Denis Gurianov" label="Denis Gurianov"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="45518" end="45537" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431531" start="45832" end="45844" title="Rick Bowness" label="Rick Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="45904" end="45920" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q772640" start="45998" end="46010" title="Tyler Seguin" label="Tyler Seguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q471377" start="46015" end="46032" title="Alexander Radulov" label="Alexander Radulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q816445" start="46063" end="46073" title="Ben Bishop" label="Ben Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="46377" end="46391" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q111476467" start="46508" end="46516" title="2022 NHL playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="46583" end="46597" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q28071130" start="46877" end="46891" title="Jake Oettinger" label="Jake Oettinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q304395" start="46962" end="46974" title="Kelly Hrudey" label="Kelly Hrudey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329882" start="47001" end="47012" title="Easter Epic" label="Easter Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94064" start="47060" end="47075" title="Johnny Gaudreau" label="Johnny Gaudreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q578705" start="47328" end="47340" title="Peter DeBoer" label="Peter DeBoer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80720760" start="47518" end="47533" title="Mason Marchment" label="Mason Marchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229782" start="47550" end="47562" title="Colin Miller (ice hockey, born 1992)" label="Colin Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q527382" start="47596" end="47610" title="John Klingberg" label="John Klingberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="47618" end="47631" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339283" start="47736" end="47748" title="Joe Pavelski" label="Joe Pavelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064791" start="47762" end="47772" title="Jamie Benn" label="Jamie Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83617451" start="47871" end="47886" title="Jason Robertson (ice hockey)" label="Jason Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229047" start="47888" end="47899" title="Roope Hintz" label="Roope Hintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107677619" start="47905" end="47919" title="Wyatt Johnston" label="Wyatt Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24827214" start="47936" end="47950" title="Miro Heiskanen" label="Miro Heiskanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="48093" end="48111" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q368568" start="48383" end="48394" title="Mike Modano" label="Mike Modano"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="48509" end="48524" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="48986" end="48993" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581451" start="49034" end="49042" title="Max Domi" label="Max Domi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209947" start="49048" end="49063" title="Evgenii Dadonov" label="Evgenii Dadonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q117074617" start="49087" end="49100" title="2023 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2023 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298541" start="49521" end="49531" title="Matt Dumba" label="Matt Dumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422166" start="49745" end="49759" title="Seattle Kraken" label="Seattle Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q473524" start="50591" end="50601" title="Mark Stone" label="Mark Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="50807" end="50818" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="50996" end="51019" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="51037" end="51053" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125220378" start="51184" end="51197" title="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2024 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="51291" end="51306" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859962" start="51440" end="51453" title="Reunion Arena" label="Reunion Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="51482" end="51513" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="51521" end="51537" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="51814" end="51818" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="51822" end="51826" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="51839" end="51857" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q463345" start="51911" end="51935" title="American Airlines Center" label="American Airlines Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927526" start="51953" end="51965" title="Victory Park, Dallas, Texas" label="Victory Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q243657" start="52122" end="52163" title="2007 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2007 National Hockey League All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231714" start="52339" end="52343" title="KTCK (AM)" label="KTCK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946973" start="52408" end="52412" title="WBAP (AM)" label="WBAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332720" start="52485" end="52489" title="KLIF (AM)" label="KLIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476971" start="52582" end="52604" title="Bally Sports Southwest" label="Bally Sports Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339327" start="52611" end="52615" title="KTXA" label="KTXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="52729" end="52748" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="52784" end="52793" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288130" start="52980" end="52994" title="Ralph Strangis" label="Ralph Strangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226220" start="53123" end="53153" title="Daryl Reaugh" label="Daryl &amp;quot;Razor&amp;quot; Reaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229940" start="53766" end="53778" title="Dave Strader" label="Dave Strader"/>
<link wikidata="Q124292" start="53821" end="53839" title="cholangiocarcinoma" label="cholangiocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q851111" start="53892" end="53901" title="bile duct" label="bile duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q367241" start="54046" end="54058" title="Craig Ludwig" label="Craig Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="54229" end="54248" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283911" start="54857" end="54865" title="Victory+ Sports Network" label="Victory+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="55054" end="55059" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595127" start="55304" end="55320" title="1999 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1999 Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="55569" end="55586" title="National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="56325" end="56338" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="56339" end="56345" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="56477" end="56483" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="56596" end="56602" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="58139" end="58145" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764074" start="58430" end="58449" title="2020 NHL Winter Classic" label="2020 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211426" start="58496" end="58509" title="Dallas Texans (USHL)" label="Dallas Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q499211" start="58517" end="58544" title="United States Hockey League" label="United States Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q806675" start="58970" end="58991" title="Bank of America Plaza (Dallas)" label="Bank of America Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="59371" end="59377" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="59800" end="59812" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q682872" start="59824" end="59835" title="Texas Stars" label="Texas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="59844" end="59866" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q252293" start="59945" end="59955" title="Iowa Stars" label="Iowa Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q682872" start="60023" end="60034" title="Texas Stars" label="Texas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q980040" start="60127" end="60144" title="Cedar Park, Texas" label="Cedar Park, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="60159" end="60165" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q954446" start="60251" end="60267" title="Idaho Steelheads" label="Idaho Steelheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="60275" end="60279" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="60290" end="60295" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946298" start="60335" end="60354" title="Idaho Central Arena" label="Idaho Central Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="60459" end="60469" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="60512" end="60525" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="60546" end="60570" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="61005" end="61012" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="61053" end="61080" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth–Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="61663" end="61667" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772948" start="61679" end="61697" title="Knights of Cydonia" label="Knights of Cydonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202937" start="61741" end="61759" title="Stevie Ray Vaughan" label="Stevie Ray Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083578" start="61782" end="61796" title="Double Trouble (band)" label="Double Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764074" start="62303" end="62322" title="2020 NHL Winter Classic" label="2020 Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62385" end="62402" title="2019–20 NHL season#Suspension of the regular season due to COVID-19" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q436460" start="62786" end="62814" title="List of Dallas Stars seasons" label="List of Dallas Stars seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="63069" end="63077" title="Captain (hockey)" label="captains"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="63085" end="63106" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q849315" start="63111" end="63124" title="Oakland Seals" label="Oakland Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890891" start="63134" end="63146" title="Mark Tinordi" label="Mark Tinordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="63160" end="63171" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q904173" start="63181" end="63195" title="Derian Hatcher" label="Derian Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q368568" start="63209" end="63220" title="Mike Modano" label="Mike Modano"/>
<link wikidata="Q573587" start="63234" end="63248" title="Brenden Morrow" label="Brenden Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064791" start="63262" end="63272" title="Jamie Benn" label="Jamie Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="63396" end="63415" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q368568" start="63790" end="63801" title="Mike Modano" label="Mike Modano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229940" start="64019" end="64031" title="Dave Strader" label="Dave Strader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="64043" end="64055" title="play-by-play" label="play-by-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473705" start="64117" end="64145" title="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award" label="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390562" start="64212" end="64223" title="Herb Brooks" label="Herb Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543829" start="64226" end="64237" title="Walter Bush" label="Walter Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="64240" end="64253" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644819" start="64256" end="64269" title="John Mariucci" label="John Mariucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="64318" end="64331" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240401" start="64378" end="64400" title="50th National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2000 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q904173" start="64442" end="64456" title="Derian Hatcher" label="Derian Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q887935" start="64459" end="64469" title="Bob Gainey" label="Bob Gainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q928110" start="64478" end="64488" title="Ed Belfour" label="Ed Belfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q359298" start="64491" end="64504" title="Ken Hitchcock" label="Ken Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q573587" start="64513" end="64527" title="Brenden Morrow" label="Brenden Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196450" start="64530" end="64539" title="Jim Lites" label="Jim Lites"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="64629" end="64650" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523956" start="64661" end="64665" title="1993 NHL entry draft" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484103" start="64667" end="64678" title="Todd Harvey" label="Todd Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122726" start="64695" end="64699" title="1994 NHL entry draft" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162900" start="64701" end="64716" title="Jason Botterill" label="Jason Botterill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960916" start="64734" end="64738" title="1995 NHL entry draft" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q456708" start="64740" end="64753" title="Jarome Iginla" label="Jarome Iginla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960907" start="64771" end="64775" title="1996 NHL entry draft" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136238" start="64777" end="64788" title="Ric Jackman" label="Ric Jackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493690" start="64805" end="64809" title="1997 NHL entry draft" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q573587" start="64811" end="64825" title="Brenden Morrow" label="Brenden Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="64843" end="64847" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q632055" start="64849" end="64858" title="Steve Ott" label="Steve Ott"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="64876" end="64880" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q898518" start="64882" end="64898" title="Jason Bacashihua" label="Jason Bacashihua"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="64916" end="64920" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q614332" start="64922" end="64935" title="Martin Vagner" label="Martin Vagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="64953" end="64957" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q930113" start="64959" end="64971" title="Mark Fistric" label="Mark Fistric"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="64989" end="64993" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q929135" start="64995" end="65008" title="Matt Niskanen" label="Matt Niskanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="65026" end="65030" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q629379" start="65032" end="65048" title="Ivan Vishnevskiy (ice hockey)" label="Ivan Vishnevskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="65066" end="65070" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q959566" start="65072" end="65085" title="Scott Glennie" label="Scott Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="65102" end="65106" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123835" start="65108" end="65121" title="Jack Campbell (ice hockey)" label="Jack Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="65139" end="65143" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161564" start="65145" end="65159" title="Jamie Oleksiak" label="Jamie Oleksiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="65177" end="65181" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416408" start="65183" end="65194" title="Radek Faksa" label="Radek Faksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="65212" end="65216" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365750" start="65218" end="65235" title="Valeri Nichushkin" label="Valeri Nichushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="65253" end="65257" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581459" start="65259" end="65274" title="Jason Dickinson" label="Jason Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="65292" end="65296" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236780" start="65298" end="65310" title="Julius Honka" label="Julius Honka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="65328" end="65332" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661749" start="65334" end="65348" title="Denis Guryanov" label="Denis Guryanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="65366" end="65370" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q24805802" start="65372" end="65383" title="Riley Tufte" label="Riley Tufte"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715164" start="65401" end="65405" title="2017 NHL entry draft" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q24827214" start="65407" end="65421" title="Miro Heiskanen" label="Miro Heiskanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28071130" start="65440" end="65454" title="Jake Oettinger" label="Jake Oettinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="65472" end="65476" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q55183445" start="65478" end="65491" title="Ty Dellandrea" label="Ty Dellandrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="65509" end="65513" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q65030543" start="65515" end="65528" title="Thomas Harley (ice hockey)" label="Thomas Harley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="65546" end="65550" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166499" start="65552" end="65566" title="Mavrik Bourque" label="Mavrik Bourque"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="65584" end="65588" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q107677619" start="65590" end="65604" title="Wyatt Johnston" label="Wyatt Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="65622" end="65626" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q81901906" start="65628" end="65640" title="Lian Bichsel" label="Lian Bichsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127690" start="65658" end="65662" title="2024 NHL entry draft" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q123380417" start="65664" end="65676" title="Emil Hemming" label="Emil Hemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="65716" end="65727" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="65730" end="65737" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="65739" end="65762" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="65765" end="65772" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="65774" end="65781" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q922116" start="65783" end="65808" title="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl" label="Clarence S. Campbell Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="65811" end="65818" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="65820" end="65829" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q61988221" start="65831" end="65838" title="2019–20 NHL season" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q705707" start="65840" end="65855" title="Art Ross Trophy" label="Art Ross Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064791" start="65858" end="65868" title="Jamie Benn" label="Jamie Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="65870" end="65877" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="65879" end="65897" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q693585" start="65900" end="65914" title="Joe Nieuwendyk" label="Joe Nieuwendyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="65916" end="65923" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q785207" start="65925" end="65946" title="Frank J. Selke Trophy" label="Frank J. Selke Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q539344" start="65949" end="65962" title="Jere Lehtinen" label="Jere Lehtinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="65964" end="65971" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="65973" end="65980" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="65982" end="65989" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q674192" start="65991" end="66012" title="Lester Patrick Trophy" label="Lester Patrick Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="66015" end="66026" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="66028" end="66035" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q748288" start="66037" end="66069" title="Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award" label="Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q928110" start="66072" end="66082" title="Ed Belfour" label="Ed Belfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="66084" end="66093" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q578738" start="66096" end="66107" title="Marty Turco" label="Marty Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="66109" end="66116" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889807" start="66118" end="66125" title="2002–03 NHL season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q508631" start="66127" end="66153" title="William M. Jennings Trophy" label="William M. Jennings Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928110" start="66156" end="66166" title="Ed Belfour" label="Ed Belfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387192" start="66171" end="66182" title="Roman Turek" label="Roman Turek"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="66184" end="66191" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q905708" start="66574" end="66589" title="Dino Ciccarelli" label="Dino Ciccarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q582276" start="66591" end="66604" title="Brian Bellows" label="Brian Bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="66610" end="66617" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="66619" end="66626" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="66656" end="66667" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="66673" end="66680" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q677081" start="66709" end="66720" title="Bobby Smith (ice hockey)" label="Bobby Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q810038" start="66772" end="66783" title="Basil McRae" label="Basil McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q590241" start="66790" end="66797" title="1987–88 NHL season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q24827214" start="66838" end="66852" title="Miro Heiskanen" label="Miro Heiskanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q960185" start="66902" end="66913" title="Neal Broten" label="Neal Broten"/>
<link wikidata="Q578738" start="67014" end="67025" title="Marty Turco" label="Marty Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889836" start="67031" end="67038" title="2005–06 NHL season" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760157" start="67085" end="67092" title="2003–04 NHL season" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q436461" start="67109" end="67142" title="List of Dallas Stars head coaches" label="List of Dallas Stars head coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q436459" start="67145" end="67173" title="List of Dallas Stars players" label="List of Dallas Stars players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381707" start="67176" end="67235" title="List of Minnesota North Stars/Dallas Stars general managers" label="List of Minnesota North Stars/Dallas Stars general managers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73136" wikidata="Q203008" url="?curid=73136" title="Los Angeles Kings">
<text>The Los Angeles Kings are a professional ice hockey team based in Los Angeles. The Kings compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Pacific Division in the Western Conference. The team was founded on June 5, 1967, after Jack Kent Cooke was awarded an NHL expansion franchise for Los Angeles on February 9, 1966, becoming one of the six teams that began play as part of the 1967 NHL expansion. The team plays its home games at Crypto.com Arena in downtown Los Angeles, their home since the start of the 1999–2000 season. Prior to that, the Kings played for 32 years at the Forum in Inglewood, California, a suburb of the Greater Los Angeles area.

During the 1970s and early 1980s, the Kings had many years marked by impressive play in the regular season only to be washed out by early playoff exits. Their highlights in those years included the strong goaltending of Rogie Vachon, and the &quot;Triple Crown Line&quot; of Charlie Simmer, Dave Taylor and Hall of Famer Marcel Dionne, who had a famous upset of the rising Edmonton Oilers in a 1982 playoff game known as the Miracle on Manchester. In 1988, the Kings traded with the Oilers to get their captain Wayne Gretzky, leading to a successful phase of the franchise that raised hockey&#x27;s popularity in Los Angeles, and helped elevate the sport&#x27;s profile in the American Sun Belt region. Gretzky, fellow Hall of Famer Luc Robitaille, and defenseman Rob Blake led the Kings to the franchise&#x27;s sole division title in 1990–91, and the Kings&#x27; first Stanley Cup Finals appearance in 1993, where they lost to the Montreal Canadiens.

After the 1993 Finals, the Kings entered financial problems, with a bankruptcy in 1995, which led to the franchise being acquired by Philip Anschutz (the owner of Anschutz Entertainment Group and the operators of Crypto.com Arena) and Edward P. Roski. A period of mediocrity ensued, with the Kings only resurging as they broke a six-year playoff drought in the 2009–10 season, with a team that included goaltender Jonathan Quick, defenseman Drew Doughty, and forwards Dustin Brown, Anze Kopitar, and Justin Williams. Under coach Darryl Sutter, who was hired early in the 2011–12 season, and with the acquisition of Jeff Carter, the Kings won two Stanley Cups in three years: 2012 over the New Jersey Devils, and 2014 over the New York Rangers, while Quick and Williams respectively won the Conn Smythe Trophy. The franchise has had mixed success since; to the present day, the Kings qualified for the playoffs for the last three consecutive seasons, but only five times in the last decade, never advancing past the first round.

==History==
===NHL expansion and the &quot;Forum Blue and Gold&quot; years (1967–1975)===

When the NHL decided to expand for the 1967–68 season amid rumblings that the Western Hockey League (WHL) was proposing to turn itself into a major league and compete for the Stanley Cup, Canadian entrepreneur Jack Kent Cooke paid the NHL $2 million to place one of the six expansion teams in Los Angeles. Following a fan contest to name the team, Cooke chose the name Kings because he wanted his club to take on &quot;an air of royalty,&quot; and picked the original team colors of purple (or &quot;Forum Blue&quot;, as it was later officially called) and gold because they were colors traditionally associated with royalty. This color scheme, first popularized by the NCAA&#x27;s LSU Tigers and later on the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League (NFL), was then adopted by the Los Angeles Lakers of the National Basketball Association (NBA), which Cooke also owned. Cooke wanted his new NHL team to play in the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena, home of the Lakers, but the Los Angeles Coliseum Commission, which managed the Sports Arena (and still manages the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum today), had already entered into an agreement with the WHL&#x27;s Los Angeles Blades (whose owners had also tried to land the NHL expansion franchise in Los Angeles) to play their games at the Sports Arena. Frustrated by his dealings with the Coliseum Commission, Cooke said, &quot;I am going to build my own arena. ... I&#x27;ve had enough of this balderdash.&quot;

Construction on Cooke&#x27;s new arena, the Forum, was not yet complete when the 1967–68 season began, so the Kings opened their first season at the Long Beach Arena in the neighboring city of Long Beach on October 14, 1967, defeating another expansion team, the Philadelphia Flyers, 4–2. The &quot;Fabulous Forum&quot; finally opened its doors on December 30, 1967, with the Kings being shut out by the Flyers, 2–0. While the first two seasons had the Kings qualifying for the playoffs, afterwards poor management led the Kings into hard times. The general managers established a history of trading away first-round draft picks, usually for veteran players, and attendance suffered during this time. Eventually the Kings made a few key acquisitions to resurge as a contender. By acquiring Toronto Maple Leafs winger Bob Pulford, who would later become the Kings&#x27; head coach, in 1970, Swedish center Juha Widing in a trade from the New York Rangers, and Montreal Canadiens goaltender Rogie Vachon in 1971, the Kings went from being one of the worst defensive teams in the league to one of the best, and in 1974 they returned to the playoffs.

===Marcel Dionne and the &quot;Triple Crown Line&quot; (1975–1988)===
After being eliminated in the first round of the playoffs in both 1973–74 and 1974–75, the Kings moved to significantly upgrade their offensive firepower when they acquired center Marcel Dionne from the Detroit Red Wings. Behind Dionne&#x27;s offensive prowess, the strong goaltending of Rogie Vachon, and the speed and scoring touch of forward Butch Goring, the Kings played two of their most thrilling seasons yet, with playoff match ups against the then-Atlanta Flames in the first round, and the Boston Bruins in the second round, both times being eliminated by Boston.
Bob Pulford left the Kings after the 1976–77 season after constant feuding with then owner Jack Kent Cooke, and General Manager Jake Milford decided to leave as well. This led to struggles in the 1977–78 season, where the Kings finished below .500 and were easily swept out of the first round by the Maple Leafs. Afterwards, Vachon became a free agent and sign with the Red Wings. The following season, Kings coach Bob Berry tried juggling line combinations, and Dionne found himself on a new line with two young, mostly unknown players: second-year right winger Dave Taylor and left winger Charlie Simmer, who had been a career minor-leaguer. Each player benefited from each other, with Simmer being the gritty player who battled along the boards, Taylor being the play maker, and Dionne being the natural goal scorer. This line combination, known as the &quot;Triple Crown Line&quot;, would go on to become one of the highest-scoring line combinations in NHL history. During the first three seasons of the Triple Crown Line, a period where Dr. Jerry Buss purchased the Kings, the Lakers, and the Forum for $67.5 million, the Kings were eliminated in the first round. The Kings regressed in 1981–82 finishing 17th overall, but this was nevertheless good enough to make the 1982 Stanley Cup playoffs under the new format put in place that year as they were still fourth in their division with 63 points, the lowest point total of any playoff team but ahead of the Colorado Rockies, the worst team in the league that season. However, Los Angeles managed to upset the second overall Edmonton Oilers, who finished 48 points ahead of them during the season and were led by the young Wayne Gretzky. With two victories in Edmonton and one at the Forum – dubbed &quot;Miracle on Manchester&quot;, where the Kings managed to erase a 5–0 deficit in the third period and eventually win in overtime – the Kings upset the vaunted Oilers, but they wound up eliminated by eventual finalists Vancouver Canucks in five games.

The 1982 off-season saw the moribund Rockies move to East Rutherford, New Jersey. To keep the divisions geographically and numerically balanced, the renamed New Jersey Devils were re-aligned to the Patrick Division while the Winnipeg Jets took their place in the Smythe Division. It was immediately apparent that the Kings, now the lone American team in the division, would have a much more difficult time staying out of last place since Winnipeg, after struggling for their first two seasons after moving over from the WHA, had already improved to a .500 record the previous season. Despite Dionne&#x27;s leadership, the Kings missed the playoffs in the next two seasons.

The Kings managed to record a winning record in 1984–85 under coach Pat Quinn, although it was still only good enough for fourth place. This time, the Kings were quickly swept out of the playoffs by the Oilers on their way to capturing their second-straight Stanley Cup championship. After a losing season in 1985–86, the Kings saw two important departures during 1986–87, as Quinn signed a contract in December to become coach and general manager of the Vancouver Canucks with just months left on his Kings contract – eventually being suspended by NHL President John Ziegler for creating a conflict of interest - and Dionne left the franchise in March in a trade to the New York Rangers. Despite these shocks, a young squad that would lead the Kings into the next decade, including star forwards Bernie Nicholls, Jimmy Carson, Luc Robitaille, and defenseman Steve Duchesne, started to flourish under head coach Mike Murphy, who played thirteen season with the Kings and was their captain for seven years, and his replacement Robbie Ftorek. The Kings made the playoffs for two seasons, but they were unable to get out of the first round given the playoff structuring forced them to play either the Oilers or the equally powerful Calgary Flames en route to the conference finals. In all, the Kings faced either the Oilers or the Flames in the playoffs four times during the 1980s.

===The Gretzky era (1988–1995)===

In 1987, coin collector Bruce McNall purchased the Kings from Buss and turned the team into a Stanley Cup contender almost overnight. After changing the team colors to silver and black, McNall acquired the league&#x27;s best player, Wayne Gretzky, in a blockbuster trade with the Edmonton Oilers on August 9, 1988. The trade rocked the hockey world, especially north of the border, where Canadians mourned the loss of a player they considered a national treasure. Gretzky&#x27;s arrival generated much excitement about hockey and the NHL in Southern California, and the ensuing popularity of the Kings is credited for the arrival of another team in the region (the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, renamed the Anaheim Ducks in 2006), as well as the arrival of a new team in Northern California (the San Jose Sharks) and the NHL&#x27;s expanding or moving into other Sun Belt cities such as Dallas, Phoenix, Tampa, Miami, Nashville, and Las Vegas.

In Gretzky&#x27;s first season with the Kings, he led the team in scoring with 168 points on 54 goals and 114 assists and won his ninth Hart Memorial Trophy as the league&#x27;s Most Valuable Player. The fourth overall Kings eliminated Gretzky&#x27;s old team, the Oilers, in the first round of the 1989 playoffs before being swept out in the second round by the eventual Stanley Cup champion Flames. Clashes between Gretzky and head coach Robbie Ftorek led to Ftorek&#x27;s dismissal, and he was replaced by Tom Webster. The next season, where Gretzky became the league&#x27;s all-time leading scorer, was the inverse of its predecessor, with the Kings eliminating the defending champion Flames before falling to the eventual champion Oilers. Gretzky spearheaded the Kings to their first regular season division title in franchise history in the 1990–91 season, but the heavily favored Kings lost a close series against Edmonton in the second round that saw four games go into overtime. After a third straight elimination by the Oilers in 1992, Webster was fired. General manager Rogie Vachon was moved to a different position in the organization and named Nick Beverley as his successor, and Beverley hired Barry Melrose, then with the American Hockey League&#x27;s Adirondack Red Wings, as head coach.

Melrose would help the Kings reach new heights in the 1992–93 season, even if Gretzky missed 39 games with a career-threatening herniated thoracic disk. Led by Luc Robitaille, who served as captain in Gretzky&#x27;s absence, the Kings finished with a 39–35–10 record (88 points), clinching third place in the Smythe Division. Heavily contested series in the 1993 playoffs had the Kings eliminating the Flames, Canucks and Leafs en route to their first berth in the Stanley Cup Finals. In the 1993 Stanley Cup Finals, the Kings faced the Montreal Canadiens. They won the first game 4–1, but late in Game 2, with the Kings leading by a score of 2–1, Canadiens coach Jacques Demers requested a measurement of Kings defenseman Marty McSorley&#x27;s stick blade. His suspicions proved to be correct, as the curve of blade was too great, and McSorley was penalized. The Canadiens pulled their goaltender, Patrick Roy, giving them a two-man advantage, and Eric Desjardins scored on the resulting power play to tie the game. Montreal went on to win the game in overtime on another goal by Desjardins, and the Kings never recovered. They dropped the next two games in overtime, and lost Game 5, 4–1, giving the Canadiens their league-leading 24th Stanley Cup in franchise history.

===Bankruptcy, move to the Staples Center, and rebuild (1995–2009)===
The years after the 1993 playoff run were tough for the Kings, as a sluggish start in the 1993–94 season cost them a playoff berth, their first absence from the postseason since 1986. However, Gretzky provided a notable highlight during that year on March 23, 1994, when he scored his 802nd career goal to pass Gordie Howe as the NHL&#x27;s all-time leading goal-scorer. At the same time, McNall defaulted on a loan from Bank of America, who threatened to force the Kings into bankruptcy unless he sold the team. After the federal government launched an investigation into his financial practices, McNall finally sold the club to IDB Communications founder Jeffrey Sudikoff and former Madison Square Garden president Joseph Cohen. It later emerged that McNall&#x27;s free-spending ways put the Kings in serious financial trouble; at one point, Cohen and Sudikoff were even unable to meet player payroll, and were ultimately forced into bankruptcy in 1995. They were forced to trade many of their stronger players, and the middling results led to Gretzky demanding a trade to a legitimate Stanley Cup contender. He would be dealt to the St. Louis Blues in 1996.
On October 6, 1995, one day before the 1995–96 season opener, a bankruptcy court approved the purchase of the Kings by Philip Anschutz and Edward P. Roski for $113.5 million. The subsequent rebuild saw the Kings only return to the playoffs in 1998, led by captain Rob Blake and players like Jozef Stumpel and Glen Murray, where the highly skilled St. Louis Blues swept the team in four games. The Kings suffered through an injury-plagued season in 1998–99 as they finished last in the Pacific Division and missed the playoffs with a 32–45–5 record, leading to the dismissal of head coach Larry Robinson.

The Kings, along with the Los Angeles Lakers, made an even bigger move in 1999, as they left The Forum after 32 seasons and moved to the Staples Center in downtown Los Angeles, which was built by Anschutz and Roski. Staples Center was a state-of-the-art arena, complete with luxury suites and all modern amenities. With a new home, a new coach (Andy Murray), a potential 50-goal scorer in the fold in Zigmund Palffy, and players such as Blake, Robitaille, Murray, Stumpel, Donald Audette, Ian Laperrière, and Mattias Norstrom, the Kings improved dramatically, finishing the season the 1999–2000 season with a 39–31–12–4 record (94 points), good for second place in the Pacific Division. While Audette would struggle under the Kings&#x27; system and was unhappy as the number two right wing, most of the new Kings like Bryan Smolinski and Palffy would find success under Andy Murray. But in the 2000 playoffs, the Kings were once again dispatched in the first round, this time by the Detroit Red Wings in a four-game sweep.

The 2000–01 season was controversial, as fans began to question AEG&#x27;s commitment to the success of the Kings because they failed to significantly improve the team during the off-season. Adding fuel to the fire was the February 21, 2001, trade of star defenseman and fan favorite Rob Blake to the Colorado Avalanche. Despite this, two players received in the deal, right wing Adam Deadmarsh and defenseman Aaron Miller, became impact players for the Kings, who finished the 2000–01 season with a 38–28–13–3 record (92 points), good for a third-place finish in the Pacific Division and another first-round playoff date with the Detroit Red Wings. The heavily favored Red Wings suffered an upset, losing in six games for the Kings&#x27; first playoff series win since 1993. In the second round, the Kings forced seven games in their series against the Avalanche, but lost to the eventual Stanley Cup champions.

Afterwards, during the off-season, Luc Robitaille turned down a one-year deal with a substantial pay cut and ended up signing with Detroit, as the Red Wings represented his best chance at winning the Stanley Cup, and like Tomas Sandstrom before him in 1997, Robitaille won the Stanley Cup with Detroit in 2002. The Kings started off the season with a sluggish October and November, and then found their game again to finish with 95 points. They in fact were tied in points with the second-place Phoenix Coyotes, and only finished third in the Pacific Division and seventh in the West due to a head-to-head record — the Coyotes won the season series, 3–0–2. In the playoffs they met the Colorado Avalanche once again, this time in the first round. The series would prove to be a carbon copy of their previous meeting, with the Kings behind three games to one and bouncing back to tie the series, only to be dominated in the seventh game and eliminated. The next seasons would be major disappointments as the Kings hit another major decline, missing the postseason up until the 2009–10 season.

During those mediocre seasons, there would be a few bright spots in the form of draft picks that would attribute to future success for the team, beginning with the 2003 NHL entry draft. Players such as Dustin Brown (2003), Anze Kopitar, Jonathan Quick (both 2005), and Drew Doughty (2008) were drafted and would help the Kings reach the playoffs once again.

===Return to the playoffs (2009–2011)===

During the 2009–10 season, the team had built a consistent roster with goaltender Jonathan Quick, defenseman Drew Doughty, and forwards Dustin Brown, Anze Kopitar and Justin Williams. Finishing sixth overall in the West with 101 points, just the third 100-plus point season in franchise history, and establishing a franchise record with a nine-game unbeaten streak, the Kings returned to the playoffs, where they lost to a highly skilled third seeded Vancouver Canucks team in six games.

The Kings entered the 2011 playoffs as the seventh seed in the West and played the second seeded San Jose Sharks in the first round. Despite Anze Kopitar&#x27;s absence with injury, the Kings pushed the series to six games until an overtime goal by Joe Thornton qualified the Sharks.

===Stanley Cup championships (2011–2014)===
A bad start to the 2011–12 season resulted in coach Terry Murray being fired, with Darryl Sutter being chosen as his replacement. The Kings were much improved under Sutter, finishing with the eighth seed after trading for Jeff Carter midseason and having finishing the season with a 40–27–15 record for 95 points. The Kings then headed into the 2012 playoffs against the back-to-back Presidents&#x27; Trophy-winning Vancouver Canucks. After playing two games in Vancouver and one in Los Angeles, the Kings were up 3–0 in the series, a franchise first. By winning Game 5 in Vancouver in overtime, the Kings advanced to the conference semifinals for the first time since the 2000–01 season, whereupon they swept the second-seeded St. Louis Blues, advancing to the conference finals for only the second time in franchise history. In doing so, the Kings also became the first NHL team to enter the playoffs as the eighth seed and eliminate the first- and second-seeded teams in the conference. They then defeated Phoenix in five games to reach the Stanley Cup Finals, culminating in an overtime goal by Dustin Penner in Game 5, and thus becoming the second team in NHL history to beat the top three Conference seeds in the playoffs (the Calgary Flames achieved the same feat in 2004, ironically also under Darryl Sutter) and the first eighth seed to accomplish the feat.

Los Angeles faced the New Jersey Devils in the Cup Finals, defeating them in six games to win their first Stanley Cup in franchise history. With the Game 6 victory occurring on home ice at Staples Center, the Kings became the first team since the 2007 Anaheim Ducks to win the Stanley Cup at home, as well as the second Californian NHL team to do so. The Kings became the first eight seed champion in any of the North American major leagues, the first Stanley Cup champion that finished below fifth in its conference, and the third to finish below second in its division (after the 1993 Canadiens and the 1995 Devils). Goaltender Jonathan Quick was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player during the playoffs, and soon after signed a ten-year contract extension on June 28.
Due to the 2012–13 NHL lockout, the 2012–13 NHL season began on January 19, 2013, and was shortened to 48 games. The Kings finished the season as the fifth seed in the West and began the defense of the Cup on the road against the St. Louis Blues, who they swept in the 2012 playoffs. After losing the first two games, the Kings won four in a row to eliminate the Blues in six games. In the second round, they then played a very tough San Jose Sharks team, this time with home-ice advantage. In the first game, Jarret Stoll suffered an injury from the Sharks&#x27; Raffi Torres, who ended up being suspended for the rest of the series. The Kings eventually won in seven games. In the conference finals, they faced the number one seed in the West and Presidents&#x27; Trophy winning-Chicago Blackhawks. After dropping the first two games, the Kings won Game 3 with Jeff Carter suffering an injury from Blackhawks defenseman Duncan Keith, who was suspended for Game 4 as a result. After losing Game 4, the Kings battled the Blackhawks through two overtime periods in Game 5, with Patrick Kane eventually scoring the game-winning goal that won the game and the series, sending the Blackhawks to the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals against the Boston Bruins (whom they defeated in six games for their second Stanley Cup in four seasons) and ending the Kings&#x27; season.

During the 2013–14 season, the Kings acquired Marian Gaborik, and qualified for their fifth straight playoffs with the sixth-best result of the West. In the first round of the 2014 playoffs, the Kings played their in-state rivals, the San Jose Sharks. After losing the first three games to the Sharks, the Kings became the fourth team in NHL history to win the final four games in a row after initially being down three games to none, beating the Sharks in San Jose in the deciding Game 7. In the second round, the Kings played another in-state rival, Anaheim. After starting the series with two wins, the Kings lost three-straight games, trailing the series three games to two. However, for the second time in the first two rounds of the playoffs, the Kings were able to rally back after being down in the series and defeated the Ducks in Anaheim in Game 7. In the third round, the Kings jumped out to a three-games-to-one lead against Stanley Cup-defending Chicago, but were unable to close out the series in the fifth and sixth games. On June 1, 2014, the Kings advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals for the second time in three years after winning Game 7, 4–3, in overtime through a goal from Alec Martinez, clinching their third Western Conference title in franchise history. The Kings became the first team in NHL history to win three Game 7s en route to a Stanley Cup Finals berth. Not only were the Kings the first team in history to accomplish this feat, but they also managed to win all game sevens on opposing ice. For the third time, the Kings were finalists after finishing third in their division and sixth or lower in their conference.
In the Stanley Cup Finals, the Kings faced the Eastern Conference-winning New York Rangers, who had defeated the Montreal Canadiens in six games in the conference finals. The Kings won the Stanley Cup in five games, culminating with an Alec Martinez goal in the second overtime of Game 5 at Staples Center. The championship run had a record-tying 26 playoff games (the 1986–87 Philadelphia Flyers and 2003–04 Calgary Flames being the others), with the Kings facing elimination a record seven times. With their Game 7 victory in the conference finals and wins in the first two games of the Cup Finals, they became the first team to win three consecutive playoff games after trailing by more than one goal in each game. Justin Williams, who scored twice in the Cup Finals and had points in all three Game 7s throughout the playoffs, won the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoff MVP.

===Post-Stanley Cup titles and continued contention (2014–present)===
Having won two Stanley Cup championships in the last three years, the Kings entered the 2014–15 season as the early favorites to retain their title. However, the Kings struggled often, with scoring slumps, defensemen losing games to injury and suspensions and frequent road losses. A defeat to the Calgary Flames in the penultimate game of the season eliminated the Kings from playoff contention, while qualifying Calgary, which coincidentally missed the postseason during the Kings&#x27; five-season playoff streak. Despite finishing with a record of 40–27–15, the Kings became the first defending Stanley Cup champion to miss the postseason since the 2006–07 Carolina Hurricanes and only the fourth overall since the 1967 NHL expansion season.
At the start of the 2015–16 season, the Kings were expected to make the playoffs. They entered the playoffs as the fifth seed in their conference and second seed in their division. They faced the San Jose Sharks, but lost to them in five games. On June 16, 2016, the Kings named Anze Kopitar the 14th captain in team history, replacing Dustin Brown, who had led the team for the past eight seasons.

The Kings celebrated their 50th anniversary during the 2016–17 season along with the other still active 1967 expansion teams (the St. Louis Blues, Philadelphia Flyers, and Pittsburgh Penguins), and for the first time since 2002, they hosted the NHL All-Star Game; Jeff Carter and Drew Doughty would represent the Kings at the All-Star Game, with the former leading the team in scoring this season. Goaltender Jonathan Quick suffered an injury on opening night that sidelined him for most of the season, and the Kings struggled without him. Backup Peter Budaj filled the void, earning his first starting duties since his time with the Colorado Avalanche six years earlier, but near the trade deadline, the Kings traded him to Tampa Bay for another goaltender, Ben Bishop who shared the crease with Jonathan Quick down the stretch, the superstar having returned from his injury. Despite the trade, the Kings ultimately missed the playoffs for the second time in three seasons and, in the off-season, fired general manager Dean Lombardi and head coach Darryl Sutter. Assistant general manager Rob Blake was promoted to be the new general manager and John Stevens took over as head coach after serving as associate head coach for the Kings for several seasons. In the 2017 NHL expansion draft, the Vegas Golden Knights drafted defenseman Brayden McNabb, who had been left unprotected by the Kings. In the next season, the Kings clinched the 2018 playoffs as a wild card, but were swept by the expansion Golden Knights.

On November 4, 2018, the Kings fired Stevens as head coach after the team started the 2018–19 season 4–8–1, and replaced him with Willie Desjardins. In Desjardins&#x27; debut on November 7, the Kings defeated the Ducks 4–1. The Kings finished the 2018–19 season in last place in both the Pacific Division and Western Conference with 71 points and they missed the playoffs for the third time in five seasons.

The Kings hired Todd McLellan as their next head coach on April 16, 2019. The 2019–20 season was highlighted by several rebuilding moves, as players such as Trevor Lewis, Jack Campbell, Kyle Clifford, Derek Forbort and Alec Martinez would all depart the team, through trades or via free agency. The team notably won the 2020 Stadium Series in a 3–1 win over the Colorado Avalanche, which saw Tyler Toffoli score the league&#x27;s first hat trick in an outdoor regular season game; Toffoli was traded to the Vancouver Canucks two days after the feat. In their later portion of the season, the Kings called up several prospects including Mikey Anderson, Gabriel Vilardi and Cal Petersen, as the team went on a seven-game win streak, showcasing their deep and talented prospect pool. However, this win streak would mark the end of their season; the NHL would pause its season due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and as part of their plan to return to play, the regular season was officially ended, and the Kings were one of seven teams left out of the playoffs. They were automatically entered into the first phase of the 2020 NHL draft lottery, in which the Kings received the second overall pick.

In the 2020–21 season, the Kings had another rebuilding year as they traded Jeff Carter, extended Alex Iafallo and saw debuts of prospects such as Jaret Anderson-Dolan, Arthur Kaliyev, Tobias Bjornfot, Rasmus Kupari and Quinton Byfield. A bright spot saw Anze Kopitar score his 1,000th point near season&#x27;s end. They finished sixth in the West Division and missed the playoffs again. During the 2021 NHL expansion draft, the Seattle Kraken selected Kurtis MacDermid from the Kings, who was left unprotected.

In the lead-up to the 2021–22 season, the Kings acquired forwards Phillip Danault and Viktor Arvidsson during the off-season. They also signed defenseman Alexander Edler in an effort to bolster their blue line presence. The Kings qualified for the playoffs for the first time in four seasons, despite losing Drew Doughty to injury. This season would also prove to be Dustin Brown&#x27;s last, as the forward announced on April 28, 2022, that he would retire following the 2022 playoffs. They were defeated by the Edmonton Oilers in seven games in the first round.

During the 2022 off-season, the Kings acquired Kevin Fiala from the Minnesota Wild to replace Brown on the first line. The 2022–23 season would start off well, as Fiala would lead the team in points for much of the season and be elected to the 2023 All-Star Game. Clinching the 2023 playoffs, the Kings once again faced the Edmonton Oilers in the first round, this time losing in six games.

The Kings made a blockbuster move in the 2023 off-season, trading forwards Gabriel Vilardi, Alex Iafallo and Rasmus Kupari to the Winnipeg Jets in exchange for forward Pierre-Luc Dubois, who signed an eight-year, $68 million contract upon being traded.

The 2023–24 season got off to a strong start, as the team began the season with an 11-0-0 record on the road, breaking the NHL record (previously held by the Buffalo Sabres) for the longest unbeaten road streak to start the year. Goaltender Cam Talbot&#x27;s resurgent play lead to him being named to the 2024 NHL All-Star Weekend. However, in January, the Kings&#x27; season collapsed; despite making no major lineup or personnel changes, the Kings suddenly won just three of their final seventeen games before the all-star break. On February 2, 2024, the Kings fired head coach McLellan, with assistant Jim Hiller named interim head coach. Under Hiller, the Kings regained their footing but never fully returned to their stronger form from earlier in the season. They finished third in the Pacific Division and clinched the 2024 playoffs, where they would be eliminated by the Edmonton Oilers for the third year in a row, this time in five games.

Hiller was subsequently promoted to full-time head coach following the season. Much discussion during and after the Kings&#x27; season centered around Pierre-Luc Dubois, as his season in Los Angeles was largely underwhelming. Dubois only managed 16 goals and 40 points, and finished with a plus-minus rating of -9, despite the heavy expectations that came with his new deal. His first season with the Kings would be his only one, as he would be traded in a one-for-one deal to the Washington Capitals in exchange for goaltender Darcy Kuemper, who had previously spent time with the Kings.

==Team identity==

===Uniforms and logos===

The Los Angeles Kings debuted in the NHL wearing purple – officially the shade &quot;Forum blue&quot; – and gold uniforms. The original design was simple and straightforward, featuring monochrome striping on the shoulders and tail, as well as purple pants with white and gold trim. Later on, white trim was added on the numbers, and names were also added, while tail stripes were adjusted. At one point, gold pants were used to pair with the gold uniforms during the 1970s. A variation of the original crown logo, with a contrasting color background, was used with this uniform.

From 1980 to 1988, the Kings modified their uniforms to include a contrasting yoke that extends from sleeve to sleeve. White was also added to the socks, on the tail stripes, and at the bottom of the yoke, but the color was removed from the pants. The names and numbers were also modified to a standard NHL block lettering.

Just in time for Wayne Gretzky&#x27;s arrival, the Kings&#x27; colors changed to black and silver, mirroring those of the Los Angeles Raiders. The new uniforms did not deviate much from the prior design, save for the color scheme, a new primary Kings logo, and a switch from a contrasting yoke color to sleeve stripes. With minor changes to the text, number font and pant striping, the uniforms were used until the 1997–98 season.
The Kings briefly reintroduced purple and gold to the color scheme upon unveiling an alternate jersey for the 1995–96 season. The uniform featured a gradually fading black splash, medieval-inspired serif text, and a logo of a bearded figure wearing a golden crown. The so-called &quot;Burger King&quot; jersey proved to be unpopular with fans, and was scrapped after only one season.
For the 1998–99 season, the Kings unveiled new logos, uniforms and a new purple-silver-white color scheme, as black and silver had become associated with gang colors. The shade of purple was a lighter shade than the one used in the &quot;Forum blue and gold&quot; era. The new primary logo was a shield and crest featuring three royal symbols–a sunglass-clad lion, a crown and the Sun. The jerseys featured the shield logo with hints of purple on the yoke, sleeve stripes and tail. By coincidence, this was the same color scheme as the NBA&#x27;s Sacramento Kings, who had rebranded to the scheme four years before the NHL&#x27;s Kings did, as well as the Colorado Rockies (not to be confused with the NHL Rockies who became the New Jersey Devils) of Major League Baseball. The bottom of the jerseys read the city name. A purple alternate jersey featuring the updated secondary crown logo was unveiled for the 1999–2000 season. In 2002, the crown logo became the primary while the shield logo was demoted to alternate status. The socks on the black and purple uniforms also switched designations to match their counterparts. Upon moving to the Reebok Edge design in 2007, the jerseys were updated without the tail stripes. The purple-tinged road jerseys were used until the 2010–11 season, while the home jersey was demoted to alternate status in 2011 and remained in use until 2013.

In 2008, the Kings unveiled an alternate jersey inspired by the 1988–1998 Kings motif. The current logo, now in a black and silver banner with the updated crown logo and &#x27;LA&#x27; abbreviation on top, made its debut with the jersey. Three years later, the Kings completed the transition back to the classic black and silver by unveiling a new away jersey, which unlike the home jersey, features a black and silver tail stripe. The Kings script from their 1988–98 logo returned on the helmets, and would stay that way until 2013, when they were replaced by the current Kings script.

From the 2010–11 to the 2016–17 seasons, the Kings have also worn their classic purple and gold jerseys from the late 1970s as part of &quot;Legends Night&quot; on select home dates. Minor changes in the uniform include the NHL shield logo on the neck piping, as well as the use of the Reebok Edge design.
The Kings wore silver jerseys with white trim, black stripes and shoulder yoke during the 2014 Stadium Series. The uniforms featured a metallic treatment of the alternate crown logo in front. The sleeve numbers were slightly tilted diagonally, while the back numbers were enlarged for visibility purposes. A new &#x27;LA&#x27; alternate logo was placed on the left shoulder yoke. For the 2015 Stadium Series, the Kings wore a tricolored jersey featuring the team&#x27;s silver, black and white colors. Both the sleeve and back numbers are enlarged, while white pants were used with this jersey.

As part of the Kings&#x27; 50th anniversary in the 2016–17 season, the team wore commemorative silver alternate jerseys with a black shoulder yoke and striping for every Saturday home game. The logos and lettering were accented with metallic gold, while a purple neckline featured five gold diamonds to symbolize the Kings&#x27; original colors. A 50th Anniversary patch was adorned on the right shoulder.

Adidas signed an agreement with the NHL to be the official manufacturer of uniforms and licensed apparel for all teams, starting with the 2017–18 season, replacing Reebok. The home and away uniforms that were debuted in the 2007–08 season remained identical with the exception of the new Adidas ADIZERO template and the new collar. With the new collar, the NHL shield was moved to the front and center on a pentagon with a new &quot;Chrome Flex&quot; style. The waist stripes on the road white jersey became curved instead of being straight across.

In the 2018–19 season, the Kings brought back their silver alternate uniforms last used in the 2016–17 season, minus the metallic gold elements in the logo and numerals. The uniform was retired following the 2020–21 season.

During the 2019–20 season, the Kings brought back the 1992–1998 white uniform (with black letters and silver trim) as a &quot;heritage&quot; uniform for two games.

The 2020 Stadium Series saw the Kings wear special black and white uniforms with &quot;LA&quot; tilted upward in front, along with chrome helmets. The uniforms took cues from the angular architecture and aircraft of the United States Air Force Academy.

In the 2020–21 season, the Kings unveiled a &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; alternate uniform in collaboration with Adidas. The uniform essentially recreated the design worn from 1988 to 1998, but black and silver were replaced by the team&#x27;s original purple and gold colors.

Before the 2021–22 season, the Kings replaced their silver alternates with a modernized version of the throwback 1990s white uniforms. The design featured slightly different striping patterns from the originals, and were paired with chrome helmets. In the 2024 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Kings opted to wear these alternates during road games, but replaced the chrome helmets with the primary white helmets.

A second &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform was unveiled in the 2022–23 season, featuring the 1980–88 uniform but with a white base, purple stripes and gold accents.

On June 20, 2024, the Kings unveiled a new primary logo, which is a modernized version of their 1988 logo. The new uniforms were also heavily based on the 1988–1998 uniforms, but the sleeve numbers were no longer placed on the contrasting stripe as they were in the previous uniform.

===Mascot===
Since 2007, the mascot of the Kings is Bailey, a six-foot lion ( with mane included) who wears No. 72 because it is the average temperature in Los Angeles. He was named in honor of Garnet &quot;Ace&quot; Bailey, who served Director of Pro Scouting for seven years before dying in the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Bailey is the second mascot, after Kingston the snow leopard in the early 1990s, who now serves as the mascot of their AHL affiliate, the Ontario Reign.

==Rivalries==
The Kings have developed strong rivalries with the two other Californian teams of the NHL, the Anaheim Ducks – who also play in the Los Angeles metropolitan area, leading to the rivalry dubbed the &quot;Freeway Face-Off&quot; as both cities are separated by the Interstate 5, and the rivalry with the San Jose Sharks – also reflects the animosity between Northern and Southern California. The Kings eliminated both teams during the 2014 Stanley Cup run, and have played outdoor games with them for the NHL Stadium Series, losing to the Ducks at Dodger Stadium in 2014 and beating the Sharks at Levi&#x27;s Stadium the following year. During the 1980s, the Kings developed a heated rivalry with the Edmonton Oilers, which has rekindled in recent years after meeting for three straight years in the playoffs from 2022 to 2024.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;List of the last five seasons completed by the Kings. For the full season-by-season history, see List of NHL seasons&quot;

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime losses/shootout losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;

==Players and personnel==
===Current roster===
===Team captains===

* Bob Wall, 1967–1969
* Larry Cahan, 1969–1971
* Bob Pulford, 1971–1973
* Terry Harper, 1973–1975
* Mike Murphy, 1975–1981
* Dave Lewis, 1981–1983
* Terry Ruskowski, 1983–1985
* Dave Taylor, 1985–1989
* Wayne Gretzky, 1989–1996
* Luc Robitaille, 1992–1993, 2006
* Rob Blake, 1996–2001, 2007–2008
* Mattias Norstrom, 2001–2007
* Dustin Brown, 2008–2016, 2022
* Anze Kopitar, 2016–present
===Head coaches===
* Red Kelly: 1967–1969
* Hal Laycoe: 1969–1970
* Johnny Wilson: 1969–1970
* Larry Regan: 1970–1972
* Fred Glover: 1971–1972
* Bob Pulford: 1972–1977
* Ron Stewart: 1977–1978
* Bob Berry: 1978–1981
* Parker MacDonald: 1981–1982
* Don Perry: 1982–1984
* Rogie Vachon (interim):1 1984, 1988, 1995
* Roger Neilson: 1984
* Pat Quinn: 1984–1987
* Mike Murphy: 1987–1988
* Robbie Ftorek: 1988–1989
* Tom Webster: 1989–1992
* Barry Melrose: 1992–1995
* Larry Robinson: 1995–1999
* Andy Murray: 1999–2006
* John Torchetti (interim):2 2006
* Marc Crawford: 2006–2008
* Terry Murray: 2008–2011
* John Stevens (interim):3 2011, 2017–2018
* Darryl Sutter: 2011–2017
* Willie Desjardins (interim): 2018–2019
* Todd McLellan 2019–2024
* Jim Hiller 2024–present
Notes:
* 1 Rogie Vachon took over as interim head coach for the Kings on three occasions, the first for two games in the middle of the 1983–84 season after Don Perry was fired, then replaced by Roger Neilson. The second time was for one game in the middle of 1987–88 season after Mike Murphy was fired, then replaced by Robbie Ftorek. The third occasion was for the final seven games in the 1994–95 lockout-shortened season after Barry Melrose was fired, then replaced by Larry Robinson. In all those times, he returned to his duties in the Kings front office.
* 2 John Torchetti took over as interim head coach for the final 12 games of the 2005–06 season after Andy Murray was fired. Torchetti was replaced by Marc Crawford at the end of the 2005–06 season.
* 3 John Stevens took over as interim head coach for four games in the middle of the 2011–12 season after Terry Murray was fired. He would return to his duties as assistant coach after Darryl Sutter was hired. Stevens would return again, this time as the permanent replacement for Sutter in 2017.

===General managers===
* Larry Regan: 1967–1973
* Jake Milford: 1973–1977
* George Maguire: 1977–1984
* Rogie Vachon: 1984–1992
* Nick Beverley: 1992–1994
* Sam McMaster: 1994–1997
* Dave Taylor: 1997–2006
* Dean Lombardi: 2006–2017
* Rob Blake: 2017–present
===Team owners===
* Jack Kent Cooke: 1967–1979
* Jerry Buss: 1979–1988
* Bruce McNall: 1988–1994
* Joseph M. Cohen and Jeffery Sudikoff: 1994–1995
* Philip Anschutz and Edward Roski: 1995–present

==Team and league honors==
===Retired numbers===

===Hall of Fame===
The Los Angeles Kings acknowledge an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame, including 19 former players (five of whom earned their credentials primarily as Kings) and three builders of the sport. The three individuals recognized as builders by the Hall of Fame includes former Kings head coaches, and general managers. In addition to players and builders, athletic trainers have been inducted into the Hall of Fame through the Professional Hockey Athletic Trainers Society, and the Society of Professional Hockey Equipment Managers. Two athletic trainers from the Kings organization were inducted into the Hall of Fame: Peter Demers in 2007 and Mark O&#x27;Neill in 2016.

Three sports broadcasters for the Kings were awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award for their contributions to hockey broadcasting: Jiggs McDonald (1990), Bob Miller (2000), and Nick Nickson (2015). In 2005, Helene Elliott, a sportswriter for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; was awarded the Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award for her contributions to sports journalism.

Players
Builders
* Red Kelly
* Jake Milford
* Roger Neilson

===Franchise records===

====Regular season scoring leaders====

These are the top-ten regular season scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Kings player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;


====Regular season goaltending leaders====
These are the top-ten regular season games played, wins, and shutouts leaders in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
* – current Kings player
&quot;Note: GP = Games played; GAA = Goals against average; SV% = Save percentage; W = Wins; L = Losses; SO = Shutouts&quot;


====Playoff scoring leaders====
These are the top-ten playoff scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL playoff season.
* – current Kings player
&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;


====Playoff goaltending leaders====
These are the top-ten playoff games played, wins, and shutouts leaders in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL playoff season.
* – current Kings player
&quot;Note: GP = Games played; GAA = Goals against average; SV% = Save percentage; W = Wins; L = Losses; SO = Shutouts&quot;



;Regular season records
* Most goals: Bernie Nicholls, 70 (1988–89)
* Most assists: Wayne Gretzky, 122 (1990–91)
* Most points: Wayne Gretzky, 168 (1988–89)
* Most points in a game: Bernie Nicholls, 8 (1988–89)
* Most penalty minutes: Marty McSorley, 399 (1992–93)
* Most points, defenseman: Larry Murphy, 76 (1980–81)
* Most points, rookie: Luc Robitaille, 84 (1986–87)
* Most wins: Jonathan Quick, 40 (2015–16)
* Most shutouts: Jonathan Quick, 10 (2011–12)

;Playoff records
* Most goals: Wayne Gretzky, 15 (1992–93)
* Most assists: Wayne Gretzky, 25 (1992–93)
* Most points: Wayne Gretzky, 40 (1992–93)
* Most points in a game: Tomas Sandstrom, Tony Granato, Wayne Gretzky, 5 (1989–90)
* Most penalty minutes: Jay Miller, 63 (1988–89)
* Most points, defenseman: Drew Doughty, 18 (2013–14)
* Most points, rookie: Tyler Toffoli, 14 (2013–14)
* Most wins: Jonathan Quick, 16 (2011–12, 2013–14)
* Most shutouts: Jonathan Quick, 3 (2011–12, 2012–13)

;Team records
* Most points in a season: 105 (1974–75)
* Most wins in a season: 48 (2015–16)
* Longest regular season winning streak: 9 (2009–10)
* Longest playoff winning streak: 8 (2011–12)

==Broadcasters==
In 1973, the Kings hired Bob Miller as their play-by-play announcer. Considered to be one of the finest hockey play-by-play announcers, Miller held the post continuously until retirement in 2017, and is often referred to as the &quot;Voice of the Kings&quot;. He received the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the NHL Hockey Broadcasters Association on November 13, 2000, making him a media honoree for the Hockey Hall of Fame, and he also earned a star in the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2006. Miller has written two books about his experiences with the team, &quot;Bob Miller&#x27;s Tales of the Los Angeles Kings&quot; (2006), and &quot;Tales From The Los Angeles Kings Locker Room: A Collection Of The Greatest Kings Stories Ever Told&quot; (2013). On March 2, 2017, citing health reasons, Miller announced his retirement after 44 years with the team, and finished his career broadcasting the final two games of the 2016–17 Kings season. The Kings named NBCSN announcer Alex Faust as Miller&#x27;s replacement, play-by-play announcer the team on TV for the 2017–18 season on June 1, 2017.

On September 18, 2018. the team announced that it would cease over-the-air radio broadcasts, and had partnered with iHeartMedia to form the &quot;Los Angeles Kings Audio Network&quot;, which streams exclusively on the iHeartRadio platform. The deal also includes pre-game shows and other ancillary content streaming on iHeartRadio. Two pre-season games were simulcast by KEIB before the transition was completed.

On June 5, 2023, the Kings parted ways with Alex Faust and planned on returning to a TV/radio simulcast format with Nick Nickson, Jim Fox and Daryl Evans, which they last used in the 1989–90 season.

On September 14, 2023, the Kings announced a new contract with Bally Sports West, airing around 65 games, and KCAL-TV, airing around 6 games.

On June 20, 2024, the Kings announced a new deal with ESPN Radio 710 to stream all games on the ESPN LA app, with 25 games to simulcast on the radio.

Television and radio: Bally Sports West, KCAL-TV and ESPN Radio 710 and ESPN LA App
* Nick Nickson – play-by-play
* Daryl Evans – color commentator
* Jim Fox – color commentator

Public address:
* David Courtney 1989–2012
* Dave Joseph 2013–2020
* Trevor Rabone 2021–present

==Affiliate teams==
The Kings are currently affiliated with the Ontario Reign in the American Hockey League, they also have an affiliation with the Greenville Swamp Rabbits in the ECHL. Previous affiliates included the Manchester Monarchs, Lowell Lock Monsters, Springfield Falcons, New Haven Nighthawks, Binghamton Dusters and Springfield Kings of the AHL; Manchester Monarchs and Reading Royals in the ECHL; Long Beach Ice Dogs, Phoenix Roadrunners and Utah Grizzlies in the International Hockey League; and the Houston Apollos of the Central Hockey League.

==See also==
* 1967 NHL expansion
* List of NHL players
* List of NHL seasons
* Crypto.com Arena

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="4" end="21" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="41" end="51" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="66" end="77" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="104" end="126" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="152" end="168" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="176" end="194" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677083" start="240" end="255" title="Jack Kent Cooke" label="Jack Kent Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="393" end="411" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="1967 NHL expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="446" end="462" title="Crypto.com Arena" label="Crypto.com Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="466" end="486" title="downtown Los Angeles" label="downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="522" end="538" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="588" end="597" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="the Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="601" end="622" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="640" end="659" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q731269" start="887" end="899" title="Rogie Vachon" label="Rogie Vachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q705465" start="942" end="956" title="Charlie Simmer" label="Charlie Simmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q672536" start="958" end="969" title="Dave Taylor (ice hockey)" label="Dave Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="974" end="986" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="988" end="1001" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="1040" end="1055" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378376" start="1092" end="1113" title="Miracle on Manchester" label="Miracle on Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="1178" end="1191" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="1353" end="1361" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q661592" start="1400" end="1414" title="Luc Robitaille" label="Luc Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q742548" start="1431" end="1440" title="Rob Blake" label="Rob Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="1502" end="1509" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="1537" end="1555" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588796" start="1570" end="1574" title="1993 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1599" end="1617" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133456" start="1753" end="1768" title="Philip Anschutz" label="Philip Anschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q569417" start="1783" end="1811" title="Anschutz Entertainment Group" label="Anschutz Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344735" start="1855" end="1870" title="Edward P. Roski" label="Edward P. Roski"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="1981" end="1995" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="2034" end="2048" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q706924" start="2061" end="2073" title="Drew Doughty" label="Drew Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q441047" start="2088" end="2100" title="Dustin Brown (ice hockey)" label="Dustin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q375787" start="2102" end="2114" title="Anže Kopitar" label="Anze Kopitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q722658" start="2120" end="2135" title="Justin Williams" label="Justin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q717856" start="2149" end="2162" title="Darryl Sutter" label="Darryl Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="2191" end="2205" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q943565" start="2235" end="2246" title="Jeff Carter" label="Jeff Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2266" end="2277" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071940" start="2295" end="2299" title="2012 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="2309" end="2326" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958416" start="2332" end="2336" title="2014 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="2346" end="2362" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="2410" end="2428" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="2764" end="2793" title="1967 NHL Expansion" label="expand for the 1967–68 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q976512" start="2818" end="2839" title="Western Hockey League (1952–1974)" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="2915" end="2926" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677083" start="2950" end="2965" title="Jack Kent Cooke" label="Jack Kent Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="3410" end="3414" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325166" start="3422" end="3432" title="LSU Tigers and Lady Tigers" label="LSU Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="3450" end="3467" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="3475" end="3499" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="3531" end="3549" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="3557" end="3588" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571403" start="3665" end="3698" title="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena" label="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="3815" end="3844" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870443" start="3911" end="3929" title="Los Angeles Blades (WHL)" label="Los Angeles Blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="4253" end="4262" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="the Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="4294" end="4308" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967–68 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757660" start="4362" end="4378" title="Long Beach Arena" label="Long Beach Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="4406" end="4416" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="4476" end="4495" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="5003" end="5022" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="5023" end="5029" title="winger (hockey)" label="winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q370558" start="5030" end="5041" title="Bob Pulford" label="Bob Pulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043628" start="5118" end="5129" title="Juha Widing" label="Juha Widing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="5172" end="5190" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q731269" start="5202" end="5214" title="Rogie Vachon" label="Rogie Vachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q772468" start="5497" end="5504" title="1973–74 NHL season" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="5509" end="5516" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q141082" start="5611" end="5624" title="Marcel Dionne" label="Marcel Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="5634" end="5651" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q428628" start="5776" end="5788" title="Butch Goring" label="Butch Goring"/>
<link wikidata="Q756173" start="5888" end="5902" title="Atlanta Flames" label="Atlanta Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="5931" end="5944" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092006" start="6042" end="6056" title="1976–77 NHL season" label="1976–77 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124849" start="6133" end="6145" title="Jake Milford" label="Jake Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q285189" start="6201" end="6215" title="1977–78 NHL season" label="1977–78 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q887806" start="6420" end="6429" title="Bob Berry (ice hockey)" label="Bob Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q672536" start="6568" end="6579" title="Dave Taylor (ice hockey)" label="Dave Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q705465" start="6596" end="6610" title="Charlie Simmer" label="Charlie Simmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509908" start="7051" end="7061" title="Jerry Buss" label="Jerry Buss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960771" start="7197" end="7204" title="1981–82 NHL season" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964390" start="7279" end="7304" title="1982 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1982 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q868358" start="7469" end="7485" title="Colorado Rockies (NHL)" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="7586" end="7601" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="7684" end="7697" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378376" start="7766" end="7787" title="Miracle on Manchester" label="Miracle on Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778778" start="7884" end="7892" title="Overtime (hockey)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="7982" end="7999" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q746830" start="8069" end="8096" title="East Rutherford, New Jersey" label="East Rutherford, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="8173" end="8190" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="8241" end="8254" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="8515" end="8539" title="1979 NHL expansion" label="moving over from the WHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="8738" end="8745" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="8758" end="8767" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960802" start="8999" end="9006" title="1985–86 NHL season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="9054" end="9061" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q586959" start="9239" end="9252" title="NHL Commissioner" label="NHL President"/>
<link wikidata="Q669776" start="9253" end="9265" title="John Ziegler (sports administrator)" label="John Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="9361" end="9377" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q826573" start="9487" end="9502" title="Bernie Nicholls" label="Bernie Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689326" start="9504" end="9516" title="Jimmy Carson" label="Jimmy Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q661592" start="9518" end="9532" title="Luc Robitaille" label="Luc Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q332275" start="9549" end="9563" title="Steve Duchesne" label="Steve Duchesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933384" start="9602" end="9613" title="Mike Murphy (ice hockey, born 1950)" label="Mike Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q354928" start="9716" end="9729" title="Robbie Ftorek" label="Robbie Ftorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="9919" end="9933" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978000" start="10130" end="10142" title="Bruce McNall" label="Bruce McNall"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="10808" end="10821" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="10897" end="10912" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="10964" end="10972" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="10988" end="10994" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="10996" end="11003" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="11005" end="11010" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="11012" end="11017" title="Florida Panthers" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="11019" end="11028" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="11034" end="11043" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q678383" start="11182" end="11202" title="Hart Memorial Trophy" label="Hart Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="11224" end="11244" title="Most Valuable Player" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458811" start="11555" end="11566" title="Tom Webster (ice hockey)" label="Tom Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="11572" end="11583" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q766331" start="12204" end="12217" title="Nick Beverley" label="Nick Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q809073" start="12255" end="12268" title="Barry Melrose" label="Barry Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="12284" end="12306" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q357563" start="12314" end="12334" title="Adirondack Red Wings" label="Adirondack Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="12406" end="12420" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588796" start="12844" end="12867" title="1993 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1993 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="12889" end="12907" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q927215" start="13016" end="13030" title="Jacques Demers" label="Jacques Demers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265800" start="13075" end="13089" title="Marty McSorley" label="Marty McSorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q357502" start="13251" end="13262" title="Patrick Roy" label="Patrick Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288144" start="13301" end="13316" title="Éric Desjardins" label="Eric Desjardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q128192" start="13785" end="13799" title="1993–94 NHL season" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q358519" start="14006" end="14017" title="Gordie Howe" label="Gordie Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="14116" end="14131" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="14380" end="14401" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="14831" end="14846" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="14895" end="14916" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96 season opener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133456" start="14975" end="14990" title="Philip Anschutz" label="Philip Anschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344735" start="14995" end="15010" title="Edward P. Roski" label="Edward P. Roski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593997" start="15099" end="15103" title="1998 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q739177" start="15147" end="15160" title="Jozef Stümpel" label="Jozef Stumpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530828" start="15165" end="15176" title="Glen Murray (ice hockey)" label="Glen Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q680030" start="15304" end="15311" title="1998–99 NHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="15341" end="15357" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806113" start="15444" end="15458" title="Larry Robinson" label="Larry Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756146" start="15535" end="15539" title="1999–2000 NHL season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="15554" end="15563" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="The Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="15598" end="15612" title="Staples Center" label="Staples Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q526811" start="15806" end="15817" title="Andy Murray (ice hockey)" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q394023" start="15862" end="15876" title="Žigmund Pálffy" label="Zigmund Palffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728701" start="15934" end="15948" title="Donald Audette" label="Donald Audette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336329" start="15950" end="15964" title="Ian Laperrière" label="Ian Laperrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910718" start="15970" end="15986" title="Mattias Norström" label="Mattias Norstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q281264" start="16279" end="16294" title="Bryan Smolinski" label="Bryan Smolinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="16489" end="16503" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="16786" end="16804" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q349138" start="16865" end="16879" title="Adam Deadmarsh" label="Adam Deadmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q302339" start="16895" end="16907" title="Aaron Miller (ice hockey)" label="Aaron Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="18475" end="18489" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854869" start="18656" end="18676" title="2003 NHL entry draft" label="2003 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q441047" start="18694" end="18706" title="Dustin Brown (ice hockey)" label="Dustin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q375787" start="18715" end="18727" title="Anže Kopitar" label="Anze Kopitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="18729" end="18743" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q706924" start="18761" end="18773" title="Drew Doughty" label="Drew Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="18975" end="18989" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q706924" start="19002" end="19014" title="Drew Doughty" label="Drew Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q441047" start="19029" end="19041" title="Dustin Brown (ice hockey)" label="Dustin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q375787" start="19043" end="19055" title="Anže Kopitar" label="Anze Kopitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q722658" start="19060" end="19075" title="Justin Williams" label="Justin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="19344" end="19361" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="19404" end="19417" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2011 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="19479" end="19494" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q434899" start="19631" end="19643" title="Joe Thornton" label="Joe Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="19730" end="19744" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405716" start="19763" end="19775" title="Terry Murray" label="Terry Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q717856" start="19794" end="19807" title="Darryl Sutter" label="Darryl Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q943565" start="19933" end="19944" title="Jeff Carter" label="Jeff Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067889" start="20056" end="20069" title="2012 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2012 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q250246" start="20095" end="20118" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192890" start="20127" end="20144" title="Vancouver Canucks" label="Vancouver Canucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="20173" end="20182" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071940" start="20755" end="20773" title="2012 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267736" start="20810" end="20823" title="Dustin Penner" label="Dustin Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="21101" end="21118" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968224" start="21326" end="21330" title="2007 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q176834" start="21740" end="21758" title="Conn Smythe Trophy" label="Conn Smythe Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="21883" end="21902" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="2012–13 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="21908" end="21926" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q265170" start="22382" end="22394" title="Jarret Stoll" label="Jarret Stoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389027" start="22436" end="22448" title="Raffi Torres" label="Raffi Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="22653" end="22671" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q722101" start="22794" end="22806" title="Duncan Keith" label="Duncan Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q335876" start="22949" end="22961" title="Patrick Kane" label="Patrick Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423220" start="23067" end="23090" title="2013 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2013 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="23103" end="23116" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q447291" start="23278" end="23292" title="Marián Gáborík" label="Marian Gaborik"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="23408" end="23421" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958416" start="24313" end="24331" title="2014 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q503722" start="24426" end="24439" title="Alec Martinez" label="Alec Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958416" start="24887" end="24905" title="2014 Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="24927" end="24945" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="24954" end="24970" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="24993" end="25011" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q503722" start="25116" end="25129" title="Alec Martinez" label="Alec Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="25171" end="25185" title="Staples Center" label="Staples Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q722658" start="25598" end="25613" title="Justin Williams" label="Justin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="25913" end="25927" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="26123" end="26137" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607389" start="26478" end="26505" title="2006–07 Carolina Hurricanes season" label="2006–07 Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="26767" end="26782" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016602" start="27216" end="27233" title="62nd National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q705612" start="27518" end="27529" title="Peter Budaj" label="Peter Budaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q816445" start="27730" end="27740" title="Ben Bishop" label="Ben Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q24731937" start="28235" end="28259" title="2017 NHL expansion draft" label="2017 NHL expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="28265" end="28285" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q944469" start="28305" end="28319" title="Brayden McNabb" label="Brayden McNabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="28372" end="28383" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q52722431" start="28573" end="28587" title="2018–19 NHL season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021464" start="28617" end="28634" title="Willie Desjardins" label="Willie Desjardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382365" start="28912" end="28925" title="Todd McLellan" label="Todd McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q450681" start="29053" end="29065" title="Trevor Lewis" label="Trevor Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123835" start="29067" end="29080" title="Jack Campbell (ice hockey)" label="Jack Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337250" start="29082" end="29095" title="Kyle Clifford" label="Kyle Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023724" start="29097" end="29110" title="Derek Forbort" label="Derek Forbort"/>
<link wikidata="Q503722" start="29115" end="29128" title="Alec Martinez" label="Alec Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768080" start="29216" end="29235" title="2020 NHL Stadium Series" label="2020 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546040" start="29288" end="29301" title="Tyler Toffoli" label="Tyler Toffoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q86746353" start="29532" end="29546" title="Mikey Anderson" label="Mikey Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251709" start="29548" end="29563" title="Gabriel Vilardi" label="Gabriel Vilardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015761" start="29568" end="29580" title="Cal Petersen" label="Cal Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="29780" end="29797" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130251" start="30014" end="30031" title="NHL draft lottery" label="NHL draft lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370829" start="30094" end="30108" title="2020–21 NHL season" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q943565" start="30163" end="30174" title="Jeff Carter" label="Jeff Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719381" start="30185" end="30197" title="Alex Iafallo" label="Alex Iafallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29355469" start="30234" end="30254" title="Jaret Anderson-Dolan" label="Jaret Anderson-Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781802" start="30256" end="30270" title="Arthur Kaliyev" label="Arthur Kaliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048743" start="30272" end="30287" title="Tobias Björnfot" label="Tobias Bjornfot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40039433" start="30289" end="30302" title="Rasmus Kupari" label="Rasmus Kupari"/>
<link wikidata="Q66472667" start="30307" end="30322" title="Quinton Byfield" label="Quinton Byfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481337" start="30430" end="30443" title="West Division (NHL)" label="West Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610721" start="30486" end="30510" title="2021 NHL expansion draft" label="2021 NHL expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422166" start="30516" end="30530" title="Seattle Kraken" label="Seattle Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719374" start="30540" end="30556" title="Kurtis MacDermid" label="Kurtis MacDermid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="30622" end="30636" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381073" start="30666" end="30681" title="Phillip Danault" label="Phillip Danault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645491" start="30686" end="30702" title="Viktor Arvidsson" label="Viktor Arvidsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063686" start="30754" end="30769" title="Alexander Edler" label="Alexander Edler"/>
<link wikidata="Q111476467" start="31072" end="31085" title="2022 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2022 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="31113" end="31128" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989104" start="31212" end="31223" title="Kevin Fiala" label="Kevin Fiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="31288" end="31302" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q111166024" start="31409" end="31427" title="2023 National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="2023 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q117074617" start="31443" end="31456" title="2023 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2023 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="31687" end="31700" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621212" start="31725" end="31742" title="Pierre-Luc Dubois" label="Pierre-Luc Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="31815" end="31829" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="31969" end="31983" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026393" start="32052" end="32062" title="Cam Talbot" label="Cam Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195653" start="32416" end="32426" title="Jim Hiller" label="Jim Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q125220378" start="32637" end="32650" title="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2024 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222375" start="33289" end="33302" title="Darcy Kuemper" label="Darcy Kuemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="34423" end="34442" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Los Angeles Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240991" start="34716" end="34730" title="1997–98 NHL season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="35017" end="35028" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520942" start="35270" end="35281" title="gang colors" label="gang colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q166105" start="35663" end="35679" title="Sacramento Kings" label="Sacramento Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="35772" end="35788" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q868358" start="35822" end="35829" title="Colorado Rockies (NHL)" label="Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="35845" end="35862" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="35867" end="35888" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="36260" end="36266" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542190" start="37485" end="37504" title="2014 NHL Stadium Series" label="2014 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="38398" end="38404" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="38562" end="38568" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768080" start="39342" end="39361" title="2020 NHL Stadium Series" label="2020 Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="39558" end="39589" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125220378" start="40123" end="40148" title="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2024 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="40797" end="40801" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q448490" start="40920" end="40949" title="Garnet Bailey" label="Garnet &amp;quot;Ace&amp;quot; Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="41023" end="41060" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q30197" start="41110" end="41122" title="snow leopard" label="snow leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q278673" start="41200" end="41213" title="Ontario Reign" label="Ontario Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="41325" end="41338" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="41362" end="41391" title="Los Angeles metropolitan area" label="Los Angeles metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501242" start="41433" end="41449" title="Freeway Face-Off" label="Freeway Face-Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q54725" start="41492" end="41504" title="Interstate 5" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q48791785" start="41514" end="41546" title="Kings-Sharks rivalry" label="rivalry with the San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="41585" end="41593" title="Northern California" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="41598" end="41617" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089824" start="41662" end="41678" title="2014 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2014 Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17487840" start="41732" end="41750" title="NHL Stadium Series" label="NHL Stadium Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q247420" start="41775" end="41789" title="Dodger Stadium" label="Dodger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="41824" end="41843" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905396" start="41911" end="41918" title="Kings–Oilers rivalry" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="41928" end="41943" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q770291" start="42187" end="42206" title="List of NHL seasons" label="List of NHL seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934298" start="42442" end="42450" title="Bob Wall (ice hockey)" label="Bob Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742801" start="42464" end="42475" title="Larry Cahan" label="Larry Cahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370558" start="42489" end="42500" title="Bob Pulford" label="Bob Pulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518901" start="42514" end="42526" title="Terry Harper" label="Terry Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933384" start="42540" end="42551" title="Mike Murphy (ice hockey, born 1950)" label="Mike Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719485" start="42565" end="42575" title="Dave Lewis (ice hockey)" label="Dave Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518928" start="42589" end="42604" title="Terry Ruskowski" label="Terry Ruskowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q672536" start="42618" end="42629" title="Dave Taylor (ice hockey)" label="Dave Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="42643" end="42656" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q661592" start="42670" end="42684" title="Luc Robitaille" label="Luc Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q742548" start="42704" end="42713" title="Rob Blake" label="Rob Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910718" start="42738" end="42754" title="Mattias Norstrom" label="Mattias Norstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q441047" start="42768" end="42780" title="Dustin Brown (ice hockey)" label="Dustin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q375787" start="42800" end="42812" title="Anže Kopitar" label="Anze Kopitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q706565" start="42848" end="42857" title="Red Kelly" label="Red Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125888" start="42871" end="42881" title="Hal Laycoe" label="Hal Laycoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182992" start="42895" end="42908" title="Johnny Wilson (ice hockey)" label="Johnny Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218094" start="42922" end="42933" title="Larry Regan" label="Larry Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939469" start="42947" end="42958" title="Fred Glover (ice hockey)" label="Fred Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q370558" start="42972" end="42983" title="Bob Pulford" label="Bob Pulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q368934" start="42997" end="43008" title="Ron Stewart" label="Ron Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q887806" start="43022" end="43031" title="Bob Berry (ice hockey)" label="Bob Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365462" start="43045" end="43061" title="Parker MacDonald" label="Parker MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293314" start="43075" end="43084" title="Don Perry" label="Don Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q731269" start="43098" end="43110" title="Rogie Vachon" label="Rogie Vachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="43142" end="43155" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712344" start="43164" end="43173" title="Pat Quinn (ice hockey)" label="Pat Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933384" start="43187" end="43198" title="Mike Murphy (ice hockey, born 1950)" label="Mike Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q354928" start="43212" end="43225" title="Robbie Ftorek" label="Robbie Ftorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458811" start="43239" end="43250" title="Tom Webster (ice hockey)" label="Tom Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q809073" start="43264" end="43277" title="Barry Melrose" label="Barry Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806113" start="43291" end="43305" title="Larry Robinson" label="Larry Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q526811" start="43319" end="43330" title="Andy Murray (ice hockey)" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182613" start="43344" end="43358" title="John Torchetti" label="John Torchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q385565" start="43378" end="43391" title="Marc Crawford" label="Marc Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405716" start="43405" end="43417" title="Terry Murray" label="Terry Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q932567" start="43431" end="43443" title="John Stevens (ice hockey)" label="John Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q717856" start="43474" end="43487" title="Darryl Sutter" label="Darryl Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021464" start="43501" end="43518" title="Willie Desjardins" label="Willie Desjardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382365" start="43542" end="43555" title="Todd McLellan" label="Todd McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195653" start="43568" end="43578" title="Jim Hiller" label="Jim Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218094" start="44675" end="44686" title="Larry Regan" label="Larry Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124849" start="44700" end="44712" title="Jake Milford" label="Jake Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352585" start="44726" end="44740" title="George Maguire (ice hockey)" label="George Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q731269" start="44754" end="44766" title="Rogie Vachon" label="Rogie Vachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q766331" start="44780" end="44793" title="Nick Beverley" label="Nick Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381639" start="44807" end="44819" title="Sam McMaster" label="Sam McMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q672536" start="44833" end="44844" title="Dave Taylor (ice hockey)" label="Dave Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181097" start="44858" end="44871" title="Dean Lombardi" label="Dean Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q742548" start="44885" end="44894" title="Rob Blake" label="Rob Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677083" start="44929" end="44944" title="Jack Kent Cooke" label="Jack Kent Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509908" start="44958" end="44968" title="Jerry Buss" label="Jerry Buss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978000" start="44982" end="44994" title="Bruce McNall" label="Bruce McNall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133456" start="45058" end="45073" title="Philip Anschutz" label="Philip Anschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344735" start="45078" end="45090" title="Edward Roski" label="Edward Roski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="45258" end="45277" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q66819454" start="45823" end="45835" title="Peter Demers" label="Peter Demers"/>
<link wikidata="Q162402" start="45882" end="45901" title="sports broadcasting" label="sports broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473705" start="45933" end="45961" title="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award" label="Foster Hewitt Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382387" start="46010" end="46024" title="Jiggs McDonald" label="Jiggs McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933413" start="46033" end="46043" title="Bob Miller (sportscaster)" label="Bob Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027614" start="46056" end="46068" title="Nick Nickson" label="Nick Nickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703852" start="46086" end="46100" title="Helene Elliott" label="Helene Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q650483" start="46104" end="46116" title="sportswriter" label="sportswriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="46131" end="46148" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366545" start="46171" end="46200" title="Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award" label="Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q706565" start="46265" end="46274" title="Red Kelly" label="Red Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124849" start="46277" end="46289" title="Jake Milford" label="Jake Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524237" start="46292" end="46305" title="Roger Neilson" label="Roger Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q826573" start="47670" end="47685" title="Bernie Nicholls" label="Bernie Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960815" start="47691" end="47698" title="1988–89 NHL season" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="47716" end="47729" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q524097" start="47736" end="47743" title="1990–91 NHL season" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="47760" end="47773" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q826573" start="47814" end="47829" title="Bernie Nicholls" label="Bernie Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265800" start="47867" end="47881" title="Marty McSorley" label="Marty McSorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q638881" start="47888" end="47895" title="1992–93 NHL season" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077414" start="47924" end="47936" title="Larry Murphy (ice hockey)" label="Larry Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="47942" end="47949" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q661592" start="47974" end="47988" title="Luc Robitaille" label="Luc Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="47994" end="48001" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="48016" end="48030" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="48036" end="48043" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="48062" end="48076" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="48082" end="48089" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="48123" end="48136" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="48167" end="48180" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="48210" end="48223" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376695" start="48263" end="48278" title="Tomas Sandström" label="Tomas Sandstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q716116" start="48280" end="48292" title="Tony Granato" label="Tony Granato"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="48294" end="48307" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737889" start="48312" end="48319" title="1989–90 NHL season" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163245" start="48345" end="48355" title="Jay Miller (ice hockey)" label="Jay Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q706924" start="48397" end="48409" title="Drew Doughty" label="Drew Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="48415" end="48422" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546040" start="48447" end="48460" title="Tyler Toffoli" label="Tyler Toffoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="48488" end="48502" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q631758" start="48543" end="48557" title="Jonathan Quick" label="Jonathan Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q171706" start="48571" end="48578" title="2012–13 NHL season" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q644171" start="48627" end="48634" title="1974–75 NHL season" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="48718" end="48725" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933413" start="48816" end="48826" title="Bob Miller (sports announcer)" label="Bob Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="49198" end="49217" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="49252" end="49274" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334262" start="49747" end="49752" title="NBCSN" label="NBCSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q98842990" start="49763" end="49773" title="Alex Faust" label="Alex Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="49850" end="49864" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="49999" end="50010" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q793699" start="50101" end="50112" title="iHeartRadio" label="iHeartRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338833" start="50254" end="50258" title="KEIB" label="KEIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027614" start="50413" end="50425" title="Nick Nickson" label="Nick Nickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178799" start="50427" end="50434" title="Jim Fox (ice hockey)" label="Jim Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016653" start="50439" end="50450" title="Daryl Evans" label="Daryl Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080194" start="50560" end="50577" title="Bally Sports West" label="Bally Sports West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="50607" end="50614" title="KCAL-TV" label="KCAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191501" start="50694" end="50708" title="ESPN Radio 710" label="ESPN Radio 710"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080194" start="50813" end="50830" title="Bally Sports West" label="Bally Sports West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="50832" end="50839" title="KCAL-TV" label="KCAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191501" start="50844" end="50858" title="ESPN Radio 710" label="ESPN Radio 710"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027614" start="50877" end="50889" title="Nick Nickson" label="Nick Nickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016653" start="50907" end="50918" title="Daryl Evans" label="Daryl Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178799" start="50941" end="50948" title="Jim Fox (ice hockey)" label="Jim Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q278673" start="51131" end="51144" title="Ontario Reign (AHL)" label="Ontario Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="51152" end="51174" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q21953168" start="51215" end="51239" title="Greenville Swamp Rabbits" label="Greenville Swamp Rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="51247" end="51251" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q925024" start="51286" end="51305" title="Manchester Monarchs (AHL)" label="Manchester Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q607135" start="51307" end="51327" title="Lowell Lock Monsters" label="Lowell Lock Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474509" start="51329" end="51348" title="Springfield Falcons" label="Springfield Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q940754" start="51350" end="51370" title="New Haven Nighthawks" label="New Haven Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q863796" start="51372" end="51390" title="Binghamton Dusters" label="Binghamton Dusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240798" start="51395" end="51412" title="Springfield Indians" label="Springfield Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="51420" end="51423" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577261" start="51425" end="51444" title="Manchester Monarchs (ECHL)" label="Manchester Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q506807" start="51449" end="51463" title="Reading Royals" label="Reading Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="51471" end="51475" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869301" start="51477" end="51496" title="Long Beach Ice Dogs" label="Long Beach Ice Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233726" start="51498" end="51517" title="Phoenix Roadrunners (IHL)" label="Phoenix Roadrunners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513220" start="51522" end="51536" title="Utah Grizzlies (1995–2005)" label="Utah Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="51544" end="51571" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="International Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564267" start="51581" end="51596" title="Houston Apollos" label="Houston Apollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053809" start="51604" end="51625" title="Central Professional Hockey League" label="Central Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="51643" end="51661" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="1967 NHL expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415968" start="51664" end="51683" title="List of NHL players" label="List of NHL players"/>
<link wikidata="Q770291" start="51686" end="51705" title="List of NHL seasons" label="List of NHL seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="51708" end="51724" title="Crypto.com Arena" label="Crypto.com Arena"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73137" wikidata="Q5360316" url="?curid=73137" title="Eli Siegel">
<text>Eli Siegel (August 16, 1902 – November 8, 1978) was a poet, critic, and educator. He founded Aesthetic Realism, a philosophical movement based in New York City. An idea central to Aesthetic Realism—that every person, place or thing in reality has something in common with all other things—was expressed in the title poem of his first volume, &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana: Poems&quot;. His second volume was &quot;Hail, American Development&quot;.

Siegel&#x27;s philosophic works include &quot;Self and World: An Explanation of Aesthetic Realism,&quot; &quot;Definitions, and Comment: Being a Description of the World,&quot; and &quot;The Aesthetic Nature of the World&quot;. His teaching of Aesthetic Realism spanned almost four decades and included thousands of extemporaneous lectures on poetry, the arts and sciences, religion, economics, and national ethics, as well as lessons to individuals and general classes which showed that questions of everyday life are aesthetic and ethical.

His lecture on the poetry of William Carlos Williams, which Williams attended, is published in &quot;The Williams-Siegel Documentary&quot; and his lectures on Henry James&#x27;s &quot;The Turn of the Screw&quot; were edited into a critical consideration titled &quot;James and the Children&quot;.
Siegel&#x27;s philosophy, and his statement, &quot;The world, art, and self explain each other: each is the aesthetic oneness of opposites&quot;, has influenced artists, scientists, and educators.

==Life==
Born in Dvinsk, Russian Empire, Siegel emigrated to the United States in 1905 with his parents, Mendel and Sarah (Einhorn) Siegel. The family settled in Baltimore, Maryland, where Siegel attended Baltimore City College and joined the speech and debate team now referred to as the Bancroft/Carrollton-Wight Literary Societies. He contributed to the senior publication &quot;The Green Bag&quot; and graduated in 1919. In 1922, together with V.F. Calverton [George Goetz], he co-founded &quot;The Modern Quarterly,&quot; a magazine in which his earliest essays appeared, including &quot;The Scientific Criticism&quot; (Vol. I, No. 1, March 1923) and &quot;The Equality of Man&quot; (Vol. I, No. 3, December 1923).

In 1925, his &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana&quot; was selected from four thousand anonymously submitted poems as the winner of &quot;The Nation&#x27;s&quot; esteemed poetry prize. The magazine&#x27;s editors described it as &quot;the most passionate and interesting poem which came in—a poem recording through magnificent rhythms a profound and important and beautiful vision of the earth on which afternoons and men have always existed.&quot; The poem begins:
::Quiet and green was the grass of the field,
::The sky was whole in brightness,
::And O, a bird was flying, high, there in the sky,
::So gently, so carelessly and fairly.

&quot;Hot Afternoons&quot; met violent opposition, according to William Carlos Williams, who wrote, years later: &quot;Only today do I realize how important that poem is in the history of our development as a cultural entity.&quot; &quot;In Hot Afternoons&quot;, Siegel later explained, &quot;I tried to take many things that are thought of usually as being far apart and foreign and to show, in a beautiful way, that they aren&#x27;t so separate and that they do have a great deal to do with one another.&quot;

Siegel continued writing poetry throughout his life but devoted the majority of his time over the next decades to developing the philosophy he later called Aesthetic Realism. After moving to New York City, he became a member of the Greenwich Village poets, famous for his dramatic readings of &quot;Hot Afternoons&quot; and other poems. His two-word poem, &quot;One Question&quot;, won recognition in 1925 as the shortest poem in the English language. It appeared in the &quot;Literary Review&quot; of the &quot;New York Evening Post&quot;:
This poem was later reprinted without the author&#x27;s name in an anthology edited by Louis Untermeyer and an anthology edited by Max J. Herzberg.
&lt;br&gt;

For several years in the 1930s Siegel served as master of ceremonies for regular poetry readings that were well known for combining poetry and jazz. He was also a regular reviewer for &quot;Scribner&#x27;s&quot; magazine and the &quot;New York Evening Post&quot; Literary Review. In 1938, Siegel began teaching poetry classes with the view that &quot;what makes a good poem is like what can make a good life&quot;. In 1941, students in these classes asked him to give individual lessons in which they might learn about their own lives. These were the first Aesthetic Realism lessons.

In 1944, Siegel married Martha Baird (University of Iowa), who had begun studying in his classes the year before. Baird would later become Secretary of the Society for Aesthetic Realism, and also a musicologist and poet in her own right.

In 1946, at Steinway Hall, Siegel began giving weekly lectures in which he presented the philosophy he first called Aesthetic Analysis (later, Aesthetic Realism) &quot;a philosophic way of seeing conflict in self and making this conflict clear to a person so that a person becomes more integrated and happier&quot;.
From 1941 to 1978, he gave many thousand lectures on poetry, history, economics—a wide variety of the arts and sciences. And he gave thousands of individual Aesthetic Realism lessons to men, women, and children. In these lessons the way of seeing the world based on aesthetics—which is Aesthetic Realism—was taught.

In 1951, William Carlos Williams read Siegel&#x27;s &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana&quot; again, and wrote to Martha Baird: &quot;Everything we most are compelled to do is in that one poem.&quot; Siegel, he wrote, &quot;belongs in the very first rank of our living artists&quot;. The prize poem became the title poem of Siegel&#x27;s first volume, &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana: Poems&quot;, nominated for a National Book Award in 1958. A decade later, his second volume, &quot;Hail, American Development&quot;, also met with critical acclaim. &quot;I think it&#x27;s about time Eli Siegel was moved up into the ranks of our acknowledged Leading Poets&quot;, wrote Kenneth Rexroth in the &quot;New York Times.&quot; Walter Leuba described Siegel&#x27;s poems as &quot;alive in a burning honesty and directness&quot; and yet, having &quot;exquisite emotional tact&quot;. He pointed to these lines from &quot;Dear Birds, Tell This to Mothers&quot;:

At the age of 76 Siegel had an operation for a benign prostatic condition. He called it &quot;the operation so disastrous to me&quot;. As a result, he lost the use of his feet and was unable to sleep. According to Ellen Reiss, Aesthetic Realism Chairman of Education, the operation was &quot;the cause of his dying 5-1/2 months later&quot;.

==Aesthetic Realism==

The basis of Aesthetic Realism is the principle, &quot;The world, art, and self explain each other: each is the aesthetic oneness of opposites.&quot; In the book &quot;Aesthetic Realism: We Have Been There&quot;, six working artists explain this principle in life and their own craft. Reviewing them, the &quot;Library Journal&quot; tells us: &quot;Heraclitus, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, and even Martin Buber have posited contraries and in their philosophies. Siegel, however, seems to be the first to demonstrate that &#x27;all beauty is the making one of the permanent opposites in reality&#x27;.&quot; (September 1, 1969) 

The ethics Siegel taught—&quot;the art of enjoying justice&quot;—includes this definition of &quot;good will&quot;: &quot;The desire to have something else stronger and more beautiful, for this desire makes oneself stronger and more beautiful.&quot; Good will is necessary, he stated, for a person to like him– or herself: &quot;This desire is the fundamental thing in human consciousness.&quot; (&quot;The Right of Aesthetic Realism to Be Known&quot;, issue no. 121)

==Works==

===Books===
Among Siegel&#x27;s many published works are:
* &lt;br&gt;&quot;Whether child or adult is spoken of, this book sees a person&#x27;s concerns with dignity and compassion.&quot; (February 1982) 
* 

===Books of Poetry===
* 

====From &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana: Poems&quot; and &quot;Hail, American Development&quot;====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Essays===
Some of his many essays and broadsides include:

* &quot;Is Beauty the Making One of Opposites?&quot;&#x27;, &quot;The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism&quot;, Vol. XIV, No. 2, December 1955 (see Terrain Gallery).
* &quot;Husbands and Poems&quot;, &quot;Today&#x27;s Japan&quot;, 1960.
* &quot;Alcoholism; or, You Got to Find the World Interesting&quot;, &quot;Definition&quot;, 1962.
* &quot;The Ordinary Doom&quot;, &quot;A Book of Nonfiction&quot;, (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1965), pp. 250–255.
* &quot;Assonance Is Like This&quot;, &quot;New York Quarterly&quot;, no. 2 (1970), pp. 82–90.

===Comments on Siegel&#x27;s work===
William Carlos Williams wrote of the poem &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana&quot;, &quot;I say definitely that that single poem, out of a thousand others written in the past quarter century, secures our place in the cultural world.&quot; Williams was an early supporter of Siegel&#x27;s poetry and defender of his views. He wrote:
I can&#x27;t tell you how important Siegel&#x27;s work is in the light of my present understanding of the modern poem. He belongs in the very first rank of our living artists.
And Williams added:
The other side of the picture is the extreme resentment that a fixed, sclerotic mind feels confronting this new. It shows itself by the violent opposition Siegel received from the &quot;authorities&quot; whom I shall not dignify by naming and after that by neglect. ...
John Henry Faulk, speaking of the poems in &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana&quot;, said on CBS radio, &quot;Eli Siegel makes a man glad he&#x27;s alive.&quot;&lt;br&gt;

Kenneth Rexroth wrote in the &quot;New York Times Book Review&quot; of &quot;Hail, American Development&quot; that Siegel&#x27;s poems contained &quot;...incomparable sensibility at work saying things nobody else could say and in the long ones the rhythms are as new inventions as once were Blake&#x27;s or Whitman&#x27;s or Apollinaire&#x27;s&quot;, adding, &quot;...all through &quot;Hail, American Development&quot; are Translations, mostly from the French, that show a penetration both original and extraordinary. His Translations of Baudelaire and his commentaries on them rank him with the most understanding of the Baudelaire critics in any language.&quot; (March 23, 1969) &lt;br&gt;

In &quot;Contemporary Authors&quot; Ellen Reiss, Aesthetic Realism Chairman of Education, stated (in a book published by Definition Press, said Foundation&#x27;s publishing arm):
Eli Siegel&#x27;s work, which in time became Aesthetic Realism, was the cause of some of the largest praise, the largest love in persons, and also the largest resentment …&lt;br&gt;

In writing an entry about [him] for &quot;Contemporary Authors&quot;, you are somewhat in the position you would be writing an entry on the poet John Keats in 1821. That is, if you were to rely on what was said of Keats by most established critics (critics now remembered principally for their injustice to one of the greatest English writers), you would present the author of `Ode to a Nightingale&#x27; as a presumptuous `Cockney poet&#x27; whose works were `driveling idiocy.&#x27; In writing about Eli Siegel [now], you are writing about a contemporary who is great; who all his life met what William Carlos Williams described him as meeting, `the extreme resentment that a fixed, sclerotic mind feels confronting this new&#x27;; who now, after his death, is beginning, just barely beginning, to be seen with something like fairness.
Huntington Cairns, Secretary of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., described Siegel&#x27;s place in the understanding of aesthetics—the branch of philosophy which studies beauty—as follows:
I believe that Eli Siegel was a genius. He did for aesthetics what Spinoza did for ethics. 
Donald Kirkley wrote in &quot;The Baltimore Sun&quot; (1944) reporting on Siegel&#x27;s reaction to his 1925 national fame,
Baltimore friends close to him at the time will testify to a certain integrity and steadfastness of purpose which distinguished Mr. Siegel ... He refused to exploit a flood of publicity which was enough to float any man to financial comfort ...
And William Carlos Williams also wrote,
Only today do I realize how important that poem [&quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana&quot;] is in the history of our development as a cultural entity. 

In 2002 the city of Baltimore placed a plaque in Druid Hill Park to commemorate the centennial of Eli Siegel&#x27;s birth. That same year, on July 26, 2002, Representative Elijah E. Cummings read a tribute to Siegel in the United States House of Representatives. 

==Epitaph==
The following are lines from &quot;Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana&quot;, one of the poems which Selden Rodman commented &quot;say more (and more movingly) about here and now than any contemporary poems I have read&quot;. (August 17, 1957 &quot;Saturday Review&quot;) These lines stand for what Ellen Reiss has described as Siegel&#x27;s &quot;beautiful, faithful, passionate, critical, loving attention to the world and humanity.&quot; 

==References==
==External links==

* Aesthetic Realism Online Library
* Aesthetic Realism Foundation website 
* Terrain Gallery
* Remarks in the U.S. Congress by Rep. Elijah E. Cummings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5360316" start="0" end="10" title="Eli Siegel" label="Eli Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688584" start="93" end="110" title="Aesthetic Realism" label="Aesthetic Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="146" end="159" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="" start="348" end="390" title="Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana: Poems" label="Hot Afternoons Have Been in Montana: Poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="1033" end="1056" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q625923" start="1188" end="1209" title="The Turn of the Screw" label="The Turn of the Screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q80021" start="1516" end="1522" title="Dvinsk" label="Dvinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1524" end="1538" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1661" end="1680" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852807" start="1704" end="1726" title="Baltimore City College" label="Baltimore City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854159" start="1788" end="1832" title="Bancroft/Carrollton-Wight Literary Societies" label="Bancroft/Carrollton-Wight Literary Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="3610" end="3627" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="3890" end="3911" title="New York Evening Post" label="New York Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="4263" end="4290" title="Scribners" label="&amp;quot;Scribner&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="4314" end="4335" title="New York Evening Post" label="New York Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="4702" end="4720" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q943999" start="4915" end="4928" title="Steinway Hall" label="Steinway Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="5272" end="5278" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="5289" end="5298" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="5321" end="5325" title="arts" label="arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="5330" end="5338" title="sciences" label="sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="6560" end="6569" title="prostate" label="prostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542511" start="7182" end="7197" title="Library Journal" label="Library Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="7220" end="7230" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7232" end="7241" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="7243" end="7247" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="7249" end="7254" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="7265" end="7277" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749902" start="7291" end="7301" title="contraries" label="contraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743548" start="8469" end="8512" title="The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism" label="The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703226" start="8556" end="8571" title="Terrain Gallery" label="Terrain Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="8999" end="9022" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181736" start="9804" end="9820" title="John Henry Faulk" label="John Henry Faulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="9904" end="9907" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q516447" start="9983" end="9998" title="Kenneth Rexroth" label="Kenneth Rexroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164965" start="10685" end="10705" title="Contemporary Authors" label="Contemporary Authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="11912" end="11935" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q862816" start="12147" end="12154" title="Ethics (Spinoza)" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="12202" end="12219" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308980" start="12789" end="12804" title="Druid Hill Park" label="Druid Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q934898" start="12912" end="12930" title="Elijah E. Cummings" label="Elijah E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="12963" end="13001" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="73138" wikidata="Q206312" url="?curid=73138" title="Arizona Coyotes">
<text>The Arizona Coyotes are an inactive professional ice hockey team based in the Phoenix metropolitan area. They competed in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Central Division (1996–1998, 2021–2024) and the Pacific Division (1998–2020) in the Western Conference, and the West Division (2020–2021). They played at America West Arena (now PHX Arena) in downtown Phoenix from 1996 to 2003, at Glendale&#x27;s Gila River Arena (now Desert Diamond Arena) from 2003 to 2022, and at Mullett Arena in Tempe from 2022 to 2024.
The organization was established on December 27, 1971, as the Winnipeg Jets, a charter franchise of the World Hockey Association (WHA). 

After seven WHA seasons, they were one of four organizations enfranchised by the NHL on June 22, 1979, when the WHA ceased operations. Due to financial troubles, the Jets were sold to American owners, who moved the team to Phoenix on July 1, 1996, where they were renamed the Phoenix Coyotes. The franchise was renamed the Arizona Coyotes on June 27, 2014. Alex Meruelo became the majority owner on July 29, 2019, later becoming the franchise&#x27;s sole owner following the arrest of minority owner Andrew Barroway.

The team failed to gain long-term stability despite the relocation to Arizona, enduring multiple changes in ownership and struggling for a profitable arena for home games. The NHL took over the Phoenix Coyotes franchise in 2009 when then-owner Jerry Moyes gave up the team after filing for bankruptcy. The NHL maintained control of the franchise until 2013, when they found new ownership willing to keep it in Arizona. Despite a difficult working relationship with the Phoenix suburb of Glendale, the Coyotes were able to secure a year-to-year arrangement to play in the facility until the end of the 2021–22 season. 

Negotiations with the city deteriorated, and the team subsequently signed an agreement to play their games at Mullett Arena on the campus of Arizona State University, starting with the 2022–23 season. The arrangement was intended to be brief, lasting only until a new arena was built in Tempe, but the arena proposal was rejected by the city&#x27;s residents in May 2023.

Amid growing pressure to resolve the arena situation and to find an alternative to a college arena considered too small even for temporary usage, the Coyotes suspended hockey operations following the conclusion of the 2023–24 season. In a deal brokered by the NHL, the Coyotes were essentially split in half. The team&#x27;s hockey assets (players, staff, and draft picks) were transferred to the Utah Hockey Club, an expansion franchise awarded at the same time to Ryan Smith and based in Salt Lake City. The Coyotes&#x27; name, history, and other intellectual property were initially retained by Meruelo, who had intended to build a new arena in Arizona by 2029.

Meruelo hoped to win a parcel of land at an auction in June 2024. When this auction was canceled by Arizona state authorities, Meruelo left the franchise and abandoned his efforts to revive the Coyotes, effectively putting the franchise into &quot;de facto&quot; NHL ownership.

In late 2024, Maricopa County Board of Supervisors chair Tom Galvin, expressed to NHL commissioner Gary Bettman interest in bringing about a committee of political and business leaders to help bring back the Coyotes franchise to Arizona.

==History==

===Original Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)===
The team began play as the Winnipeg Jets, one of the founding franchises in the World Hockey Association (WHA). The Jets were the most successful team in the short-lived WHA, winning the Avco World Trophy, the league&#x27;s championship trophy, three times and making the finals five out of the WHA&#x27;s seven seasons. It then became one of the four teams admitted to the NHL as part of a merger when the financially struggling WHA folded in 1979.

However, the club was never able to translate its WHA success into the NHL after the merger. The merger&#x27;s terms allowed the established NHL teams to reclaim most of the players that had jumped to the upstart league, and the Jets lost most of their best players in the ensuing reclamation draft. As a result, they finished last in the NHL during their first two seasons, including a nine-win season in 1980–81 that is still the worst in franchise history. However, they recovered fairly quickly, making the playoffs 11 times in the next 15 seasons, but the Jets only won two playoff series, largely because they were in the same division as the powerful Edmonton Oilers and Calgary Flames. Because of the way the playoffs were structured for much of their Winnipeg run, the team was all but assured of having to defeat either the Oilers or the Flames (or both) to reach the conference finals. In 1984–85, for instance, they finished with the fourth-best record in the NHL with 96 points, at the time their best as an NHL team. However, they were swept by the Oilers in the division finals. Two seasons later, they dispatched the Flames in the first round, only to be swept again by the Oilers in the division finals. The franchise did not win another playoff series for 25 years.

The Jets ran into financial trouble when player salaries began spiralling up in the 1990s; this hit the Canadian teams particularly hard. Winnipeg was the second-smallest market in the NHL for most of the Jets&#x27; existence and became the smallest after the Quebec Nordiques moved to Denver in 1995 to become the Colorado Avalanche. In addition, the club&#x27;s home arena, Winnipeg Arena, was one of the smallest in the league, seating just under 15,400 people. It was over 40 years old and had no luxury suites. Despite strong fan support, owner Barry Shenkarow was forced to put the team on the market. Several attempts to keep the team in Winnipeg fell through.

===Relocation to Phoenix===
In October 1995, Minnesota businessmen Steven Gluckstern and Richard Burke purchased the team with plans to move it to Minneapolis–St. Paul, which had lost the Minnesota North Stars in 1993, for the 1996–97 season. However, in December, after they were unable to secure a lease at Minneapolis&#x27; Target Center, they opted to move the Jets to Phoenix, instead. Minnesota was ultimately awarded an expansion team in 1997, the Minnesota Wild.

After the franchise considered &quot;Mustangs&quot;, &quot;Outlaws&quot;, &quot;Wranglers&quot;, and &quot;Freeze&quot;, a name-the-team contest yielded the official name &quot;Coyotes&quot;. At the time, the name was largely seen as play on the &quot;Looney Tunes&quot; character Wile E. Coyote of &quot;Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner&quot;, since Phoenix was home to several minor league teams and one short-lived WHA team called the Phoenix Roadrunners, including an International Hockey League (IHL) team that was playing there in 1996. However, &quot;Coyotes&quot; was considered suitable in any case since the coyote is endemic to the whole of Arizona, unlike the roadrunner, which is only found in the southern and western regions of the state. The Roadrunners only played one more season before leaving Phoenix; however, the Coyotes later revived the &quot;Roadrunners&quot; nickname for their American Hockey League affiliate, the Tucson Roadrunners.

===Early years in Phoenix (1996–2005)===
In the summer, the team added established superstar Jeremy Roenick from the Chicago Blackhawks, in exchange for trading Alexei Zhamnov. Roenick teamed up with power wingers Keith Tkachuk and Rick Tocchet to form a dynamic 1–2–3 offensive punch that led the Coyotes through their first years in Arizona. Also impressive were young players like Shane Doan (he eventually was the last remaining player from the team&#x27;s days in Winnipeg), Oleg Tverdovsky, and goaltender Nikolai Khabibulin, whom the fans nicknamed the &quot;Bulin Wall&quot;.
Another key addition to the squad was veteran forward Mike Gartner, who had joined from the Toronto Maple Leafs. Despite his experience and scoring his 700th career goal on December 15, 1997, Gartner battled injuries in the latter half of the 1997–98 season. The Coyotes did not renew his contract and he retired at the end of the season. After arriving in Phoenix, the team posted six consecutive .500 or better seasons, making the playoffs in every year but one. The one time they did not make the playoffs, in 2000–01, they became the first team to earn 90 points and miss the playoffs.

The Coyotes&#x27; original home, America West Arena, was suboptimal for hockey. Although considered a state-of-the-art arena when built for the Phoenix Suns, it was designed specifically as a basketball venue, with sight lines optimized for the smaller playing surface of that sport, and not with hockey in mind. The floor was just barely large enough to fit a standard NHL rink, forcing the Coyotes to hastily re-engineer it to accommodate the 200-foot rink. The configuration left a portion of one end of the upper deck hanging &quot;over&quot; the boards and ice, obscuring almost a third of the rink and one goal from several sections. As a result, listed capacity had to be cut down from over 18,000 seats to just over 16,000 – the second-smallest in the league at the time – after the first season.

Burke bought out Gluckstern in 1998 but was unable to attract more investors to alleviate the team&#x27;s financial woes. In 2001, Burke sold the team to Phoenix-area developer Steve Ellman, with Wayne Gretzky as a part-owner and head of hockey operations.

The closest that they came to advancing past the first round during their first decade in Arizona was during the 1999 playoffs. After building a 3–1 series lead, the Coyotes fell in overtime of game 7 on a goal by Pierre Turgeon of the St. Louis Blues. In 2002, the Coyotes posted 95 points, one point behind their best total as an NHL team while in Winnipeg, but went down rather meekly to the San Jose Sharks in five games.

From then until the 2007–08 season, the Coyotes were barely competitive and managed to break the 80-point barrier only once during that time. Attendance levels dropped considerably, worrying many NHL executives. In addition, an unfavorable arena lease at city-owned America West Arena had the team suffering massive financial losses (as much as $40 million a year at one point); the Coyotes have yet to recover from the resulting financial problems.

Ellman put forward numerous proposals to improve the hockey sightlines in America West Arena in hopes of boosting capacity back over the 17,000 mark. However, none of these got beyond the planning stages, leading Ellman to commit to building a new arena. After nearly three years of proposals to build an arena on the former Los Arcos Mall in Scottsdale and having difficulty financing the purchase of the Coyotes and finishing demolition of Los Arcos, along with infighting in the Scottsdale City Council, Ellman looked toward the West Valley, and in December 2003, the team moved into Glendale Arena (which then became known as Jobing.com Arena during the 2006–07 NHL season). Simultaneously, the team changed its logo and uniforms, moving from the multi-colored kit to a more streamlined look. In 2005, Ellman sold the Coyotes, the National Lacrosse League&#x27;s Arizona Sting and the lease to Gila River Arena to trucking magnate Jerry Moyes, who was also a part-owner of Major League Baseball&#x27;s Arizona Diamondbacks.

===Gretzky era (2005–2009)===
On August 6, 2005, Brett Hull, son of former Jet Bobby Hull, was signed and promptly assigned the elder Hull&#x27;s retired number 9. Two days later, Gretzky named himself head coach, replacing Rick Bowness, despite the fact he had never coached at any level of hockey. The Coyotes &quot;Ring of Honor&quot; was unveiled on October 8, inducting Gretzky (who had never played for the organization, but whose number 99 was retired by all NHL teams after his retirement in 1999) and Bobby Hull. Only a week later, Brett Hull announced his retirement. On January 21, 2006, Jets great Thomas Steen was the third inductee to the &quot;Ring of Honor&quot;.
Another moment in a series of bad luck: the Coyotes were planning to host the 2006 NHL All-Star Game, but the event was canceled because of the 2006 Winter Olympics. The team returned to Winnipeg on September 17, 2006, to play a preseason game against the Edmonton Oilers, but were shut-out 5–0 before a sellout crowd of 15,015.

On April 11, 2007, CEO Jeff Shumway announced that General Manager Michael Barnett (Gretzky&#x27;s agent for over 20 years), senior executive vice president of hockey operations Cliff Fletcher and San Antonio Rampage&#x27;s general manager and Coyotes&#x27; assistant general manager Laurence Gilman &quot;have been relieved of their duties&quot;. The Coyotes finished the 2006–07 season 31–46–5, their worst record since relocating to Phoenix. On May 29, Jeff Shumway announced Don Maloney had agreed to a multi-year contract to become general manager of the Coyotes. As per club policy, the terms of the contract were not disclosed. However, as had been the case with all general managers since 2001, Maloney served in an advisory role to Gretzky.

The 2007–08 season was something of a resurgence for the Coyotes. After their disastrous 2006–07 campaign, the Coyotes looked to rebuild the team by relying on their drafted talent such as Peter Mueller and Martin Hanzal to make the team successful as opposed to using free agency. The Coyotes also acquired Radim Vrbata from the Chicago Blackhawks for Kevyn Adams in an effort to provide the team with more offense. The team signed both Alex Auld and David Aebischer to compete for the starting goaltender position with Mikael Tellqvist acting as the backup goaltender. Neither Auld or Aebischer were able to hold on to the starting position, leaving the Coyotes to turn to the waiver wire for assistance. On November 17, 2007, the Coyotes were able to claim Ilya Bryzgalov off waivers from the Anaheim Ducks. Bryzgalov responded by not only starting in goal the day he was acquired but posting a shutout in his Coyotes debut against the Los Angeles Kings. Bryzgalov was soon given a three-year contract extension because of his high level of play. Despite predictions of another disastrous season, the Coyotes played competitive hockey for most of the season. However, they finished eight points short of the last playoff spot, with 83 points.

===Return to the playoffs and division title (2009–2012)===
On September 24, 2009, Dave Tippett took over coaching duties of the Phoenix Coyotes after Wayne Gretzky stepped down hours before. In just 61 games, Tippett led the Coyotes to more wins in their 2009–10 regular season (37) than their previous season (36), en route to the first 50-win season in the franchise&#x27;s NHL history.
On March 27, 2010, the Coyotes clinched a playoff spot, their first playoff spot since the 2001–02 season, and in the process, reached the 100-point mark for the first time ever as an NHL team, and the first time overall since the 1977–78 (WHA) Jets scored 102 points. They finished with 107 points, the highest point total in the franchise&#x27;s 38-year history. This was good enough for fourth overall in the NHL, tying the 1984–85 Jets for the franchise&#x27;s highest finish as an NHL team. They also qualified for the fourth seed in the Western Conference, giving them a home-ice advantage in the first round for the first time since 1985.

Their first round opponent in the 2010 Stanley Cup playoffs were the Detroit Red Wings. Game 1 of the series was the first NHL playoff game to be played in Gila River Arena. However, an injury to Shane Doan sidelined him for most of the series, and the defending conference champion Red Wings defeated the Coyotes in seven games.

The Coyotes again faced Detroit in the first round of the 2011 playoffs, losing the series in four games.

On April 7, 2012, the Coyotes defeated the Minnesota Wild 4–1 to win the Pacific Division title – their first and only division title as an NHL team (in Winnipeg or Phoenix). This gave them the third seed in the West, and with it home-ice advantage in a playoff series for only the third time in franchise history. In the first round, they defeated the Chicago Blackhawks in six games, the franchise&#x27;s first playoff series win since 1987. The first five games went to overtime, tying a record when the Montreal Canadiens and Toronto Maple Leafs did it in the 1951 Stanley Cup Finals. They faced the Nashville Predators in the second round, winning the first two games and the series 4–1. However, in the conference finals, the Coyotes fell to the Los Angeles Kings (who eventually went on to win the Cup that year) in game five of a 4–1 series.

====2009 bankruptcy and attempts to sell the team====

In December 2008, the media became aware the Coyotes were suffering massive losses and that the NHL was paying the team&#x27;s bills. The media reports were minimized by NHL commissioner Gary Bettman and vice-president Bill Daly. However, Moyes had secretly given operational control of the team to the league. In May 2009, Moyes put the team into bankruptcy hours before Bettman was to present him an offer to sell the team to Chicago Bulls and Chicago White Sox owner Jerry Reinsdorf. Moyes intended to sell the team to Canadian billionaire Jim Balsillie, who in turn intended to purchase the team out of bankruptcy and move it to Hamilton, Ontario. The NHL responded by stripping Moyes of his remaining ownership authority.

From May until September 2009, hearings were held in Phoenix bankruptcy court to determine the fate of the Coyotes and the holding company. Two potential bidders for the team surfaced, Reinsdorf and Ice Edge Holdings, but they did not submit a bid for the team. Instead, the NHL put in the only rival bid to Balsillie for the team, while it contended the Moyes–Balsillie deal violated NHL rules. The bankruptcy court voided the planned sale to Balsillie, accepting the NHL&#x27;s argument that bankruptcy could not be used to circumvent NHL rules. The NHL&#x27;s bid was also declared insufficient, but the judge left the window open to an improved bid. Moyes and the NHL settled, with the NHL purchasing the team and assuming all debts. The NHL negotiated a temporary lease with the City of Glendale, which owns Gila River Arena.

The NHL then negotiated with Reinsdorf and Ice Edge toward a deal with Glendale. Ice Edge signed a letter of intent to purchase the team from the NHL, while Reinsdorf had won the approval of the City of Glendale. On May 7, 2010, ESPN.com reported the Reinsdorf bid had fallen apart and that the City of Glendale was working with Ice Edge to purchase the team in a last-ditch effort to keep them in Arizona. The &quot;National Post&quot; criticized both bids, as they were conditional on municipal taxpayers covering any losses the Coyotes might incur, and suggested that keeping the team in Phoenix was never economically viable.

In July 2010, the Ice Edge bid collapsed because it did not satisfy Glendale&#x27;s financial conditions. Ice Edge decided to concentrate on an effort to purchase a minor league team. The City of Glendale had to step in and guarantee the team&#x27;s losses for 2010–11 as a precondition of the NHL not transferring the franchise. A consortium of investors led by Chicago investor Matt Hulsizer then reached a deal to purchase the Coyotes from the NHL along with a lease agreement with Glendale. However, the Hulsizer deal collapsed in late June 2011 at least in part because of a threatened suit by the Goldwater Institute over the legality of payments that Glendale was to make to Hulsizer before the consortium bought the team. The threat of the suit may have prevented the sale of bonds to finance the payments. The team only stayed in the Phoenix area for the 2011–12 season after another $25 million payment by the City of Glendale.

Also in 2011, former Coyotes bidders True North Sports and Entertainment purchased the Atlanta Thrashers and moved them to Winnipeg, thus ending any possibility that the Coyotes would return to Manitoba. As part of the transaction, the NHL agreed to transfer the Jets&#x27; name, logos, and related trademarks from the league-owned Coyotes to True North and the Thrashers thus becoming the &quot;new&quot; Winnipeg Jets. However, the original Jets&#x27; history remains with the Coyotes organization.

The 2012–13 NHL lockout provided another opportunity for the Coyotes to find a potential owner and avoid relocation while the NHL suspended team operations during the labor dispute. A deal to former San Jose Sharks owner Greg Jamison had been drafted just as the lockout ended, but failed to be finalized and fulfilled by January 31, 2013. The deal would have kept the Coyotes in Phoenix for the next 20 years relying on a taxpayer subsidy, according to the agreement. It would also have had &quot;Phoenix&quot; dropped from the name and instead used &quot;Arizona&quot;.

California investment executive Darin Pastor also submitted a bid to purchase the Coyotes. His bid proposed to keep the team in the Glendale area while engaging young hockey players in the region through school partnerships and scholarship efforts. The NHL rejected Pastor&#x27;s bid on May 13, 2013, citing the bid was &quot;inconsistent with what we had previously indicated were the minimum prerequisites&quot; of a bid.

===New ownership and the Arizona Coyotes (2013–2024)===

Because the team had been in bankruptcy since 2009 and lost revenue each year, the NHL planned to move the Coyotes should a deal with the city for a new lease and new ownership not be decided by July 2, 2013. The plan was to move the franchise to a new city, likely Seattle. On July 2, 2013, by a vote of 4–3, the Glendale City Council approved a 15-year lease agreement with Renaissance Sports and Entertainment (RSE), which purchased the team from the NHL for US$225 million by August 5, 2013. The members of the Canadian group were Executive Chairman &amp; Governor George Gosbee; President, CEO &amp; Alternate Governor Anthony LeBlanc; Alternate Governor Craig Stewart; and Directors Gary J. Drummond, W. David Duckett, William &quot;Bill&quot; Dutton, Robert Gwin, Scott Saxberg and Richard Walter. RSE partnered with Global Spectrum (owners of the Philadelphia Flyers) for help in managing Gila River Arena. The agreement had the City of Glendale giving RSE US$15 million per year for management fees. There was a clause stipulating RSE could relocate the team after five years if it accrued US$50 million in losses.

On January 29, 2014, the new ownership group announced that the team would change its name to the &quot;Arizona Coyotes&quot; for the 2014–15 season. According to Coyotes club president Anthony LeBlanc, the change was made to reflect the fact the team is no longer located within Phoenix city limits and to include all hockey fans in the state of Arizona. Aside from a new shoulder patch, the team&#x27;s uniform design did not change. The name officially changed on June 27.

Following the conclusion of the 2013–14 season, it was reported that lackluster revenue from parking and non-hockey events enabled the City of Glendale to recoup just $4.4 million, which was significantly less than the $6.8 million the city expected to receive back from sources including parking receipts, ticket sales, and naming rights for the arena.

On June 4, 2014, it was reported that a Scottsdale, Arizona, public-relations firm had sued IceArizona, the owner of the Phoenix Coyotes, alleging the NHL club had reneged on a sponsorship deal worth nearly $250,000. A Coyotes spokesman responded to this issue by calling it a &quot;quarter-million-dollar scheme&quot;. By October, IceArizona entered a deal to sell a 51% controlling interest in the Coyotes to Philadelphia-based hedge fund manager Andrew Barroway, who had recently failed in his attempt to purchase the New York Islanders. The deal was approved by the NHL Board of Governors on December 31, 2014.

During the 2014–15 season, the team finished last in the Pacific Division with the second-worst record in the NHL. On June 10, 2015, Glendale City Council voted to terminate its 15-year, $225 million agreement with the Coyotes. The city claimed &quot;It was entitled to terminate the agreement because two former city employees, Craig Tindall and Julie Frisoni, were involved in securing the deal and later worked for the Coyotes.&quot; On July 23, 2015, it was announced the Coyotes and City Council had agreed on a resolution. On July 24, 2015, the Coyotes announced the City Council had reached a two-year deal.

At the conclusion of the 2015–16 season, general manager Don Maloney, who had won General Manager of the Year award in 2010, was fired from his position after eight seasons. The Coyotes replaced Maloney with John Chayka, who, at 26 years of age, became the youngest NHL GM of all time, being promoted from his position as assistant general manager/analytics within the Coyotes staff. In August 2016, Dawn Braid was hired as the Coyotes&#x27; skating coach, making her the first female full-time coach in the NHL.

On November 14, 2016, the Coyotes announced plans to build a new arena in Tempe, Arizona, which was scheduled to be completed for the 2019–20 NHL season. The project would have included an adjoining 4,000-seat arena to be used for Coyotes practices and as the home for the Arizona State University hockey team. However, the arena project was withdrawn when ASU pulled out of the deal in February 2017.

At the end of the 2016–17 season, Barroway bought out the rest of the IceArizona ownership group and became the sole owner of the franchise. Following the transfer, former IceArizona CEO Anthony LeBlanc and the director of hockey operations Gary Drummond both left the organization. On June 19, 2017, the Coyotes opted not to re-sign long-time captain Shane Doan, who had been with the franchise since they were the Winnipeg Jets. The Coyotes left Doan a standing offer to remain with the team in a non-playing role. On June 22, 2017, head coach Dave Tippett left his positions within the Coyotes after eight seasons, and was succeeded by Rick Tocchet on July 11, 2017.

On December 4, 2018, it was announced that the team would move to the Central Division in 2021, changing divisions for the second time since relocating to Arizona, as part of a league realignment following the addition of the Seattle Kraken. The team previously played in the Central Division for their first two seasons following their relocation from Winnipeg in 1996. On December 20, 2018, the team extended their lease in Gila River Arena through the 2019–20 season.

On July 29, 2019, Barroway sold controlling interest in the Coyotes to billionaire Alex Meruelo, with Barroway remaining as a minority owner until his arrest, which left Meruelo the sole owner of the franchise.

During the 2020 NHL entry draft, the Coyotes received widespread backlash and criticism for drafting Mitchell Miller in the fourth round (111th pick overall), after allegations surfaced that he had bullied and discriminated against an African-American classmate having a learning disability, during high school in 2016. Soon thereafter, they renounced his draft rights.

For the COVID-19 pandemic-shortened 2020–21 season the Coyotes were placed in the reformed West Division and played a division-only 56-game schedule. They finished in fifth place with 54 points, outside of the playoffs. After the season, the team and coach Rick Tocchet mutually agreed to part ways. Andre Tourigny was hired as head coach of the Coyotes on July 1, 2021.
For the 2021–22 season, the Coyotes moved into the Central Division upon the arrival of the Kraken in the Pacific Division. In the 2021 NHL entry draft, the Coyotes would select Josh Doan, son of former Coyotes player Shane Doan; Josh would later play with the Coyotes in 2024. On August 19, 2021, the city of Glendale and the Gila River Arena chose to not renew their operating agreement with the Coyotes beyond the 2021–22 season, as the team&#x27;s lease had been renewed each year since 2016. The franchise entered negotiations with Tempe to develop a new arena on an old solid waste compost yard, but the terrain had problems regarding environmental remediation. On September 3, they submitted a proposal to build a new arena in Tempe.
On December 8, 2021, the Coyotes were informed that they would be locked out of Gila River Arena on December 20, 2021, if they did not pay $1.3 million owed in taxes, including $250,000 to the City of Glendale. The team paid the bills the next day, citing &quot;unfortunate human error&quot; as the cause of the issue. In late January 2022, the Coyotes were in talks with Arizona State University (ASU) to use their new 5,000-seat arena as a temporary home arena for the next few years. On February 10, 2022, the Coyotes signed a three-year agreement to play their games at Mullett Arena, starting with the 2022–23 season. On April 29, 2022, the Coyotes played their final home game at the Gila River Arena against the Nashville Predators, with a 5–4 comeback win. On October 28, 2022, the Coyotes would make their debut in the Mullett Arena, which sold out to a crowd of 4,600 people that day, in a 3–2 overtime loss to the current Winnipeg Jets franchise, with Christian Fischer scoring the first two goals of the franchise at the arena for that game.

====Asset transfer to Utah and suspension of operations====

A proposal by the Coyotes to build a new arena in Tempe was rejected by residents of the city on May 16, 2023. The arena was estimated to cost $2.1 billion, with $1.9 billion of the cost privately funded. Despite speculation on immediate relocation, the team remained in Arizona, playing at Mullett Arena during the 2023–24 NHL season. The Coyotes spoke with the city of Mesa about a potential arena at the Fiesta Mall site, but that plan was ultimately rejected for unknown reasons. In January 2024, Scottsdale mayor David Ortega announced his opposition to a Coyotes&#x27; proposal, which planned an arena in northern Phoenix near the border of Scottsdale. Following this, the Coyotes initially stated on social media their commitment to keeping the team in Arizona. They announced that the ownership was intent on winning a land auction for of state-owned land between Scottsdale Road and Loop 101 in Phoenix to build an arena. However, the auction had been delayed from January to June 2024, which likely played a part into the ownership&#x27;s final decision with the franchise near the end of the 2023–24 season.

On April 10, 2024, it was reported that, with the NHL&#x27;s permission, the Coyotes were making efforts to relocate to Salt Lake City, Utah, following concerns about an indefinite timeframe for finding a new arena and the effects of continued play at Mullett Arena, in the interim. This led to the NHL buying the franchise then reselling it to Ryan Smith, owner of the Utah Jazz of the National Basketball Association (NBA), for a reported $1.2 billion. Of that payment, $1 billion went to Coyotes owner Alex Meruelo for the sale (with Meruelo agreeing to refund the money to the NHL as an expansion fee should his efforts to locate a new home for the franchise succeed) and $200 million went to the NHL&#x27;s other 31 owners, as the equivalent of a relocation fee. The Utah team will play its home games at the Jazz&#x27;s home arena, the Delta Center. Renovations will be required to make it the team&#x27;s permanent home, similar to the renovations made to Climate Pledge Arena before the Kraken began play in the NHL two seasons prior.

On April 12, 2024, ahead of a 3–2 overtime win against the Edmonton Oilers at Rogers Place, general manager Bill Armstrong officially disclosed the news of the team&#x27;s impending sale and relocation to Coyotes players and staff. Five days later, on April 17, the Coyotes played their final game at Mullett Arena, and ultimately their last game before deactivation, against the same Oilers team. With the fans engaging in one last Whiteout (and audibly heard chanting phrases such as &quot;Salt Lake sucks&quot; and &quot;we love you Coyotes&quot; throughout the game), the Coyotes won 5–2, with Sean Durzi scoring the final goal of the team&#x27;s first incarnation, into an empty net. Amongst the events of the game, Shane Doan was given his retirement banner (which had been lost by the team in the move to Mullett Arena but had been rediscovered by a local fan), and following the end of the game the fans gave the outgoing team a standing ovation, and the players, in turn, spent over an hour afterward on the ice giving away team apparel and equipment (also signing a majority of the fan gifts), as well as taking a final team picture on the ice and taking turns hugging and thanking longtime equipment manager Stan Wilson, who had moved with the team from Winnipeg in 1996. The following day, the sale and relocation was officially approved, and the team was officially deactivated until further notice.

It subsequently emerged that the Utah club was considered an expansion team, not a relocated Coyotes team. In a deal that effectively split the Coyotes franchise in half, Smith acquired the Coyotes&#x27; player contracts, hockey operations staff, and draft picks while the Coyotes went &quot;dormant&quot; pending a permanent arena. This move was similar to the Cleveland Browns and Baltimore Ravens of the National Football League (NFL), with the Coyotes continuing minor business operations, mostly focused on finding a new arena. Meruelo remained on the NHL Board of Governors as an observer, retaining the rights to the Coyotes brand and history (including the history and records of the 1972–1996 Winnipeg Jets), with a five-year window to build or otherwise locate a new arena for his team, before &quot;reactivating&quot; the Coyotes through an expansion draft. Conversely, if Meruelo were to fail to come up with a suitable arena by end of that five-year window, he would be required to permanently halt franchise operations and cede the franchise back to the NHL. The sale was finalized on April 18, after the NHL Board of Governors voted to grant a new Utah franchise to Smith, effectively expanding the NHL to a total of 33 clubs, should the Coyotes have succeeded in building a new team arena.

On June 21, 2024, the Arizona State Land Department canceled a land auction for a 110-acre parcel of land in north Phoenix which Meruelo intended to purchase as a site for a new arena. Three days later, it was reported that Meruelo had told staff he had no plans to pursue further arena options for the team. At the Board of Governors’ meeting on June 26, Meruelo informed Bettman that he was not pursuing the franchise reactivation. Meruelo formally relinquished his rights to the franchise on July 10.

==Team information==
===Name===
Upon the franchise&#x27;s relocation to Phoenix, a public team-naming vote was held, with &quot;Coyotes&quot; defeating &quot;Scorpions&quot; among the finalists. Both coyotes and scorpions are inhabitants of the Sonoran Desert, and the owners/supporters of the club wanted the team name to be an animal that was representative of the region. On June 27, 2014, the team changed its geographic name to Arizona.

===Logos and jerseys===
Upon their arrival in Phoenix in 1996, the team adopted a look with a traditional Southwestern design. The primary logo was a Southwest Native American-styled hockey stick-wielding coyote in a kachina-inspired style. The jerseys featured pointed green shoulders with brick red trim over a white (home) or black (road) body, and non-traditional striping patterns. These uniforms remained in place until 2003. A third jersey, primarily green with a nighttime desert landscape wrapped around the bottom and the cuffs of the sleeves, was introduced in 1998 and was retired in 2003 when the team redesigned the uniforms.

As the NHL switched home and road jerseys beginning in the 2003–04 season and coinciding with the team&#x27;s move from America West Arena to the newly completed Glendale Arena, the Coyotes redesigned their look completely, adopting a howling coyote head logo while dropping several colors from the team&#x27;s palette. Sedona red and white became the primary colors, with desert sand and black remaining as logo trim colors. A variation of these colors was later used for the Major League Baseball team Arizona Diamondbacks. The team also changed its shoulder patch, taking the form of the outline of the state of Arizona, with an homage to the state flag and the abbreviation &quot;PHX&quot;. This logo was worn only on the right shoulder leaving the left shoulder bare.
The Coyotes updated their jerseys for the 2007–08 season, along with all NHL teams, as part of the switchover to &quot;Rbk Edge&quot; jerseys. The changes made were adding an NHL crest just below the neck opening, removing the stripes that were previously just above the lower hem, and moving the &quot;PHX&quot; patch from the right to the left shoulder. The white jersey also gained red shoulder coloring and laces at the collar. The three-stripe pattern is applied to the side of the pants.

The Coyotes also added a third jersey for the 2008–09 season. It is primarily black and features a new alternate coyote logo on the front, with the primary logo (coyote head) patch on the right shoulder, and the &quot;Official Seal&quot; on the left. Since white does not appear on the alternate, solid red pant shells are worn with this jersey.

Before the 2014–15 season, it was announced the Coyotes&#x27; third jersey would no longer be used. The patch on the home and away jerseys that used to read &quot;PHX&quot; would also be changed to read &quot;AZ&quot; to match the team&#x27;s rebranded name.

On June 26, 2015, the Coyotes introduced updated jerseys. The uniforms reintegrated black into the design; the color was prominently featured on the uniform sleeves, socks, and pants.

The Coyotes wore their black Kachina jerseys for a few dates between 2014–15 and 2016–17 seasons. The style was similar to the originals but was adapted to the Reebok Edge cut. For the 2018–19 season and beyond, the Coyotes revived the Kachina uniforms as a third jersey, and was updated to the Adidas adizero cut. In 2020, the black Kachina design became the primary home jerseys (for 2021 only, the red trim on the letters were changed to silver to commemorate the team&#x27;s 25th season in Arizona), but kept the previous red &quot;howling coyote&quot; jerseys as an alternate. The road &quot;howling coyote&quot; jerseys were also retained. In addition, the Coyotes wore a second alternate uniform: a purple &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; version of the 1998–2003 Kachina head alternates.

Before the 2021–22 season, the Coyotes hinted at a possible rebrand in September after the team named MullenLowe LA as its branding partner. During the off-season, the Coyotes quietly brought back the 1996–2003 Kachina logo as the primary, and later revealed a white road version of the Kachina uniforms while keeping the previous &quot;howling coyote&quot; home uniform as an alternate.

In the 2022–23 season, Arizona once again wore its 1998–2003 Kachina head alternates as its &quot;Reverse Retro&quot; uniform, but with sienna as the base color. Also during that season, a new alternate uniform was released, returning to the simplified brick red and sand color scheme from 2003 to 2015 but with kachina patterns at the bottom and on the sleeves. The uniform features &quot;Arizona&quot; in sand with a star above the &quot;i&quot;, and a sand saguaro on the right side of the pants. The captain&#x27;s patch is denoted by the crescent moon alternate, while the alternate captain&#x27;s patch is denoted by two saguaros crossing each other.

===Mascot===
Howler was the coyote-suited mascot of the Arizona Coyotes. He was introduced on October 15, 2005. The Coyotes&#x27; official kids club was called Howler&#x27;s Kids Club. Howler wore number 96 on his jersey, representing the year the Winnipeg Jets moved to Arizona, and he also wore an &quot;M&quot; designation for &quot;mascot&quot;. He was known to beat on a bucket to encourage the fans to cheer and has had many different outfits in games.

==Season-by-season record==
&quot;This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Coyotes. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Arizona Coyotes seasons&quot;.

&quot;Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against&quot;
==Players==
===Retired and honored numbers===


===Hall of Famers===
Players
* Mike Gartner
* Dale Hawerchuk
* Phil Housley
* Bobby Hull
* Brett Hull
* Jeremy Roenick
* Serge Savard
* Teemu Selanne

===First-round draft picks===
&quot;Note: This list does not include selections of the Winnipeg Jets.&quot;
* 1996: Dan Focht (11th overall) &amp; Daniel Briere (24th overall)
* 1998: Patrick DesRochers (14th overall)
* 1999: Scott Kelman (15th overall) &amp; Kirill Safronov (19th overall)
* 2000: Krystofer Kolanos (19th overall)
* 2001: Fredrik Sjostrom (11th overall)
* 2002: Jakub Koreis (19th overall) &amp; Ben Eager (23rd overall)
* 2004: Blake Wheeler (5th overall)
* 2005: Martin Hanzal (17th overall)
* 2006: Peter Mueller (8th overall) &amp; Chris Summers (29th overall)
* 2007: Kyle Turris (3rd overall) &amp; Nick Ross (30th overall)
* 2008: Mikkel Boedker (8th overall) &amp; Viktor Tikhonov (28th overall)
* 2009: Oliver Ekman-Larsson (6th overall)
* 2010: Brandon Gormley (13th overall) &amp; Mark Visentin (27th overall)
* 2011: Connor Murphy (20th overall)
* 2012: Henrik Samuelsson (27th overall)
* 2013: Max Domi (12th overall)
* 2014: Brendan Perlini (12th overall)
* 2015: Dylan Strome (3rd overall) &amp; Nick Merkley (30th overall)
* 2016: Clayton Keller (7th overall) &amp; Jakob Chychrun (16th overall)
* 2017: Pierre-Olivier Joseph (23rd overall)
* 2018: Barrett Hayton (5th overall)
* 2019: Victor Soderstrom (11th overall)
* 2021: Dylan Guenther (9th overall)
* 2022: Logan Cooley (3rd overall), Conor Geekie (11th overall) &amp; Maveric Lamoureux (29th overall)
* 2023: Dmitriy Simashev (6th overall), Daniil But (12th overall)
===Team scoring leaders===
These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise (Winnipeg, Phoenix, and Arizona) history.

&quot;Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game&quot;


===NHL awards and trophies===

Jack Adams Award
* Bob Francis: 2001–02
* Dave Tippett: 2009–10

King Clancy Memorial Trophy
* Shane Doan: 2009–10

Mark Messier Leadership Award
* Shane Doan: 2011–12

Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy
* Connor Ingram: 2023–24

===Team records===

&quot;Note: This list does not include seasons of the 1972–1996 Winnipeg Jets.&quot;
* Most goals in a season: 52, Keith Tkachuk (1996–97)
* Most assists in a season: 53, Ray Whitney (2011–12)
* Most points in a season: 86, Keith Tkachuk (1996–97) and Clayton Keller (2022–23)
* Most penalty minutes in a season: 324, Daniel Carcillo (2007–08)
* Most goals in a season, defenseman: 23, Oliver Ekman-Larsson (2014–15)
* Most points in a season, defenseman: 59, Keith Yandle (2010–11)
* Most points in a season, rookie: 65, Clayton Keller (2017–18)
* Most wins in a season: 42, Ilya Bryzgalov (2009–10)

===Team captains===
In the NHL, each team may select a captain. Along with the two alternate captains, they have the &quot;privilege of discussing with the referee any questions relating to interpretation of rules which may arise during the progress of a game&quot;. Captains are required to wear the letter &quot;C&quot; on their uniform for identification, which is high.

&quot;Note: This list does not include captains from the original Winnipeg Jets (NHL &amp; WHA).&quot;
* Keith Tkachuk, 1996–2001
* Teppo Numminen, 2001–2003
* Shane Doan, 2003–2017
* Oliver Ekman-Larsson, 2018–2021

==Broadcasting==
===Television===
Prior to the cessation of the team&#x27;s operations, the following television stations carried the team&#x27;s games:
* KASW (Independent, Phoenix)
* KGUN-DT2 (Laff, Tucson)
* KUPX-TV/KSTU-DT2 (Independent/Antenna TV, Provo–Salt Lake City) 
** As KUPX also aired Vegas Golden Knights games on their main channel, games were split between KUPX-TV and KSTU-DT2, depending on the latter&#x27;s own game scheduling

KNXV-TV (Independent, Phoenix) would also be involved earlier in the team&#x27;s final season of play, but would drop out in covering games live shortly after the season began. 

On October 5, 2023, the Coyotes reached a new multi-year broadcast agreement with Scripps Sports, with games airing on Scripps-owned broadcast stations in the Coyotes&#x27; designated market. As part of the agreement, the Coyotes planned to launch a direct-to-consumer streaming service. In Phoenix, KNXV-TV&#x27;s Antenna TV-affiliated subchannel 15.2 initially served as flagship station; due to network programming commitments with ABC and The CW, KNXV or sister station KASW could not carry the games on their main channels, but were still scheduled to air team-produced ancillary programming. In November 2023, Scripps announced that KASW would become the independent station Arizona 61 on November 20, taking over as the flagship station of the Coyotes television network. The CW would concurrently move to KNXV-DT2. With the team&#x27;s cessation in 2024, the Coyotes&#x27; deal would end prematurely, but it would be replaced with the Utah Hockey Club taking on the team&#x27;s original contractual rights with Scripps Sports instead.

On February 16, 2024, the Coyotes launched Coyotes Central, a direct-to-consumer streaming service that featured all locally televised games in partnership with Kiswe. At launch, the service cost $11.99 per month and $24.99 for the remainder of the 2023–24 season. The service would shut down following the Coyotes&#x27; suspension period turned into an abandoned revival project starting on April 18, 2024.

From its move to Phoenix in 1996 to the end of the 2007–08 season, the regional television rights for Arizona Coyotes were split between Fox Sports Arizona and over-the-air broadcasters including KTVK and KASW (1996–2006) and KAZT-TV (2006–2008).

From the 2007–08 NHL season until the 2023 NHL preseason period, Bally Sports Arizona (formerly Fox Sports Arizona) was the exclusive regional television rightsholder for all Arizona Coyotes games not broadcast nationally by NBCSN, NBC, ESPN, ABC, or TNT. As part of Bally Sports&#x27; bankruptcy proceedings, on October 4, 2023, Diamond Sports rejected Bally Sports Arizona&#x27;s contract with the Coyotes. For the 2023–24 NHL season, Scripps Sports became the new exclusive regional television rightsholder for all Arizona Coyotes games not broadcast nationally.

===Radio===
In 2021, the Arizona Coyotes entered a two-year deal with Bonneville Phoenix to broadcast the team&#x27;s games on the radio in the Phoenix market on either KMVP-FM or KTAR. In 2023, the Arizona Coyotes extended the deal with Bonneville Phoenix by one-year.

* 98.7/KMVP-FM: Phoenix
* 620/KTAR: Phoenix (when there was a conflict on KMVP-FM)
* 92.3/KTAR-FM: Glendale (when there was a conflict on KTAR and KMVP-FM)

==See also==

* Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)
* List of Arizona Coyotes players
* List of Arizona Coyotes broadcasters
* Utah Hockey Club

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="4" end="19" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="49" end="59" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290452" start="78" end="103" title="Phoenix metropolitan area" label="Phoenix metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="126" end="148" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="174" end="190" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="222" end="238" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q834457" start="258" end="276" title="Western Conference (NHL)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481337" start="286" end="299" title="West Division (NHL)" label="West Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538690" start="352" end="361" title="PHX Arena" label="PHX Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038341" start="366" end="382" title="downtown Phoenix" label="downtown Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="405" end="413" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421377" start="443" end="463" title="Desert Diamond Arena" label="Desert Diamond Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169373" start="491" end="504" title="Mullett Arena" label="Mullett Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="508" end="513" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="595" end="608" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="637" end="661" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="732" end="755" title="1979 NHL expansion" label="enfranchised by the NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="947" end="962" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Phoenix Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717490" start="1028" end="1040" title="Alex Meruelo" label="Alex Meruelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352214" start="1171" end="1186" title="Andrew Barroway" label="Andrew Barroway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184135" start="1433" end="1444" title="Jerry Moyes" label="Jerry Moyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377528" start="1468" end="1489" title="Phoenix Coyotes bankruptcy and sale" label="filing for bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="1949" end="1973" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q108821972" start="2072" end="2081" title="New Tempe Arena" label="new arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="2399" end="2413" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q125520712" start="2578" end="2594" title="Utah Hockey Club" label="Utah Hockey Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="2599" end="2618" title="expansion franchise" label="expansion franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867414" start="2647" end="2657" title="Ryan Smith (businessman)" label="Ryan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="2671" end="2685" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="3110" end="3113" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q58691" start="3140" end="3155" title="Maricopa County, Arizona" label="Maricopa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q383983" start="3225" end="3237" title="Gary Bettman" label="Gary Bettman"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="3355" end="3362" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="3446" end="3459" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="3499" end="3523" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q260036" start="3606" end="3623" title="Avco World Trophy" label="Avco World Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="3810" end="3816" title="NHL-WHA merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960768" start="4276" end="4283" title="1980–81 NHL season" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="4528" end="4543" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="4548" end="4562" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960774" start="4770" end="4777" title="1984–85 NHL season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="4964" end="4981" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="Two seasons later"/>
<link wikidata="Q530764" start="5415" end="5431" title="Quebec Nordiques" label="Quebec Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="5441" end="5447" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="5470" end="5488" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165024" start="5531" end="5545" title="Winnipeg Arena" label="Winnipeg Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="5971" end="5991" title="Minneapolis–St. Paul" label="Minneapolis–St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="6012" end="6033" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="6051" end="6065" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q282675" start="6151" end="6164" title="Target Center" label="Target Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="6251" end="6265" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="6279" end="6293" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="6548" end="6560" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q822524" start="6601" end="6635" title="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner" label="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q647765" start="6700" end="6724" title="Phoenix Roadrunners (WHA)" label="one short-lived WHA team"/>
<link wikidata="Q647765" start="6736" end="6755" title="Phoenix Roadrunners (WHA)" label="Phoenix Roadrunners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="6770" end="6797" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="International Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233726" start="6804" end="6831" title="Phoenix Roadrunners (IHL)" label="team that was playing there"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452250" start="6970" end="6980" title="roadrunner" label="roadrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="7202" end="7224" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185295" start="7240" end="7258" title="Tucson Roadrunners" label="Tucson Roadrunners"/>
<link wikidata="Q973444" start="7354" end="7368" title="Jeremy Roenick" label="Jeremy Roenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="7378" end="7396" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345810" start="7422" end="7436" title="Alexei Zhamnov" label="Alexei Zhamnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q960045" start="7475" end="7488" title="Keith Tkachuk" label="Keith Tkachuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q713811" start="7493" end="7505" title="Rick Tocchet" label="Rick Tocchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q715600" start="7645" end="7655" title="Shane Doan" label="Shane Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185283" start="7741" end="7756" title="Oleg Tverdovsky" label="Oleg Tverdovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q553244" start="7773" end="7791" title="Nikolai Khabibulin" label="Nikolai Khabibulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q373960" start="7899" end="7911" title="Mike Gartner" label="Mike Gartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="7937" end="7956" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q783410" start="7993" end="8014" title="List of NHL players with 700 goals" label="his 700th career goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="8358" end="8365" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538690" start="8469" end="8487" title="America West Arena" label="America West Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="9438" end="9451" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595125" start="9613" end="9626" title="1999 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1999 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q739886" start="9714" end="9728" title="Pierre Turgeon" label="Pierre Turgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="9736" end="9751" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="9756" end="9760" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="9895" end="9910" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682470" start="10703" end="10717" title="Los Arcos Mall" label="Los Arcos Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49221" start="10721" end="10731" title="Scottsdale, Arizona" label="Scottsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421377" start="11008" end="11024" title="Jobing.com Arena" label="Jobing.com Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540118" start="11036" end="11054" title="2006–07 NHL season" label="2006–07 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550259" start="11213" end="11237" title="National Lacrosse League" label="National Lacrosse League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499523" start="11245" end="11258" title="Arizona Sting" label="Arizona Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184135" start="11313" end="11324" title="Jerry Moyes" label="Jerry Moyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="11355" end="11376" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="11384" end="11404" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q440363" start="11456" end="11466" title="Brett Hull" label="Brett Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="11486" end="11496" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431531" start="11631" end="11643" title="Rick Bowness" label="Rick Bowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385664" start="12017" end="12029" title="Thomas Steen" label="Thomas Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29144" start="12170" end="12187" title="National Hockey League All-Star Game" label="NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="12231" end="12251" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="12274" end="12282" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381589" start="12484" end="12499" title="Mike Barnett (ice hockey)" label="Michael Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132600" start="12595" end="12609" title="Cliff Fletcher" label="Cliff Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q27580" start="12614" end="12633" title="San Antonio Rampage" label="San Antonio Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q775084" start="12896" end="12907" title="Don Maloney" label="Don Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382050" start="13357" end="13370" title="Peter Mueller (ice hockey)" label="Peter Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384161" start="13375" end="13388" title="Martin Hanzal" label="Martin Hanzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373494" start="13476" end="13488" title="Radim Vrbata" label="Radim Vrbata"/>
<link wikidata="Q433371" start="13521" end="13532" title="Kevyn Adams" label="Kevyn Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q954930" start="13606" end="13615" title="Alex Auld" label="Alex Auld"/>
<link wikidata="Q664921" start="13620" end="13635" title="David Aebischer" label="David Aebischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342417" start="13689" end="13705" title="Mikael Tellqvist" label="Mikael Tellqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q129201" start="13928" end="13942" title="Ilya Bryzgalov" label="Ilya Bryzgalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="13964" end="13977" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="14107" end="14124" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q726452" start="14498" end="14510" title="Dave Tippett" label="Dave Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619766" start="15486" end="15511" title="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2010 Stanley Cup playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="15521" end="15538" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470188" start="15841" end="15854" title="2011 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2011 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="15933" end="15947" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Minnesota Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="15963" end="15979" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="16397" end="16415" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567236" start="16454" end="16477" title="1951 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1951 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="16494" end="16513" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q383983" start="16983" end="16995" title="Gary Bettman" label="Gary Bettman"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="17224" end="17237" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="17242" end="17259" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662152" start="17266" end="17281" title="Jerry Reinsdorf" label="Jerry Reinsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="17318" end="17326" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178732" start="17339" end="17352" title="Jim Balsillie" label="Jim Balsillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="17429" end="17446" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="18773" end="18786" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580384" start="19590" end="19609" title="Goldwater Institute" label="Goldwater Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381798" start="19963" end="19998" title="True North Sports and Entertainment" label="True North Sports and Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="20013" end="20030" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="20332" end="20345" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628397" start="20432" end="20451" title="2012–13 NHL lockout" label="2012–13 NHL lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213695" start="21033" end="21045" title="Darin Pastor" label="Darin Pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="21749" end="21756" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="22338" end="22357" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="23117" end="23131" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q49221" start="23480" end="23499" title="Scottsdale, Arizona" label="Scottsdale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="23851" end="23863" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352214" start="23889" end="23904" title="Andrew Barroway" label="Andrew Barroway"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="23961" end="23979" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="24067" end="24081" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863343" start="24697" end="24711" title="2015–16 NHL season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q775084" start="24729" end="24740" title="Don Maloney" label="Don Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572029" start="24754" end="24787" title="Jim Gregory General Manager of the Year Award" label="General Manager of the Year award"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053778" start="24880" end="24891" title="John Chayka" label="John Chayka"/>
<link wikidata="Q104093209" start="25072" end="25082" title="Dawn Braid" label="Dawn Braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="25260" end="25274" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880833" start="25459" end="25483" title="Arizona State Sun Devils men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21064339" start="25776" end="25791" title="Anthony LeBlanc" label="Anthony LeBlanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q726452" start="26135" end="26147" title="Dave Tippett" label="Dave Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q713811" start="26228" end="26240" title="Rick Tocchet" label="Rick Tocchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q728811" start="26330" end="26346" title="Central Division (NHL)" label="Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422166" start="26486" end="26500" title="Seattle Kraken" label="Seattle Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717490" start="26815" end="26827" title="Alex Meruelo" label="Alex Meruelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138754" start="26955" end="26975" title="2020 NHL entry draft" label="2020 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866795" start="27045" end="27060" title="Mitchell Miller (ice hockey)" label="Mitchell Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="27323" end="27340" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481337" start="27406" end="27419" title="West Division (NHL)" label="West Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215132" start="27615" end="27629" title="Andre Tourigny" label="Andre Tourigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q106707544" start="27694" end="27708" title="2021–22 NHL season" label="2021–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q834546" start="27792" end="27808" title="Pacific Division (NHL)" label="Pacific Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="27817" end="27837" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q107637219" start="27864" end="27873" title="Josh Doan" label="Josh Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715600" start="27904" end="27914" title="Shane Doan" label="Shane Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="28223" end="28228" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019586" start="28327" end="28352" title="environmental remediation" label="environmental remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421377" start="28507" end="28523" title="Gila River Arena" label="Gila River Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="28799" end="28823" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169373" start="29001" end="29014" title="Mullett Arena" label="Mullett Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="29034" end="29048" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q207980" start="29146" end="29165" title="Nashville Predators" label="Nashville Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169373" start="29255" end="29268" title="Mullett Arena" label="Mullett Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="29360" end="29373" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q21599453" start="29390" end="29407" title="Christian Fischer" label="Christian Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q108821972" start="29580" end="29598" title="New Tempe Arena" label="new arena in Tempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="29859" end="29877" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="29914" end="29918" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447322" start="29950" end="29961" title="Fiesta Mall" label="Fiesta Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187039" start="30415" end="30430" title="Scottsdale Road" label="Scottsdale Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q670457" start="30435" end="30443" title="Loop 101" label="Loop 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="30783" end="30803" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867414" start="31008" end="31018" title="Ryan Smith (businessman)" label="Ryan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q170649" start="31033" end="31042" title="Utah Jazz" label="Utah Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="31050" end="31081" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717490" start="31168" end="31180" title="Alex Meruelo" label="Alex Meruelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82294" start="31505" end="31517" title="Delta Center" label="Delta Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q977529" start="31626" end="31646" title="Climate Pledge Arena" label="Climate Pledge Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="31766" end="31781" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339036" start="31785" end="31797" title="Rogers Place" label="Rogers Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q109735832" start="32305" end="32315" title="Sean Durzi" label="Sean Durzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339453" start="32385" end="32394" title="Empty net goal" label="empty net"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132076" start="33483" end="33520" title="Cleveland Browns relocation controversy" label="Cleveland Browns and Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="33528" end="33552" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="35145" end="35153" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="35178" end="35192" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570159" start="35593" end="35600" title="kachina" label="kachina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="36494" end="36515" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="36521" end="36541" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q632491" start="36663" end="36673" title="Flag of Arizona" label="state flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954087" start="36909" end="36917" title="Rbk Edge" label="Rbk Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785065" start="37310" end="37322" title="third jersey" label="third jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="37398" end="37404" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="38372" end="38378" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934173" start="38969" end="38982" title="MullenLowe U.S." label="MullenLowe LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q275573" start="39716" end="39723" title="saguaro" label="saguaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902779" start="40525" end="40556" title="List of Arizona Coyotes seasons" label="List of Arizona Coyotes seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q373960" start="40775" end="40787" title="Mike Gartner" label="Mike Gartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157843" start="40790" end="40804" title="Dale Hawerchuk" label="Dale Hawerchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q722956" start="40807" end="40819" title="Phil Housley" label="Phil Housley"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="40822" end="40832" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q440363" start="40835" end="40845" title="Brett Hull" label="Brett Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q973444" start="40848" end="40862" title="Jeremy Roenick" label="Jeremy Roenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q569178" start="40865" end="40877" title="Serge Savard" label="Serge Savard"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="40880" end="40893" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="40982" end="40995" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960907" start="41005" end="41009" title="1996 NHL entry draft" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013065" start="41011" end="41020" title="Dan Focht" label="Dan Focht"/>
<link wikidata="Q960831" start="41042" end="41055" title="Daniel Brière" label="Daniel Briere"/>
<link wikidata="Q776656" start="41073" end="41077" title="1998 NHL entry draft" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q552915" start="41079" end="41097" title="Patrick DesRochers" label="Patrick DesRochers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960919" start="41115" end="41119" title="1999 NHL entry draft" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378549" start="41121" end="41133" title="Scott Kelman" label="Scott Kelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q950266" start="41155" end="41170" title="Kirill Safronov" label="Kirill Safronov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694655" start="41188" end="41192" title="2000 NHL entry draft" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q941523" start="41194" end="41211" title="Krystofer Kolanos" label="Krystofer Kolanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q113849" start="41229" end="41233" title="2001 NHL entry draft" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q939767" start="41235" end="41251" title="Fredrik Sjöström" label="Fredrik Sjostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846" start="41269" end="41273" title="2002 NHL entry draft" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160685" start="41275" end="41287" title="Jakub Koreis" label="Jakub Koreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q816477" start="41309" end="41318" title="Ben Eager" label="Ben Eager"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432" start="41336" end="41340" title="2004 NHL entry draft" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q881297" start="41342" end="41355" title="Blake Wheeler" label="Blake Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q127434" start="41372" end="41376" title="2005 NHL entry draft" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384161" start="41378" end="41391" title="Martin Hanzal" label="Martin Hanzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777033" start="41409" end="41413" title="2006 NHL entry draft" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382050" start="41415" end="41428" title="Peter Mueller (ice hockey)" label="Peter Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964874" start="41449" end="41462" title="Chris Summers (ice hockey)" label="Chris Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854839" start="41480" end="41484" title="2007 NHL entry draft" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q350149" start="41486" end="41497" title="Kyle Turris" label="Kyle Turris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339793" start="41518" end="41527" title="Nick Ross (ice hockey)" label="Nick Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634160" start="41545" end="41549" title="2008 NHL entry draft" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q944165" start="41551" end="41565" title="Mikkel Bødker" label="Mikkel Boedker"/>
<link wikidata="Q247265" start="41586" end="41601" title="Viktor Tikhonov (ice hockey, born 1988)" label="Viktor Tikhonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514996" start="41619" end="41623" title="2009 NHL entry draft" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390668" start="41625" end="41645" title="Oliver Ekman-Larsson" label="Oliver Ekman-Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464820" start="41662" end="41666" title="2010 NHL entry draft" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q523834" start="41668" end="41683" title="Brandon Gormley" label="Brandon Gormley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048335" start="41705" end="41718" title="Mark Visentin" label="Mark Visentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510106" start="41736" end="41740" title="2011 NHL entry draft" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993498" start="41742" end="41755" title="Connor Murphy" label="Connor Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="41773" end="41777" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132520" start="41779" end="41796" title="Henrik Samuelsson" label="Henrik Samuelsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960925" start="41814" end="41818" title="2013 NHL entry draft" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581451" start="41820" end="41828" title="Max Domi" label="Max Domi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630247" start="41846" end="41850" title="2014 NHL entry draft" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180838" start="41852" end="41867" title="Brendan Perlini" label="Brendan Perlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157394" start="41885" end="41889" title="2015 NHL entry draft" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q17388804" start="41891" end="41903" title="Dylan Strome" label="Dylan Strome"/>
<link wikidata="Q20652609" start="41924" end="41936" title="Nick Merkley" label="Nick Merkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515631" start="41954" end="41958" title="2016 NHL entry draft" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278556" start="41960" end="41974" title="Clayton Keller" label="Clayton Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240150" start="41995" end="42009" title="Jakob Chychrun" label="Jakob Chychrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715164" start="42027" end="42031" title="2017 NHL entry draft" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q30596054" start="42033" end="42054" title="Pierre-Olivier Joseph" label="Pierre-Olivier Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897149" start="42072" end="42076" title="2018 NHL entry draft" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q51777580" start="42078" end="42092" title="Barrett Hayton" label="Barrett Hayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646802" start="42109" end="42113" title="2019 NHL entry draft" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q59538675" start="42115" end="42132" title="Victor Söderström (ice hockey)" label="Victor Soderstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047055" start="42150" end="42154" title="2021 NHL entry draft" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030630" start="42156" end="42170" title="Dylan Guenther" label="Dylan Guenther"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858881" start="42187" end="42191" title="2022 NHL entry draft" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967578" start="42193" end="42205" title="Logan Cooley" label="Logan Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q81903067" start="42221" end="42233" title="Conor Geekie" label="Conor Geekie"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967564" start="42255" end="42272" title="Maveric Lamoureux" label="Maveric Lamoureux"/>
<link wikidata="Q107710129" start="42290" end="42294" title="2023 NHL entry draft" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q120067858" start="42296" end="42312" title="Dmitriy Simashev" label="Dmitriy Simashev"/>
<link wikidata="Q120067880" start="42328" end="42338" title="Daniil But" label="Daniil But"/>
<link wikidata="Q757037" start="42619" end="42635" title="Jack Adams Award" label="Jack Adams Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q370569" start="42638" end="42649" title="Bob Francis (coach)" label="Bob Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q581336" start="42651" end="42658" title="2001–02 NHL season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q726452" start="42661" end="42673" title="Dave Tippett" label="Dave Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="42675" end="42682" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q250753" start="42684" end="42711" title="King Clancy Memorial Trophy" label="King Clancy Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q715600" start="42714" end="42724" title="Shane Doan" label="Shane Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="42726" end="42733" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550433" start="42735" end="42764" title="Mark Messier Leadership Award" label="Mark Messier Leadership Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q715600" start="42767" end="42777" title="Shane Doan" label="Shane Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="42779" end="42786" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q795029" start="42788" end="42818" title="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy" label="Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q88398540" start="42821" end="42834" title="Connor Ingram" label="Connor Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661507" start="42836" end="42843" title="2023–24 NHL season" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="42929" end="42942" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q960045" start="42980" end="42993" title="Keith Tkachuk" label="Keith Tkachuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="42995" end="43002" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342855" start="43036" end="43047" title="Ray Whitney (ice hockey)" label="Ray Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415145" start="43049" end="43056" title="2011–12 NHL season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q960045" start="43089" end="43102" title="Keith Tkachuk" label="Keith Tkachuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278556" start="43117" end="43131" title="Clayton Keller" label="Clayton Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952582" start="43133" end="43140" title="2022–23 NHL season" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160275" start="43183" end="43198" title="Daniel Carcillo" label="Daniel Carcillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="43200" end="43207" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390668" start="43251" end="43271" title="Oliver Ekman-Larsson" label="Oliver Ekman-Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515801" start="43273" end="43280" title="2014–15 NHL season" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738109" start="43325" end="43337" title="Keith Yandle" label="Keith Yandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q598557" start="43339" end="43346" title="2010–11 NHL season" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278556" start="43387" end="43401" title="Clayton Keller" label="Clayton Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="43403" end="43410" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q129201" start="43441" end="43455" title="Ilya Bryzgalov" label="Ilya Bryzgalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q978704" start="43457" end="43464" title="2009–10 NHL season" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="43522" end="43529" title="Captain (ice hockey)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q979247" start="43881" end="43889" title="Captain (hockey)" label="captains"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="43908" end="43921" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="43923" end="43926" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="43933" end="43936" title="World Hockey Association" label="WHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q960045" start="43947" end="43960" title="Keith Tkachuk" label="Keith Tkachuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348641" start="43974" end="43988" title="Teppo Numminen" label="Teppo Numminen"/>
<link wikidata="Q715600" start="44002" end="44012" title="Shane Doan" label="Shane Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390668" start="44026" end="44046" title="Oliver Ekman-Larsson" label="Oliver Ekman-Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325347" start="44214" end="44218" title="KASW" label="KASW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191398" start="44244" end="44252" title="KGUN-TV" label="KGUN-DT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599473" start="44254" end="44258" title="Laff (TV network)" label="Laff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339703" start="44270" end="44277" title="KUPX-TV" label="KUPX-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338271" start="44278" end="44286" title="KSTU" label="KSTU-DT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="44357" end="44377" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334700" start="44506" end="44513" title="KNXV-TV" label="KNXV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q123010205" start="44767" end="44781" title="Scripps Sports" label="Scripps Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q368344" start="44935" end="44953" title="direct-to-consumer" label="direct-to-consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334700" start="44985" end="44992" title="KNXV-TV" label="KNXV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852675" start="45000" end="45010" title="Antenna TV" label="Antenna TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="45120" end="45123" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="45128" end="45134" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325347" start="45159" end="45163" title="KASW" label="KASW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="45346" end="45365" title="independent station" label="independent station"/>
<link wikidata="Q125520712" start="45628" end="45644" title="Utah Hockey Club" label="Utah Hockey Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q368344" start="45791" end="45809" title="direct-to-consumer" label="direct-to-consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="45810" end="45827" title="streaming service" label="streaming service"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011331" start="45890" end="45895" title="Kiswe (company)" label="Kiswe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773283" start="46166" end="46170" title="1996–97 NHL season" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419809" start="46189" end="46203" title="2007–08 NHL season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="46298" end="46310" title="Terrestrial television" label="over-the-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191538" start="46334" end="46338" title="KTVK" label="KTVK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325554" start="46364" end="46371" title="KAZT-TV" label="KAZT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476935" start="46451" end="46471" title="Bally Sports Arizona" label="Bally Sports Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954079" start="46611" end="46621" title="NHL on NBC" label="NBCSN, NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324261" start="46623" end="46632" title="NHL on ESPN" label="ESPN, ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q106809088" start="46637" end="46640" title="NHL on TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q123010205" start="46823" end="46837" title="Scripps Sports" label="Scripps Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335629" start="47122" end="47129" title="KMVP-FM" label="KMVP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338484" start="47133" end="47137" title="KTAR (AM)" label="KTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335629" start="47231" end="47238" title="KMVP-FM" label="KMVP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="47240" end="47247" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338484" start="47254" end="47258" title="KTAR (AM)" label="KTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338483" start="47314" end="47321" title="KTAR-FM" label="KTAR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="47323" end="47331" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="47397" end="47422" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)"/>
<link wikidata="Q460543" start="47425" end="47456" title="List of Arizona Coyotes players" label="List of Arizona Coyotes players"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005483" start="47459" end="47495" title="List of Arizona Coyotes broadcasters" label="List of Arizona Coyotes broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q125520712" start="47498" end="47514" title="Utah Hockey Club" label="Utah Hockey Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
