<doc id="71262" wikidata="Q58715" url="?curid=71262" title="Great Leap Forward">
<text>The Great Leap Forward was an economic and social campaign within China from 1958 to 1962, led by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Party Chairman Mao Zedong launched the campaign to transform the country from an agrarian society into an industrialized society through the formation of people&#x27;s communes. Millions of people died in mainland China during the Great Leap, with estimates based on demographic reconstruction ranging from 15 to 55 million, making the Great Chinese Famine the largest or second-largest famine in human history.

The Great Leap Forward stemmed from multiple factors, including &quot;the purge of intellectuals, the surge of less-educated radicals, the need to find new ways to generate domestic capital, rising enthusiasm about the potential results mass mobilization might produce, and reaction against the sociopolitical results of the Soviet [Union]&#x27;s development strategy.&quot; Mao ambitiously sought an increase in rural grain production and an increase in industrial activity. Mao was dismissive of technical experts and basic economic principles, which meant that industrialization of the countryside would solely be dependent on the peasants. Grain quotas were introduced with the idea of having peasants provide grains for themselves and support urban areas. Output from the industrial activities such as steel was also supposed to be used for urban growth. Local officials were fearful of the so-called &quot;Anti-Right Deviation Struggle&quot; and they competed to fulfill or over-fulfill quotas which were based on Mao&#x27;s exaggerated claims, collecting non-existent &quot;surpluses&quot; and leaving farmers to starve to death. Higher officials did not dare to report the economic disaster which was being caused by these policies, and national officials, blaming bad weather for the decline in food output, took little or no action. 

The major changes which occurred in the lives of rural Chinese people included the incremental introduction of mandatory agricultural collectivization. Private farming was prohibited, and those people who engaged in it were persecuted and labeled counter-revolutionaries. Restrictions on rural people were enforced with public struggle sessions and social pressure, and forced labor was also exacted on people. Rural industrialization, while officially a priority of the campaign, saw &quot;its development ... aborted by the mistakes of the Great Leap Forward&quot;. The Great Leap was one of two periods between 1953 and 1976 in which China&#x27;s economy shrank (the other being the Cultural Revolution). Economist Dwight Perkins argues that &quot;enormous amounts of investment only produced modest increases in production or none at all. ... In short, the Great Leap [Forward] was a very expensive disaster&quot;.

The CCP studied the damage that was done at various conferences from 1960 to 1962, especially at the &quot;Seven Thousand Cadres Conference&quot; in 1962, during which Mao Zedong ceded day-to-day leadership to pragmatic moderates like Chinese President Liu Shaoqi and Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Acknowledging responsibilities for the Great Leap Forward, Mao did not retreat from his policies; instead, he blamed problems on bad implementation and &quot;rightists&quot; who opposed him. He initiated the Socialist Education Movement in 1963 and the Cultural Revolution in 1966 in order to remove opposition and re-consolidate his power. In addition, dozens of dams constructed in Zhumadian, Henan, during the Great Leap Forward collapsed in 1975 (under the influence of Typhoon Nina) and resulted in the 1975 Banqiao Dam failure, with estimates of its death toll ranging from tens of thousands to 240,000.

==Background==
The core goal of the Great Leap Forward was to increase industrial and agricultural outputs by using mass mobilization to raise labor inputs and therefore overcome China&#x27;s lack of other material inputs.

Classical Marxist theory hypothesized a relatively linear progression of development and a worldwide revolution beginning with the most developed countries. At the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949, the country was one of poorest in the world. The Great Leap Forward attempted to defy the conventional understanding of the time required for economic development. Through rapid industrialization, it aimed to close the gap between China&#x27;s developmental stage and its political aspirations. In March 1955, at a national conference of the Party, Mao declared that China &quot;would catch up with and surpass the most powerful capitalist countries in several dozen years&quot;, and in October, Mao announced that he would complete the building of a socialist state in 15 years.

In the late 1950s, China&#x27;s socio-political landscape experienced significant rural reforms and the aftermath of previous policies aimed at collectivization rather than individualism. Before the Great Leap Forward, the Chinese government initiated land reforms that redistributed land from landlords to peasants, but these reforms still needed to attain the expected agricultural productivity. The early 1950s saw the establishment of agricultural cooperatives, yet these changes brought mixed outcomes. However, the push towards rapid industrialization and the establishment of people’s communes in rural areas were central to the Great Leap Forward, reflecting the government’s belief that collectivization and large-scale projects would boost agricultural and industrial outputs. The communes were meant to centralize farming and labor, supposedly leading to increased efficiency and output; still, in reality, and practice, these measures often disrupted traditional farming practices and led to decreased productivity. Dali Yang stated, &quot;The initial stages of collectivization brought chaos and inefficiency, with agricultural productivity often declining&quot;.

By the time of the Great Leap Forward, increased Sino-Soviet tensions meant that China could not depend on Soviet technological assistance. Mao emphasized China&#x27;s self-reliance in technology and industry and discouraged reliance on foreign technology.

===Agricultural collectives and other social changes===

Before 1949, peasants had farmed their own small pockets of land and observed traditional practices—festivals, banquets, and paying homage to ancestors. It was realized that Mao&#x27;s policy of using a state monopoly on agriculture to finance industrialization would be unpopular with the peasants. Therefore, it was proposed that the peasants should be brought under Party control by the establishment of agricultural collectives which would also facilitate the sharing of tools and draft animals.

This policy was gradually pushed through between 1949 and 1958 in response to immediate policy needs, first by establishing &quot;mutual aid teams&quot; of 5–15 households, then in 1953 &quot;elementary agricultural cooperatives&quot; of 20–40 households, then from 1956 in &quot;higher co-operatives&quot; of 100–300 families. From 1954 onward peasants were encouraged to form and join collective-farming associations, which would supposedly increase their efficiency without robbing them of their own land or restricting their livelihoods.

By 1958, private ownership was abolished and all households were forced into state-operated communes. Mao demanded that the communes increase grain production to feed the cities and to earn foreign exchange through exports. China must follow a different path to socialism than the Soviet Union, Mao told delegates, by allowing its peasants to participate in economic modernisation and making more use of their labour.

Apart from progressive taxation on each household&#x27;s harvest, the state introduced a system of compulsory state purchases of grain at fixed prices to build up stockpiles for famine-relief and meet the terms of its trade agreements with the Soviet Union. Together, taxation and compulsory purchases accounted for 30% of the harvest by 1957, leaving very little surplus. Rationing was also introduced in the cities to curb &#x27;wasteful consumption&#x27; and encourage savings (which were deposited in state-owned banks and thus became available for investment), and although food could be purchased from state-owned retailers the market price was higher than that for which it had been purchased. This too was done in the name of discouraging excessive consumption.

Besides these economic changes, the CCP implemented major social changes in the countryside including the banishing of all religious and mystic institutions and ceremonies, replacing them with political meetings and propaganda sessions. Attempts were made to enhance rural education and the status of women (allowing them to initiate divorce if they desired) and ending foot-binding, child marriage and opium addiction. The old system of internal passports (the &quot;hukou&quot;) was introduced in 1956, preventing inter-county travel without appropriate authorization. Highest priority was given to the urban proletariat for whom a welfare state was created.

The first phase of collectivization resulted in modest improvements in output. Famine along the mid-Yangzi was averted in 1956 through the timely allocation of food-aid, but in 1957 the Party&#x27;s response was to increase the proportion of the harvest collected by the state to insure against further disasters. Moderates within the Party, including Zhou Enlai, argued for a reversal of collectivization on the grounds that claiming the bulk of the harvest for the state had made the people&#x27;s food-security dependent upon the constant, efficient, and transparent functioning of the government.

===Hundred Flowers Campaign and Anti-Rightist Campaign===
In 1957, Mao responded to the tensions which existed in the Party by launching the Hundred Flowers Campaign as a way to promote free speech and criticism. Some scholars have retroactively concluded that this campaign was a ploy designed to allow critics of the regime, primarily intellectuals but also low ranking members of the party who were critical of the agricultural policies, to identify themselves.

By the time of the completion of the first 5 Year Economic Plan in 1957, Mao had come to believe that the path to socialism that had been followed by the Soviet Union was not appropriate for China. He was critical of Khrushchev&#x27;s reversal of Stalinist policies and he was also alarmed by the uprisings that had taken place in East Germany, Poland and Hungary, and the perception that the USSR was seeking &quot;peaceful coexistence&quot; with the Western powers. Mao had become convinced that China should follow its own path to communism. According to Jonathan Mirsky, a historian and a journalist who specialized in Chinese affairs, China&#x27;s isolation from most of the rest of the world, along with the Korean War, had accelerated Mao&#x27;s attacks on his perceived domestic enemies. It led him to accelerate his designs to develop an economy where the regime would get maximum benefit from rural taxation.

The Anti-Rightist Campaign started on 8 June 1957. The main goal was to purge &quot;rightists&quot; from the CCP and China altogether. It was believed that approximately 5 percent of the population was still &quot;rightists&quot; (Political conservatives sabotaging the revolution).

=== Rash advance movement and anti-rash advance movement ===

In the early years of the New China, due to the lack of experience in financial and economic work, it was a common practice to include the fiscal surplus of the previous year in the budget of the current year. Because of the low level of budgeting in the fiscal sector and inaccurate estimates of economic development, revenues and expenditures were underestimated. However, no problems arose because the government usually managed to end the fiscal year with a surplus. In 1953, when China entered the first five-year plan period, the Chinese economy had improved and the Ministry of Finance still decided to include the fiscal surplus of the previous fiscal year as credit funds in the 1953 budget revenue to cover the current year&#x27;s expenditures. As a result, budget expenditures were expanded and so was the size of the budget. At that time, only the Soviet expert Kutuzov warned the Chinese fiscal authorities not to use the fiscal surplus of the previous year, however, it was not heeded by the Ministry of Finance. In that year, the gross industrial and agricultural output grew by 21.3%, while the capital construction budget increased by 50% compared to the previous year, which led to an imbalance between production and demand. Such was the &quot;small rash advance&quot; () at the start of the first five-year plan period. The issue had caused widespread social controversy. This marked one of the first times people questioned Mao&#x27;s authority. The faction of Li Xiannian, Chen Yun and others did not think it was appropriate to continue this practice, but they also had opponents. Li Xiannian finally decided to hold a collective meeting to discuss the issue, and after listening to the views of all parties, he decided to abolish the practice.

Nevertheless, the controversy over the use of the fiscal surplus persisted, which brought another reckless &quot;rash advance&quot; to China&#x27;s economic development in 1956. At that time, China lacked consideration in three areas: capital construction, employee wages, and agricultural loans. This made the central treasury &quot;tight&quot; again. This drew the attention of Zhou Enlai, Li Xiannian, and others. At a state meeting held on 5 June 1956, proposals were made to curb impetuousness and rash advances, revise the 1956 national economic plan, and cut capital construction investment. Such was the anti-&quot;rash advance&quot; movement.

The excess of the first five-year plan gave the nation great confidence, and at the Second Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee, &quot;go all out, aim high, and build socialism with greater, faster, better, and more economical results&quot; () was adopted as the &quot;General Line for Socialist Construction&quot; in China. In 1955, Mao had already expressed his belief that socialist construction should achieve &quot;greater, faster, better, and more economical&quot; results. These led to the re-emergence of &quot;rash advances&quot;, which further led to the reintroduction of policies and tendencies that had previously been overturned. Those who opposed Mao&#x27;s policies were accused of not upholding the tenets of the &quot;class struggle&quot; under the people&#x27;s cult of Mao.

== Initial phase and resistance ==

===Initial goals===

Regarding agriculture, the Chinese government recognized the country&#x27;s dilemma of feeding its rapidly growing population without the means to make significant capital improvements in agriculture. Viewing human labor as an underutilized factor of production, the government intensified the mobilization of masses of people to increase labor inputs in agriculture.

In November 1957, party leaders of communist countries gathered in Moscow to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the October Revolution. Soviet Communist Party First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev proposed not only to catch up with but exceed the United States in industrial output in the next 15 years through peaceful competition. Mao Zedong was so inspired by the slogan that China put forward its own one: to catch up with and surpass the United Kingdom in 15 years. As with its approach to agriculture, the Chinese government attempted to compensate for its inability to invest in industry with mass mobilizations to increase human labor inputs.

The initial projects of the Great Leap Forward were accelerating the construction of waterworks on the North China Plain during the 1957-1958 winter and next the development of people&#x27;s communes and crude forms of rural industrialization. Some Great Leap Projects had lots of long-term value to China&#x27;s economy and continued to benefit China after The Great Leap Forward ended. Some of the projects included bridges, railroads, canals and reservoirs. However, some of these projects were completed quickly, resulting in errors and delays that did more harm than good.

=== Lushan Conference and the Anti-Right Deviation Struggle ===
The initial impact of the Great Leap Forward was discussed at the Lushan Conference in July–August 1959. Although many of the more moderate leaders had reservations about the new policy, the only senior leader to speak out openly was Marshal Peng Dehuai. Mao responded to Peng&#x27;s criticism of the Great Leap by dismissing Peng from his post as the Minister of National Defense, denouncing Peng (who came from a poor peasant family) and his supporters as &quot;bourgeois&quot;, subsequently launching a nationwide campaign against &quot;rightist opportunism&quot; known as the &quot;Anti-Right Deviation Struggle&quot;. Peng was replaced by Lin Biao, who began a systematic purge of Peng&#x27;s supporters from the military. In total, over 3 million CCP members were purged or penalized during the campaign.

==Organizational and operational factors==
The Great Leap Forward campaign began during the period of the Second Five Year Plan which was scheduled to run from 1958 to 1963, though the campaign itself was discontinued by 1961. Mao unveiled the Great Leap Forward at a meeting in January 1958 in Nanjing.

The Great Leap Forward was grounded in a logical theory of economic development and represented an unambiguous social invention. The central idea behind the Great Leap was that China should &quot;walk on two legs&quot;, by rapidly developing both heavy and light industry, urban and rural areas, and large and small scale labor. The hope was to industrialize by making use of the massive supply of cheap labor and avoid having to import heavy machinery. The government also sought to avoid both social stratification and technical bottlenecks involved in the Soviet model of development, but sought political rather than technical solutions to do so. Distrusting technical experts, Mao and the party sought to replicate the strategies used in its 1930s regrouping in Yan&#x27;an following the Long March: &quot;mass mobilization, social leveling, attacks on bureaucratism, [and] disdain for material obstacles&quot;. In the absence of material development inputs, Mao sought to increase development through voluntarism and organizational advantages brought about by socialism. Mao advocated that a further round of collectivization modeled on the USSR&#x27;s Third Period was necessary in the countryside where the existing collectives would be merged into huge people&#x27;s communes., Since the country side was significantly poorer than the cities and the people were hands on workers. (https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/430804). 

===People&#x27;s communes===
An experimental commune was established at Chayashan in Henan in April 1958. Here for the first time, private plots were entirely abolished and communal kitchens were introduced. At the Politburo meetings in August 1958, it was decided that these people&#x27;s communes would become the new form of economic and political organization throughout rural China. By the end of the year, approximately 25,000 communes had been set up, with an average of 5,000 households each. The communes were relatively self-sufficient co-operatives where wages and money were replaced by work points.

The commune system was aimed at maximizing production for provisioning the cities and constructing offices, factories, schools, and social insurance systems for urban-dwelling workers, cadres, and officials. Citizens in rural areas who criticized the system were labeled &quot;dangerous&quot;. Later on, as more and more families linked together to form people&#x27;s communes, peasants started to lose individual identities, since families were from vastly different communities with different cultural views, political views, family structures, and financial backgrounds, which created conflict regarding the means and modes of production. Some wealthier families who refused to join a people&#x27;s commune might be labeled as rightists. Escape was also difficult or impossible, and those who attempted were subjected to &quot;party-orchestrated public struggle&quot;, which further jeopardized their survival. Besides agriculture, communes also incorporated some light industry and construction projects. Harvests did increase. However this was because of exceptional weather, not, which a lot of officials mistook, as the result of hard work of the peasants, creating further complications. This lead to famine in the countryside since they were required to reach set harvest goals, leaving not enough food for themselves.

===Industrialization===
Mao saw grain and steel production as the key pillars of economic development. He forecast that within 15 years of the start of the Great Leap, China&#x27;s industrial output would surpass that of the UK. In the August 1958 Politburo meetings, it was decided that steel production would be set to double within the year, most of the increase coming through backyard steel furnaces. Major investments in larger state enterprises were made: 1,587, 1,361 and 1,815 medium and large-scale state projects were started in 1958, 1959 and 1960 respectively, more in each year than in the first Five Year Plan.

Millions of Chinese became state workers as a consequence of this industrial investment: in 1958, 21 million were added to non-agricultural state payrolls, and total state employment reached a peak of 50.44 million in 1960, more than doubling the 1957 level; the urban population swelled by 31.24 million people. These new workers placed major stress on China&#x27;s food-rationing system, which led to increased and unsustainable demands on rural food production. Those between the ages of sixteen and thirty were considered ideal candidates for the militia. Peasants were working long hours, all year round, even contributed their own cooking utensils to be melted as a source of production.

The consequences of the Great Leap Forward were devastating, leading to one of the most severe famines in human history. The policies that diverted labor from agriculture to industrial projects, such as backyard steel furnaces, resulted in a catastrophic drop in agricultural output; consequently, food shortages became widespread. According to demographic studies, the famine caused an estimated 15 to 45 million deaths, with rural areas being the hardest hit. Ashton et al. (1984) highlight: “During the period 1958-62, about 30 million premature deaths occurred in China: deaths that occurred earlier than they would have on the basis of mortality trends for more normal years.”

During this rapid expansion, coordination suffered and material shortages were frequent, resulting in &quot;a huge rise in the wage bill, largely for construction workers, but no corresponding increase in manufactured goods&quot;. Facing a massive deficit, the government cut industrial investment from to from 1960 to 1962 (an 82% decrease; the 1957 level was ). partly due to misreporting, or corruption at every level of the government where they would over-report harvest and steel production, by the time people realized, it was too late to correct statistics without angering Mao.

===Backyard furnaces===
The Great Leap Forward sought to revive folk technologies, including in the area of steel production. China&#x27;s steel industry faced a shortage of imported iron and calls to increase production of &quot;native iron&quot; had begun in 1956. Efforts to improve steel production were a major focus of the Great Leap Forward. By mid-1958, the Chinese state began promoting indigenous metallurgical methods and the proliferation of &quot;folk furnaces&quot;. This was an effort to increase steel production without increased investment costs.

Mao was shown an example of a backyard furnace in Hefei, Anhui, in September 1958 by provincial first secretary Zeng Xisheng. The unit was claimed to be manufacturing high quality steel.

Vast amounts of steel produced from backyard furnaces were not of usable quality.

===Crop production experiments===

On the communes, a number of radical and controversial agricultural innovations were promoted at the behest of Mao. Many of these innovations were based on the ideas of now-discredited Soviet agronomist Trofim Lysenko and his followers. The policies included close cropping, whereby seeds were sown far more densely than normal on the incorrect assumption that seeds of the same class would not compete with each other. Yang provides data on the failure of close planting techniques, which reduced yields in Anhui from 400 jin per mu to less than 200 jin per mu due to overcrowded plants competing for nutrients and sunlight.&quot; Deep plowing was encouraged on the mistaken belief that this would yield plants with extra large root systems. Moderately productive land was left unplanted based on the belief that concentrating manure and effort on the most fertile land would lead to large productivity gains per-acre. Altogether, these untested innovations generally led to decreases in grain production rather than increases.

Meanwhile, local leaders were pressured into falsely reporting ever-higher grain production figures to their political superiors. Participants at political meetings remembered production figures being inflated up to 10 times their actual production amounts as the race to please superiors and win plaudits—like the chance to meet Mao himself—intensified. The state was later able to force many production groups to sell more grain than they could spare based on these false production figures.

===Treatment of villagers===

The ban on private holdings severely disrupted peasant life at its most basic level. Villagers were unable to secure enough food to go on living because they were deprived by the commune system of their traditional means of being able to rent, sell, or use their land as collateral for loans. In one village, once the commune was operational, the Party boss and his colleagues &quot;swung into manic action, herding villagers into the fields to sleep and to work intolerable hours, and forcing them to walk, starving, to distant additional projects&quot;.

Edward Friedman, political scientist, Paul Pickowicz, historian, and Mark Selden, sociologist, wrote about the dynamic of interaction between the Party and villagers:
The authors present a similar picture to Thaxton in depicting the party&#x27;s destruction of the traditions of Chinese villagers. Traditionally prized local customs were deemed signs of feudalism to be extinguished. &quot;Among them were funerals, weddings, local markets, and festivals. The Party thus destroyed much that gave meaning to Chinese lives. These private bonds were social glue. To mourn and to celebrate is to be human. To share joy, grief, and pain is humanizing.&quot; Failure to participate in the CCP&#x27;s political campaigns—though the aims of such campaigns were often conflicting—&quot;could result in detention, torture, death, and the suffering of entire families&quot;.

Public struggle sessions were often used to intimidate the peasants into obeying local officials; they increased the death rate of the famine in several ways. &quot;In the first case, blows to the body caused internal injuries that, in combination with physical emaciation and acute hunger, could induce death.&quot; In one case, after a peasant stole two cabbages from the common fields, the thief was publicly criticized for half a day. He collapsed, fell ill, and never recovered. Others were sent to labor camps.

About 7% of those who died during the Great Leap Forward were tortured to death or summarily killed. Benjamin Valentino notes that &quot;communist officials sometimes tortured and killed those accused of failing to meet their grain quota&quot;.

However, J. G. Mahoney has said that &quot;there is too much diversity and dynamism in the country for one work to capture ... rural China as if it were one place.&quot; Mahoney describes an elderly man in rural Shanxi who recalls Mao fondly, saying &quot;Before Mao we sometimes ate leaves, after liberation we did not.&quot; Regardless, Mahoney points out that Da Fo villagers recall the Great Leap Forward as a period of famine and death, and among those who survived in Da Fo were precisely those who could digest leaves.

==Direct consequences==
The failure of agricultural policies, the movement of farmers from agricultural to industrial work, and weather conditions suppressed the food supply. At the same time improvements in medicine, infant mortality, and average life expectancy promoted by the Patriotic Health Campaign led to a greatly increased need for food. The shortage of supply clashed with an explosion in demand, leading to millions of deaths from severe famine. The economy, which had improved since the end of the civil war, was devastated, and in response to the severe conditions, there was resistance among the populace.

The effects on the upper levels of government in response to the disaster were complex, with Mao purging the Minister of National Defense Peng Dehuai in 1959, the temporary promotion of Lin Biao, Liu Shaoqi, and Deng Xiaoping, and Mao losing some power and prestige following the Great Leap Forward, during the Seven Thousand Cadres Conference in 1962, which led him to launch the Cultural Revolution in 1966.

===Famine===

Despite the harmful agricultural innovations, the weather was very favorable in 1958 and the harvest was also good. However, the amount of labor which was diverted to steel production and construction projects meant that much of the harvest was left to rot because it was not collected in some areas. This problem was exacerbated by a devastating swarm of locusts, which was caused when their natural predators were killed as part of the Four Pests Campaign.

Although actual harvests were reduced, local officials, under tremendous pressure to report record harvests to central authorities in response to the innovations, competed with each other to announce increasingly exaggerated results. These results were used as the basis for determining the amount of grain which would be taken by the State, supplied to the towns and cities and exported. This barely left enough grain for the peasants, and in some areas, starvation set in. A 1959 drought and flooding from the Yellow River in the same year also contributed to the famine.

During 1958–1960 China continued to be a substantial net exporter of grain, despite the widespread famine which was being experienced in the countryside, as Mao sought to maintain face and convince the outside world of the success of his plans. Foreign aid was refused. When the Japanese foreign minister told his Chinese counterpart Chen Yi about an offer of 100,000 tonnes of wheat which was going to be shipped away from public view, he was rebuffed.

John F. Kennedy was also aware that the Chinese were exporting food to Africa and Cuba during the famine. He said during the news conference on 23 May 1962, &quot;Well, there has been no indication of any expression of interest or desire by the Chinese Communists to receive any food from us, as I have said at the beginning, and we would certainly have to have some idea as to whether the food was needed and under what conditions it might be distributed. Up to the present, we have had no such indication.&quot; But Kennedy said that the US provided food for about half a million refugees in British Hong Kong.

With dramatically reduced yields, even urban areas received greatly reduced rations; however, mass starvation was largely confined to the countryside, where, as a result of drastically inflated production statistics, very little grain was left for the peasants to eat. Food shortages were bad throughout the country, but the provinces which had adopted Mao&#x27;s reforms with the most vigor, such as Anhui, Gansu and Henan, tended to suffer disproportionately. Sichuan, one of China&#x27;s most populous provinces, known in China as &quot;Heaven&#x27;s Granary&quot; because of its fertility, is thought to have suffered the highest number of deaths from starvation due to the vigor with which provincial leader Li Jingquan undertook Mao&#x27;s reforms. There are widespread oral reports, though little official documentation, of cannibalism being practiced in various forms as a result of the famine. Author Yan Lianke also claims that, while growing up in Henan during the Great Leap Forward, he was taught to &quot;recognize the most edible kinds of bark and clay by his mother. When all of the trees had been stripped and there was no more clay, he learned that lumps of coal could appease the devil in his stomach, at least for a little while.&quot;

The agricultural policies of the Great Leap Forward and the associated famine continued until January 1961, when, at the Ninth Plenum of the 8th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, the restoration of agricultural production through a reversal of the Great Leap policies was started. Grain exports were stopped, and imports from Canada and Australia reduced the impact of the food shortages, at least in the coastal cities.

====Deaths by famine====
The exact number of deaths by famine is difficult to determine, and estimates range from 15 million to 55 million people. Because of the uncertainties which are involved in estimating the number of deaths which were caused by the failure of the Great Leap Forward and the ensuing famine and because of the uncertainties which are involved in estimating the numbers of deaths which were caused by other famines, it is difficult to compare the severity of different famines. If an estimate of 30 million deaths is accepted, the failure of the Great Leap Forward caused the deadliest famine in the history of China, and it also caused the deadliest famine in human history. This extremely high loss of human lives was partially caused by China&#x27;s large population. To put things into absolute and relative numerical perspective: in the Great Irish Famine, approximately 1 million people out of a total population of 8 million people died, or 12.5% of Ireland&#x27;s entire population. If approximately 23 million people out of a total population of 650 million people died during the Great Chinese Famine, the percentage would be 3.5%. Hence, the famine during the Great Leap Forward had the highest absolute death toll, though not the highest relative (percentage) one.

The Great Leap Forward reversed the downward trend in mortality that had occurred since 1950, though even during the Leap, mortality may not have reached pre-1949 levels. Famine deaths and the reduction in number of births caused the population of China to drop in 1960 and 1961. This was only the third time in 600 years that the population of China had decreased. Mao suggested, in a discussion with Field Marshal Montgomery in Autumn 1961, that &quot;unnatural deaths&quot; exceeded 5 million in 1960–1961, according to a declassified CIA report. After the Great Leap Forward, mortality rates decreased to below pre-Leap levels and the downward trend begun in 1950 continued.

The severity of the famine varied from region to region. By correlating the increases in the death rates of different provinces, Peng Xizhe found that Gansu, Sichuan, Guizhou, Hunan, Guangxi, and Anhui were the hardest-hit regions, while Heilongjiang, Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Tianjin, and Shanghai experienced the lowest increases in death rates during the Great Leap Forward (there was no data for Tibet). In some areas, people resorted to eating tree bark and dirt, and in some places cannibalism as a result of starvation. Peng also noted that the increase in death rates in urban areas was about half the increase in death rates in rural areas. According to Chinese government reports in the &quot;Fuyang Party History Research Office&quot;, between the years 1959 and 1961, 2.4 million people from Fuyang died from the famine.

===Long-term impact===

The long-term impact of the Great Leap Forward extended beyond immediate famine and loss of life. The policies and their disastrous outcomes led to significant changes in Chinese society and governance. In rural areas, the effects on education and women&#x27;s labor roles were profound. The collapse of agricultural production systems and the communal structure led to a reevaluation of economic strategies in subsequent decades. Rural education suffered due to the upheaval, and while women were initially mobilized into the workforce, the ensuing chaos often negated these advances. Dali Yang explains, &quot;The Great Leap Forward’s failure necessitated significant policy shifts, leading to a more pragmatic approach in China’s economic reforms.&quot;

==== Methods of estimating the death toll and methods of identifying the sources of the error ====

Some outlier estimates include 11 million by Utsa Patnaik, an Indian Marxist economist, 3.66 million by Chinese mathematician Sun Jingxian () and 2.6–4 million by Chinese historian and political economist Yang Songlin ().

The number of famine deaths during the Great Leap Forward has been estimated with different methods. Banister, Coale, and Ashton et al. compare age cohorts from the 1953, 1964, and 1982 censuses, yearly birth and death records, and results of the 1982 1:1000 fertility survey. From these they calculate excess deaths above a death rate interpolated between pre- and post-Leap death rates. All involve corrections for perceived errors inherent in the different data sets. Peng uses reported deaths from the vital statistics of 14 provinces, adjusts 10% for under reporting, and expands the result to cover all of China assuming similar mortality rates in the other provinces. He uses 1956/57 death rates as the baseline death rate rather than an interpolation between pre- and post-GLF death rates.

Houser, Sands, and Xiao in their 2005 research study using &quot;provincial-level demographic panel data and a Bayesian empirical approach in an effort to distinguish the relative importance of weather and national policy on China&#x27;s great demographic disaster&quot; conclude that &quot;in aggregate, from 1959 to 1961 China suffered about 14.8 million excess deaths. Of those, about 69% (or 10.3 million) seem attributable to effects stemming from national policies.&quot;

Cao uses information from &quot;local annals&quot; to determine for each locality the expected population increase from normal births and deaths, the population increase due to migration, and the loss of population between 1958 and 1961. He then adds the three figures to determine the number of excess deaths during the period 1959–1961. Chang and Halliday use death rates determined by &quot;Chinese demographers&quot; for the years 1957–1963, subtract the average of the pre-and post-Leap death rates (1957, 1962, and 1963) from the death rates of each of the years 1958–1961, and multiply each yearly excess death rate by the year&#x27;s population to determine excess deaths.

Chen Yizi, a top adviser to CCP General Secretary Zhao Ziyang and former head of the Institute for Economic Structural Reform, concluded 43 million died in the famine after conducting a county-by-county review of deaths in five provinces and performing extrapolation. Chen was part of a large investigation group led by the Institute for Economic Structural Reform which &quot;visited every province and examined internal Party documents and records&quot;.

Becker, Rummel, Dikötter, and Yang each compare several earlier estimates. Becker considers Banister&#x27;s estimate of 30 million excess deaths to be &quot;the most reliable estimate we have&quot;. Rummel initially took Coale&#x27;s 27 million as a &quot;most likely figure&quot;, then accepted the later estimate of 38 million by Chang and Halliday after it was published. Dikötter judged Chen&#x27;s estimate of 43 to 46 million to be &quot;in all likelihood a reliable estimate&quot;. He also claimed that at least 2.5 million of these deaths were caused by beatings, tortures, or summary executions. On the other hand, Daniel Vukovich asserts that this claim is coming from a problematic and unverified reference, because Chen simply threw that number as an &quot;estimate&quot; during an interview and because Chen hasn&#x27;t published any scholarly work on the subject. Yang takes Cao&#x27;s, Wang Weizhi&#x27;s, and Jin Hui&#x27;s estimates ranging from 32.5 to 35 million excess deaths for the period 1959–1961, adds his own estimates for 1958 (0.42 million) and 1962 (2.23 million) &quot;based on official figures reported by the provinces&quot; to get 35 to 37 million, and chooses 36 million as a number that &quot;approaches the reality but is still too low&quot;.

Estimates contain several sources of error. National census data was not accurate and even the total population of China at the time was not known to within 50 to 100 million people. The statistical reporting system had been taken over by party cadre from statisticians in 1957, making political considerations more important than accuracy and resulting in a complete breakdown in the statistical reporting system. Population figures were routinely inflated at the local level, often in order to obtain increased rations of goods. During the Cultural Revolution, a great deal of the material in the State Statistical Bureau was burned.

According to Jasper Becker, under-reporting of deaths was also a problem. The death registration system, which was inadequate before the famine, was completely overwhelmed by the large number of deaths during the famine. In addition, he claims that many deaths went unreported so that family members of the deceased could continue to draw the deceased&#x27;s food ration and that counting the number of children who both were born and died between the 1953 and 1964 censuses is problematic. However, Ashton, et al. believe that because the reported number of births during the GLF seems accurate, the reported number of deaths should be accurate as well. Massive internal migration made both population counts and registering deaths problematic, though Yang believes the degree of unofficial internal migration was small and Cao&#x27;s estimate takes internal migration into account.

Coale&#x27;s, Banister&#x27;s, Ashton et al.&#x27;s, and Peng&#x27;s figures all include adjustments for demographic reporting errors, though Dikötter, in his book &quot;Mao&#x27;s Great Famine&quot;, argues that their results, as well as Chang and Halliday&#x27;s, Yang&#x27;s, and Cao&#x27;s, are still underestimates. The System Reform Institute&#x27;s (Chen&#x27;s) estimate has not been published and therefore it cannot be verified.

==== Causes of the famine and responsibility for it ====
The policies of the Great Leap Forward, the failure of the government to respond quickly and effectively to famine conditions, as well as Mao&#x27;s insistence on maintaining high grain export quotas in the face of clear evidence of poor crop output were responsible for the famine. There is disagreement over how much, if at all, weather conditions contributed to the famine.

Significant amounts of agricultural labor had been transferred for steel production, resulting in a shortage of agricultural workers. Approximately 10% of crops could not be harvested as a result.

Yang Jisheng, a former CCP member and former reporter for the official Chinese news agency &quot;Xinhua&quot;, puts the blame squarely on Maoist policies and the political system of totalitarianism, such as diverting agricultural workers to steel production instead of growing crops, and exporting grain at the same time. During the course of his research, Yang uncovered that some 22 million tons of grain was held in public granaries at the height of the famine, reports of starvation went up the bureaucracy only to be ignored by top officials, and the authorities ordered that statistics be destroyed in regions where population decline became evident. Using Henan as an example, Yang documents that inflated reports claimed production of 1200 jin per mu, while the actual production was closer to 600 jin per mu, resulting in excessive grain requisitions and local starvation, nearly 6% of the population passed away. In the later book, Yang states, &quot;36 million Chinese starved to death in the years between 1958 and 1962, while 40 million others failed to be born, which means that &quot;China&#x27;s total population loss during the Great Famine then comes to 76 million.&quot;

Economist Steven Rosefielde argues that Yang&#x27;s account &quot;shows that Mao&#x27;s slaughter was caused in considerable part by terror-starvation; that is, voluntary manslaughter (and perhaps murder) rather than innocuous famine.&quot; Yang claims that local party officials were indifferent to the large number of people dying around them, as their primary concern was the delivery of grain, which Mao wanted to use to pay back debts to the USSR totaling 1.973 billion yuan. In Xinyang, people died of starvation at the doors of grain warehouses. Mao refused to open the state granaries as he dismissed reports of food shortages and accused the &quot;rightists&quot; and the &quot;kulaks&quot; of conspiring to hide grain.

From his research into records and talks with experts at the meteorological bureau, Yang concludes that the weather during the Great Leap Forward was not unusual compared to other periods and was not a factor. Yang also believes that the Sino-Soviet split was not a factor because it did not happen until 1960, when the famine was well under way.

Mao&#x27;s efforts to cool the Leap in late 1958 met resistance within the Party and when Mao proposed a scaling down of steel targets, &quot;many people just wouldn&#x27;t change and wouldn&#x27;t accept it&quot;. Thus, according to historian Tao Kai, the Leap &quot;wasn&#x27;t the problem of a single person, but that many people had ideological problems&quot;. Tao also pointed out that &quot;everyone was together&quot; on the Anti-Rightist Campaign and only a minority didn&#x27;t approve of the Great Leap&#x27;s policies or put forth different opinions. The actions of the party under Mao in the face of widespread famine are reminiscent of Soviet policy nearly three decades earlier during the Soviet famine of 1932-33. At that time, the USSR exported grain for international propaganda purposes despite millions dying of starvation across southern areas of the Soviet Union.

Benjamin Valentino writes that like in the USSR during the famine of 1932–33, peasants were confined to their starving villages by a system of household registration, and the worst effects of the famine were directed against enemies of the regime. Those labeled as &quot;black elements&quot; (religious leaders, rightists, rich peasants, etc.) in any previous campaign were given the lowest priority in the allocation of food, and therefore died in the greatest numbers. Drawing from Jasper Becker&#x27;s book Hungry Ghosts, genocide scholar Adam Jones states that &quot;no group suffered more than the Tibetans&quot; from 1959 to 1962.

Ashton, et al. write that policies leading to food shortages, natural disasters, and a slow response to initial indications of food shortages were to blame for the famine. Policies leading to food shortages included the implementation of the commune system and an emphasis on non-agricultural activities such as backyard steel production. Natural disasters included drought, flood, typhoon, plant disease, and insect pest. The slow response was in part due to a lack of objective reporting on the agricultural situation, including a &quot;nearly complete breakdown in the agricultural reporting system&quot;.

This was partly caused by strong incentives for officials to over-report crop yields. According to Frank Dikötter, local officials frequently reported production figures 30-40% higher than the actual output to meet the central government&#x27;s ambitious targets. The unwillingness of the Central Government to seek international aid was a major factor; China&#x27;s net grain exports in 1959 and 1960 would have been enough to feed 16 million people 2000 calories per day. Ashton, et al. conclude that &quot;It would not be inaccurate to say that 30 million people died prematurely as a result of errors of internal policy and flawed international relations.&quot;

Mobo Gao suggested that the Great Leap Forward&#x27;s terrible effects came not from malignant intent on the part of the Chinese leadership at the time, but instead related to the structural nature of its rule, and the vastness of China as a country. Gao says &quot;the terrible lesson learnt is that China is so huge and when it is uniformly ruled, follies or wrong policies will have grave implications of tremendous magnitude&quot;.

In the official &quot;Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China&quot; passed in 1981, the Chinese Communist Party called the purge of the so-called anti-Party clique of Peng Dehuai and others as &quot;entirely wrong&quot; and cut short the process of the rectification of &quot;Left&quot; errors. The 1981 Resolution also states that, &quot;it was mainly due to the errors of the Great Leap Forward and of the struggle against &#x27;Right opportunism&#x27; together with a succession of natural calamities and the perfidious scrapping of contracts by the Soviet Government that our economy encountered serious difficulties between 1959 and 1961, which caused serious losses to our country and people.&quot;

===Deaths by violence===
Not all deaths during the Great Leap were from starvation. In accounts documented by Yang Jisheng, people were beaten or killed for rebelling against the government, reporting the real harvest numbers, for sounding alarm, for refusing to hand over what little food they had left, for trying to flee the famine area, for begging for food or as little as stealing scraps or angering officials.

In the book &quot;Tombstone&quot;, a cycle of starvation and violence was documented during the Great Leap Forward.

==Other impacts==
===Failures of the food supply===
In agrarian policy, the failures of the food supply during the Great Leap were met by a gradual de-collectivization over the course of the 1960s that foreshadowed the further measures taken under Deng Xiaoping. Political scientist Meredith Jung-En Woo argues: &quot;Unquestionably the regime failed to respond in time to save the lives of millions of peasants, but when it did respond, it ultimately transformed the livelihoods of several hundred million peasants (modestly in the early 1960s, but permanently after Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s reforms subsequent to 1978).&quot;

Despite the risks to their careers, some CCP members openly laid blame for the disaster at the feet of the Party leadership and took it as proof that China must rely more on education, acquiring technical expertise and applying bourgeois methods in developing the economy. Liu Shaoqi made a speech at the Seven Thousand Cadres Conference in 1962, stating that &quot;[the] economic disaster was 30% fault of nature, 70% human error.&quot;

A 2017 paper by economists found &quot;strong evidence that the unrealistic yield targets led to excessive death tolls from 1959 to 1961, and further analysis shows that yield targets induced the inflation of grain output figures and excessive procurement. We also find that Mao&#x27;s radical policy caused serious deterioration in human capital accumulation and slower economic development in the policy-affected regions decades after the death of Mao.&quot;

A dramatic decline in grain output continued for several years, involving in 1960–61 a drop in output of more than 25 percent. Causes of this drop are found in both natural disaster and government policy.

===Industrialization===
Overall, the Great Leap Forward failed to rapidly industrialize China as intended.

According to Joseph Ball, writing in the &quot;Monthly Review&quot;, there is a good argument to suggest that the policies of the Great Leap Forward did a lot to sustain China&#x27;s overall economic growth, after an initial period of disruption. Official Chinese statistics show that after the end of the Leap in 1962, industrial output value had doubled; the gross value of agricultural products increased by 35 percent; steel production in 1962 was between 10.6 million tons or 12 million tons; investment in capital construction rose to 40 percent from 35 percent in the First Five-Year Plan period; the investment in capital construction was doubled; and the average income of workers and farmers increased by up to 30 percent. Additionally, there was significant capital construction (especially in iron, steel, mining and textile enterprises) that ultimately contributed greatly to China&#x27;s industrialization. The Great Leap Forward period also marked the initiation of China&#x27;s rapid growth in tractor and fertilizer production.

The successful construction of the Daqing oil field despite harsh weather conditions and supply limitations became a model held up by the Party as an example during subsequent industrialization campaigns. During its 1960 construction, Oil Minister Yu Qiuli mobilized workers through ideological motivation instead of material incentives, focusing enthusiasm, energy, and resources to complete a rapid industrialization project. The project also delivered critical economic benefits because without the production of the Daqing oil field, crude oil would have been severely limited after the Soviet Union cut off supplies as a result of the Sino-Soviet split.

Large-scale irrigation projects begun during the late 1950s as part of the Great Leap Forward continued to grow rapidly until the late 1970s.

During the Great Leap Forward, control of state-owned enterprises was largely decentralized, with control being transferred to local governments from the central government. This process of decentralization also significantly increased the power of local Party organizations.

===Women&#x27;s labor advancement===
The Great Leap Forward&#x27;s focus on total workforce mobilization resulted in opportunities for women&#x27;s labor advancement. Increasing collectivization of labor brought more opportunities for women to &quot;leave the home&quot;, thereby increasing their economic and personal independence. The number of women in state institutions and state-owned enterprises more than tripled during the period 1957 to 1960.

As women became increasingly needed to work in agriculture and industry, and encouraged by policy to do so, the phenomenon of Iron Women arose. Women did traditionally male work in both fields and factories, including major movements of women into management positions. Women competed for high productivity, and those who distinguished themselves came to be called Iron Women. Slogans such as &quot;There is no difference between men and women in this new age,&quot; and &quot;We can do anything, and anything we do, we can do it well,&quot; became popular.

Neighborhood production teams established during this period offered women labor that allowed them to leave the home without leaving the neighborhood community. This mode of labor provided urban women with the right to work while still preserving existing forms of household social life.

=== Education ===
During the Great Leap Forward, the number of universities in China increased to 1,289 by 1960 and nationwide enrollment more than doubled to 962,000 in 1960. This was a wave of &quot;great leap forward&quot; in higher education. Many of the newly established universities, however, were affiliated with people&#x27;s communes and were directly transformed from local middle schools. For example, in Xushui County, Hebei, every commune built one university of its own and local middle school teachers were promoted to professors; for another example, in Suiping County, Henan, a new university was established with 10 departments and 529 students, where some &quot;professors&quot; were actually teachers from local elementary school. According to official sources:

Some comrades expressed the fear that the movement would be a mockery of school education ...With regard to the development of higher education, some comrades, hearing that peasants have set up their own universities in the countryside, would ridicule the idea, believing that a university without a staff of qualified professors and students who have graduated from senior middle schools cannot be called a university.

Educational reforms during the Great Leap Forward sought to increase student and staff participation in the administration process, to favor students from worker, peasant, or soldier backgrounds in admissions, and to increase the role of the CCP and of politics in schools. Beginning in 1961, universities rolled back these policy initiatives, and increase meritocratic university policies instead of egalitarian ones.

===Resistance===
There were various forms of resistance to the consequences of the Great Leap Forward. Several provinces saw armed rebellion, though these rebellions never posed a serious threat to the Central Government. Rebellions are documented to have occurred in Henan, Shandong, Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan, Fujian, Yunnan, and Tibet. In Henan, Shandong, Qinghai, Gansu, and Sichuan, these rebellions lasted more than a year, with the Spirit Soldier rebellion of 1959 being one of the few larger-scale uprisings. There was also occasional violence against cadre members. Raids on granaries, arson and other vandalism, train robberies, and raids on neighboring villages and counties were common.

According to Ralph Thaxton, professor of politics at Brandeis University, villagers turned against the CCP during and after the Great Leap, seeing it as autocratic, brutal, corrupt, and mean-spirited. According to Thaxton, the CCP&#x27;s policies included plunder, forced labor, and starvation, which led villagers &quot;to think about their relationship with the Communist Party in ways that do not bode well for the continuity of socialist rule.&quot;

Often, villagers composed doggerel to show their defiance to the regime, and &quot;perhaps, to remain sane&quot;. During the Great Leap, one jingle ran: &quot;Flatter shamelessly—eat delicacies... Don&#x27;t flatter—starve to death for sure.&quot;

===Impact on the government===

Officials were prosecuted for exaggerating production figures, although punishments varied. In one case, a provincial party secretary was dismissed and prohibited from holding higher office. A number of county-level officials were publicly tried and executed.

Mao stepped down as State Chairman of the PRC on 27 April 1959, but remained CCP Chairman. Liu Shaoqi (the new PRC Chairman) and reformist Deng Xiaoping (CCP General Secretary) were left in charge to change policy to bring economic recovery. Mao&#x27;s Great Leap Forward policy was openly criticized at the Lushan party conference by one person. Criticism from Minister of National Defense Peng Dehuai, who, discovered that people from his home province starved to death caused him to write a letter to Mao to ask for the policies to be adapted. After the Lushan showdown, Mao replaced Peng with Lin Biao and Peng was sent off into obscurity.

However, by 1962, it was clear that the party had changed away from the extremist ideology that led to the Great Leap. During 1962, the party held a number of conferences and rehabilitated most of the deposed comrades who had criticized Mao in the aftermath of the Great Leap. The event was again discussed, with much self-criticism, and the contemporary government called it a &quot;serious [loss] to our country and people&quot; and blamed the cult of personality of Mao.

At the Lushan conference of 1959, Peng Dehuai, one of the great marshals of the Chinese civil war against the nationalists, was a strong supporter of the Leap. But the discovery that people from his own home area were starving to death prompted him to write to Mao to ask for the policies to be adapted. Mao was furious, reading the letter out in public and demanding that his colleagues in the leadership line up either behind him or Peng. Almost to a man, they supported Mao, with his security chief Kang Sheng declaring of the letter: &quot;I make bold to suggest that this cannot be handled with lenience.&quot;

In particular, at the &quot;Seven Thousand Cadres Conference&quot; in January–February 1962, Mao made a self-criticism and re-affirmed his commitment to democratic centralism. In the years that followed, Mao mostly abstained from the operations of government, making policy largely the domain of Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. Maoist ideology took a back seat in the CCP, until Mao launched the Cultural Revolution in 1966 which marked his political comeback.

Following the failures of the Great Leap Forward, Chinese leadership slowed the pace of industrialization, focusing more on the development of China&#x27;s already more developed coastal areas and the production of consumer goods. Thus, during the preliminary formulation of the Third Five Year Plan (which had been delayed due to the economic turmoil), Liu stated:

During the discussion of the Third Five Year Plan, Mao made similar statements about the Great Leap Forward having &quot;extended the infrastructure battlefront too long&quot;, acknowledging that it was &quot;best to do less and well&quot;.

The failures of the Great Leap Forward also informed the government&#x27;s approach to the Third Front construction campaign which followed a few years later and which built basic industry and national defense industry in China&#x27;s interior. Rather than adopting the Great Leap Forward&#x27;s approach of locally developed projects, the mass mobilizations of the Third Front were centrally planned.

In addition, according to historian Philipp Brigham, the failures of the Great Leap Forward significantly contributed to the Cultural Revolution, which is another pivotal event in modern Chinese politics that happened later in Chairman Mao’s regime. Specifically, he posits that one of the main objectives of the Cultural Revolution was to extricate Chairman Mao and the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party from the responsibility for the Great Leap Forward. According to Brigham&#x27;s explanation, Chairman Mao and the central committee tried to incite through the Cultural Revolution that the Great Leap Forward had failed despite the right direction from above due to inadequate leadership of the local cadres.

=== Ecological impact ===
The Great Leap Forward resulted in ecological impacts through deforestation that resulted, as well as the expansion of agriculture into areas ill-suited for it.

=== Health impacts ===
There is evidence that survivors of the famine suffered sustained negative effects to their long-term health and economic outcomes. Those in early childhood during the famine were impacted the most, and it has been estimated that the 1959 birth cohort would have otherwise grown three centimeters taller in adulthood.

Cohorts born during the famine showed higher infant and early life mortality, but exhibit a &quot;mortality crossover&quot; pattern, with mortality rates leveling off or even dropping relative to non-famine cohorts beyond a certain point. This could be explained by the combined effects of initial debilitation, in which malnutrition and hardship increase early deaths, and selection for robustness among famine survivors resulting in fewer later deaths.

=== Cultural impact ===
Consistent with the Great Leap Forward in agriculture and industry, authorities promoted the New Folksong Movement and the Peasant Painting Movement, from which hundreds of thousands of new artists emerged. Through the New Folksong Movement, millions of new folk songs and poems were written and collected. As part of the Peasant Painting Movement, peasant artists decorated village walls with Great Leap Forward-themed murals.

The Great Leap Forward also prompted a wave of the New &quot;Guohua&quot; Campaign in which the state commissioned landscape artists to paint new production projects; select paintings of the campaign were taught in schools, published widely as propaganda posters, exhibited in museums, and used as the backdrops of state events.

On 9 March 1958, the Ministry of Culture held a meeting to introduce a Great Leap Forward in cinema. During the Great Leap Forward, the film industry rapidly expanded, with documentary films being the genre that experienced the greatest growth. The total number of film-screening venues, including both urban cinemas and mobile projection units which traveled through rural China, radically increased.

==See also==
* Lysenkoism

* Crimes against humanity under communist regimes
* Criticism of communist party rule
* List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party
* Mass killings under communist regimes
* Neo-Stalinism
* Stalinism
* Virgin Lands Campaign, a contemporaneous program in the Soviet Union

==Notes==
==References==

==Bibliography and further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="4" end="22" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="66" end="71" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="102" end="125" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="148" end="158" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q396108" start="214" end="230" title="agrarian society" label="agrarian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="239" end="261" title="industrialized society" label="industrialized society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153975" start="287" end="308" title="people&amp;#x27;s commune" label="people&amp;#x27;s commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454958" start="469" end="489" title="Great Chinese Famine" label="Great Chinese Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478941" start="494" end="526" title="List of famines" label="largest or second-largest famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="629" end="642" title="intellectuals" label="intellectuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="871" end="884" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet [Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10912674" start="1458" end="1487" title="Anti-Right Deviation Struggle" label="Anti-Right Deviation Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="2012" end="2041" title="Collective farming" label="agricultural collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q985716" start="2138" end="2161" title="Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries" label="counter-revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681848" start="2218" end="2235" title="Denunciation rally" label="struggle sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="2261" end="2273" title="Forced labour" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="2528" end="2548" title="Economy of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="2577" end="2596" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318167" start="2609" end="2623" title="Dwight H. Perkins (economist)" label="Dwight Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10864514" start="2918" end="2950" title="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference" label="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988" start="3064" end="3074" title="Liu Shaoqi" label="Liu Shaoqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="3092" end="3105" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215032" start="3315" end="3343" title="Socialist Education Movement" label="Socialist Education Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="3360" end="3379" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q198240" start="3491" end="3507" title="Zhumadian" label="Zhumadian, Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q716334" start="3581" end="3593" title="Typhoon Nina (1975)" label="Typhoon Nina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141442" start="3615" end="3639" title="1975 Banqiao Dam failure" label="1975 Banqiao Dam failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128296" start="3942" end="3959" title="Classical Marxism" label="Classical Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="5971" end="5991" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet tensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692520" start="6107" end="6130" title="Technological and industrial history of China" label="technology and industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634516" start="6440" end="6454" title="state monopoly" label="state monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13473501" start="6657" end="6667" title="collective" label="collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7944" end="7956" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q498231" start="8841" end="8853" title="foot-binding" label="foot-binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="8855" end="8869" title="child marriage" label="child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="8874" end="8879" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8939" end="8944" title="Hukou#1949–1978: Maoist era" label="hukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="9082" end="9093" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="9105" end="9118" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="9485" end="9495" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q517371" start="9876" end="9900" title="Hundred Flowers Campaign" label="Hundred Flowers Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="10418" end="10435" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Khrushchev&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="10448" end="10457" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="10532" end="10544" title="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q52967" start="10546" end="10552" title="Poznań 1956 protests" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="10557" end="10564" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134177" start="10617" end="10637" title="peaceful coexistence" label="peaceful coexistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q108504984" start="10759" end="10774" title="Jonathan Mirsky" label="Jonathan Mirsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="10915" end="10925" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357324" start="11125" end="11147" title="Anti-Rightist Campaign" label="Anti-Rightist Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q832407" start="12040" end="12059" title="Ministry of Finance of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q311413" start="12949" end="12960" title="Li Xiannian" label="Li Xiannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="12962" end="12970" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24831013" start="14678" end="14689" title="cult of Mao" label="cult of Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="14990" end="15010" title="Factors of production" label="factor of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="15233" end="15251" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="15253" end="15291" title="General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Communist Party First Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="15292" end="15309" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q147304" start="15868" end="15885" title="North China Plain" label="North China Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q175984" start="16474" end="16491" title="Lushan Conference" label="Lushan Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="16650" end="16661" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q10297096" start="16760" end="16788" title="Minister of National Defense (China)" label="Minister of National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q10912674" start="16994" end="17023" title="Anti-Right Deviation Struggle" label="Anti-Right Deviation Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="17052" end="17060" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q855055" start="17333" end="17347" title="Five-year plans of China" label="Five Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="17515" end="17522" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="18292" end="18303" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="18318" end="18328" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18532" end="18543" title="Voluntarism (philosophy)#Marxist context" label="voluntarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784916" start="18684" end="18696" title="Third Period" label="Third Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="19061" end="19066" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="19191" end="19200" title="Politburo of the Communist Party of China" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006573" start="23637" end="23664" title="Steel industry in China" label="China&amp;#x27;s steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185684" start="24127" end="24132" title="Hefei" label="Hefei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11091488" start="24189" end="24201" title="Zeng Xisheng" label="Zeng Xisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197987" start="24539" end="24548" title="Lysenkoism" label="the ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q294234" start="24586" end="24600" title="Trofim Lysenko" label="Trofim Lysenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431982" start="25015" end="25027" title="Deep plowing" label="Deep plowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="25949" end="25965" title="private property" label="private holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769670" start="26564" end="26575" title="Mark Selden" label="Mark Selden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="26849" end="26858" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681848" start="27367" end="27383" title="struggle session" label="struggle session"/>
<link wikidata="Q568378" start="27622" end="27632" title="emaciation" label="emaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q628505" start="27864" end="27874" title="labor camp" label="labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="28336" end="28342" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148047" start="28931" end="28956" title="Patriotic Health Campaign" label="Patriotic Health Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="29411" end="29422" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="29459" end="29467" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988" start="29469" end="29479" title="Liu Shaoqi" label="Liu Shaoqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="29485" end="29498" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10864514" start="29584" end="29616" title="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference" label="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="29654" end="29673" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q779863" start="30136" end="30155" title="Four Pests Campaign" label="Four Pests Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="30670" end="30682" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="31188" end="31203" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="32203" end="32208" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="32210" end="32215" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="32220" end="32225" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="32264" end="32271" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429301" start="32515" end="32526" title="Li Jingquan" label="Li Jingquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q348180" start="32712" end="32722" title="Yan Lianke" label="Yan Lianke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15898519" start="33200" end="33252" title="8th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="8th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478941" start="33864" end="33930" title="List of famines" label="estimating the numbers of deaths which were caused by other famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981379" start="34257" end="34286" title="Demographics of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s large population"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="34359" end="34377" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="35197" end="35221" title="Field Marshal Montgomery" label="Field Marshal Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="35642" end="35649" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="35651" end="35656" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="35658" end="35665" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="35713" end="35725" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="35727" end="35741" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="35743" end="35751" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="35753" end="35760" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="35766" end="35774" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444884" start="35876" end="35881" title="Tibet (1912–1951)" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15127416" start="37237" end="37249" title="Utsa Patnaik" label="Utsa Patnaik"/>
<link wikidata="Q8459390" start="39375" end="39384" title="Chen Yizi" label="Chen Yizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="39403" end="39424" title="CCP General Secretary" label="CCP General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="39425" end="39436" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q982717" start="39849" end="39857" title="Frank Dikötter" label="Dikötter"/>
<link wikidata="Q722280" start="41763" end="41776" title="Jasper Becker" label="Jasper Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209496" start="42805" end="42828" title="Mao&amp;#x27;s Great Famine" label="Mao&amp;#x27;s Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q553393" start="43708" end="43720" title="Yang Jisheng (journalist)" label="Yang Jisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q204839" start="43805" end="43811" title="Xinhua" label="Xinhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="43846" end="43852" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="43890" end="43905" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615209" start="44909" end="44926" title="Steven Rosefielde" label="Steven Rosefielde"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="45374" end="45378" title="Chinese yuan" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q404873" start="45383" end="45390" title="Xinyang" label="Xinyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="45556" end="45565" title="rightists" label="rightists"/>
<link wikidata="Q220790" start="45586" end="45591" title="kulak" label="kulak"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="45867" end="45884" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357324" start="46409" end="46431" title="Anti-Rightist Campaign" label="Anti-Rightist Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497254" start="46680" end="46704" title="Soviet famine of 1932-33" label="Soviet famine of 1932-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497254" start="46922" end="46939" title="Soviet famine of 1932–33" label="famine of 1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823965" start="47405" end="47415" title="Adam Jones (Canadian scholar)" label="Adam Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="47867" end="47874" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893860" start="49237" end="49354" title="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q10912674" start="49701" end="49747" title="Anti-Right Deviation Struggle" label="struggle against &amp;#x27;Right opportunism&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q553393" start="50109" end="50121" title="Yang Jisheng (journalist)" label="Yang Jisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="50685" end="50701" title="collectivization" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818945" start="50817" end="50837" title="Meredith Jung-En Woo" label="Meredith Jung-En Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="51387" end="51396" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="51423" end="51430" title="economic science" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988" start="51432" end="51442" title="Liu Shaoqi" label="Liu Shaoqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10864514" start="51464" end="51496" title="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference" label="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937752" start="51578" end="51589" title="human error" label="human error"/>
<link wikidata="Q420062" start="51937" end="51957" title="capital accumulation" label="capital accumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946330" start="52421" end="52435" title="Monthly Review" label="Monthly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100815" start="53263" end="53293" title="Chinese industrialization" label="China&amp;#x27;s industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093731" start="53455" end="53471" title="Daqing Oil Field" label="Daqing oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436019" start="53668" end="53676" title="Yu Qiuli" label="Yu Qiuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="54265" end="54288" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-owned enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="54879" end="54902" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-owned enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564277" start="55080" end="55090" title="Iron Girls" label="Iron Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="56031" end="56047" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153975" start="56123" end="56144" title="people&amp;#x27;s commune" label="people&amp;#x27;s commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196521" start="56219" end="56232" title="Xushui County" label="Xushui County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199069" start="56373" end="56387" title="Suiping County" label="Suiping County"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="57695" end="57700" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="57702" end="57710" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="57712" end="57719" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="57721" end="57726" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="57728" end="57735" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="57737" end="57743" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="57745" end="57751" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="57757" end="57762" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857182" start="57864" end="57896" title="Spirit Soldier rebellion (1959)" label="Spirit Soldier rebellion of 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="58178" end="58197" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030485" start="58606" end="58614" title="doggerel" label="doggerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="59261" end="59274" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q175984" start="59430" end="59453" title="Lushan Conference" label="Lushan party conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="59513" end="59524" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="59719" end="59727" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q714150" start="60085" end="60099" title="self-criticism" label="self-criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="60213" end="60232" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q10864514" start="60887" end="60919" title="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference" label="Seven Thousand Cadres Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q714150" start="60963" end="60977" title="self-criticism" label="self-criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="61012" end="61033" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="61253" end="61272" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866590" start="62019" end="62030" title="Third Front (China)" label="Third Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="62702" end="62750" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="63148" end="63161" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q919348" start="64560" end="64566" title="Guohua" label="Guohua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607378" start="64850" end="64869" title="Ministry of Culture (China)" label="Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q842792" start="64922" end="64928" title="Cinema of China" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197987" start="65247" end="65257" title="Lysenkoism" label="Lysenkoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235125" start="65261" end="65308" title="Crimes against humanity under communist regimes" label="Crimes against humanity under communist regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186866" start="65311" end="65344" title="Criticism of communist party rule" label="Criticism of communist party rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608729" start="65347" end="65395" title="List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party" label="List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235125" start="65398" end="65435" title="Mass killings under communist regimes" label="Mass killings under communist regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977701" start="65438" end="65451" title="Neo-Stalinism" label="Neo-Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="65454" end="65463" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006581" start="65466" end="65487" title="Virgin Lands Campaign" label="Virgin Lands Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="65522" end="65534" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71265" wikidata="Q209596" url="?curid=71265" title="Senecio">
<text>Senecio is a genus of flowering plants in the daisy family (Asteraceae) that includes ragworts and groundsels.

Variously circumscribed taxonomically, the genus &quot;Senecio&quot; is one of the largest genera of flowering plants.

==Description==

===Morphology===
The flower heads are normally rayed with the heads borne in branched clusters, and usually completely yellow, but green, purple, white and blue flowers are known as well.

In its current circumscription, the genus contains species that are annual or perennial herbs, shrubs, small trees, aquatics or climbers. The only species which are trees are the species formerly belonging to &quot;Robinsonia&quot; occurring on the Juan Fernández Islands.

===Chemistry===
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are found in all &quot;Senecio&quot; species. These alkaloids serve as a natural biocides to deter or even kill animals that would eat them. Livestock generally do not find them palatable. &quot;Senecio&quot; species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species that have developed tolerance for these alkaloids.

==Taxonomy==
The traditional circumscription of &quot;Senecio&quot; is artificial, being polyphyletic, even in its new circumscription which is based on genetic data. Despite the separation of many species into other genera, the genus still contains species and is one of the largest genera of flowering plants.

As no morphological synapomorphies are known to determine which species belong to the genus or not, no exact species number is known. The genus has an almost worldwide distribution and evolved in the mid- to late Miocene.

===Phylogeny===
As of 2007, many genera and the whole tribe are in need of revision. Many species currently placed in the genus need to be transferred to other or new genera, and others have been retransferred to &quot;Senecio&quot;. In its new delimitation the genus is still not monophyletic.

Genera that have been included are the following:
* &quot;Aetheolaena&quot;
* &quot;Culcitum&quot;
* &quot;Hasteola&quot;
* &quot;Iocenes&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Lasiocephalus&quot; Willd. ex Schltdl.
* &quot;Robinsonia&quot;

====Synonyms====

The following genera contain species that are or have been included within &quot;Senecio&quot;.
* &quot;Antillanthus&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Barkleyanthus&quot; H. Rob. &amp; Brettell
* &quot;Brachyglottis&quot; J. R. Forst. &amp; G. Forst.
* &quot;Canariothamnus&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Curio&quot; P.V. Heath
* &quot;Dauresia&quot; B. Nord. &amp; Pelser
* &quot;Dendrophorbium&quot; C. Jeffrey
* &quot;Dendrosenecio&quot; (Hauman ex Hedberg) B. Nord. - Giant groundsels occurring in the high altitude areas of East Africa
* &quot;Dorobaea&quot; Cass.
* &quot;Dresslerothamnus&quot; H. Rob.
* &quot;Elekmania&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Herreranthus&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Hubertia&quot; Bory
* &quot;Jacobaea&quot; Mill.&quot;Leonis&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Ligularia&quot; 
* &quot;Lundinia&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Mesogramma&quot; DC.
* &quot;Monticalia&quot; C. Jeffrey
* &quot;Nelsonianthus&quot; H. Rob. &amp; Brettell
* &quot;Nesampelos&quot; B. Nord., nom. inval.
* &quot;Oldfeltia&quot; B. Nord. &amp; Lundin
* &quot;Packera&quot; Á. Löve &amp; D. Löve
* &quot;Pentacalia&quot; Cass.
* &quot;Pippenalia&quot; McVaugh
* &quot;Pittocaulon&quot; H. Rob. &amp; Brettell
* &quot;Pojarkovia&quot; Askerova
* &quot;Psacaliopsis&quot; H. Rob. &amp; Brettell
* &quot;Pseudogynoxys&quot; (Greenm.) Cabrera
* &quot;Pseudojacobaea&quot; (Hook. f.) R. Mathur
* &quot;Roldana&quot; La Llave
* &quot;Sinosenecio&quot; B. Nord.
* &quot;Synotis&quot; (C. B. Clarke) C. Jeffrey &amp; Y. L. Chen
* &quot;Telanthophora&quot; H. Rob. &amp; Brettell
* &quot;Tephroseris&quot; (Rchb.) Rchb.
* &quot;Vendredia&quot; Baill.
* &quot;Zemisia&quot; B. Nord.

===Etymology===
The scientific name, &quot;&quot;, means &quot;old man&quot;.

===Selected species===

*&quot;Senecio ampullaceus&quot; — Texas ragwort, Texas squaw-weed, Texas groundsel, clasping-leaf groundsel
*&quot;Senecio angulatus&quot; L.f. — creeping groundsel
*&quot;Senecio antisanae&quot;
*&quot;Senecio arborescens&quot;
*&quot;Senecio barbertonicus&quot; Klatt — succulent bush senecio
*&quot;Senecio bigelovii&quot; — nodding groundsel
*&quot;Senecio bosniacus&quot; G. Beck — Bosnian ragwort
*&quot;Senecio brasiliensis&quot; (Spreng.) Less. — flor-das-almas
*&quot;Senecio candicans&quot; — angel wings
*&quot;Senecio cambrensis&quot; — Welsh groundsel, Welsh ragwort
*&quot;Senecio crassissimus&quot;
*&quot;Senecio elegans&quot; — purple groundsel
*&quot;Senecio falklandicus&quot;
*&quot;Senecio flaccidus&quot; Less. — Douglas senecio, threadleaf groundsel, threadleaf ragwort
*&quot;Senecio gallicus&quot; Chaix — French groundsel
*&quot;Senecio glaucus&quot; L. — Jaffa groundsel
*&quot;Senecio howeanus&quot; 
*&quot;Senecio inaequidens&quot; — South African ragwort
*&quot;Senecio iscoensis&quot; — Hieron.
*&quot;Senecio keniophytum&quot;
*&quot;Senecio lamarckianus&quot;
*&quot;Senecio leucanthemifolius&quot; Poir. — coastal ragwort
*&quot;Senecio madagascariensis&quot; — Madagascar ragwort
*&quot;Senecio macroglossus&quot; — Natal ivy, wax ivy
*&quot;Senecio neowbsteri&quot; Olympic Mountain groundsel
*&quot;Senecio patagonicus&quot;
*&quot;Senecio pauciradiatus&quot;
*&quot;Senecio pokohinuensis&quot; — Mokohinau groundsel
*&quot;Senecio pulcher&quot;
*&quot;Senecio sanmarcosensis&quot;
*&quot;Senecio scandens&quot; — climbing Senecio
*&quot;Senecio squalidus&quot; — Oxford ragwort
*&quot;Senecio trapezuntinus&quot; 
*&quot;Senecio triangularis&quot; — arrowleaf groundsel
*&quot;Senecio tropaeolifolius&quot; — false nasturtium
*&quot;Senecio vaginatus&quot;
*&quot;Senecio vernalis&quot; — eastern groundsel
*&quot;Senecio viscosus&quot; — sticky ragwort
*&quot;Senecio vulgaris&quot; — common groundsel, old-man-in-the-spring

Formerly in &quot;Senecio&quot; 
* &quot;Brachyglottis greyi&quot; (as &quot;S. greyi&quot;)
* &quot;Pericallis&quot; × &quot;hybrida&quot; (as &quot;S. cruentus&quot;)
* &quot;Rugelia nudicaulis&quot; — Rugels ragwort

==Distribution==
The genus &quot;Senecio&quot; is distributed almost worldwide. It is one of the few genera occurring in all five regions with a Mediterranean climate. Furthermore, species are found in mountainous regions, including tropical alpine-like areas.

==See also==
* Ragwort Control Act 2003

==References==
==External links==
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="60" end="70" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q209596" start="86" end="94" title="Senecio" label="ragworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q209596" start="99" end="109" title="Senecio" label="groundsels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="122" end="135" title="circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q587369" start="270" end="281" title="flower head" label="flower head"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="506" end="512" title="annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="516" end="525" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295530" start="653" end="663" title="Robinsonia (plant)" label="Robinsonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156325" start="687" end="709" title="Juan Fernández Islands" label="Juan Fernández Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q75005794" start="728" end="751" title="Pyrrolizidine alkaloids" label="Pyrrolizidine alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q864939" start="833" end="840" title="biocide" label="biocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1000" end="1005" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="1015" end="1026" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="1176" end="1188" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="1240" end="1252" title="genetic data" label="genetic data"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1285" end="1292" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643091" start="1363" end="1397" title="List of the largest genera of flowering plants" label="largest genera of flowering plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="1420" end="1434" title="Synapomorphy" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="1613" end="1620" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="1904" end="1916" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688663" start="1977" end="1988" title="Aetheolaena" label="Aetheolaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680195" start="2026" end="2034" title="Hasteola" label="Hasteola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062205" start="2049" end="2056" title="Iocenes" label="Iocenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283950" start="2080" end="2093" title="Lasiocephalus" label="Lasiocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295530" start="2127" end="2137" title="Robinsonia (plant)" label="Robinsonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774887" start="2267" end="2279" title="Antillanthus" label="Antillanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861088" start="2303" end="2316" title="Barkleyanthus" label="Barkleyanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953443" start="2354" end="2367" title="Brachyglottis" label="Brachyglottis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897961" start="2411" end="2425" title="Canariothamnus" label="Canariothamnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676387" start="2449" end="2454" title="Curio (plant)" label="Curio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5799708" start="2480" end="2488" title="Dauresia" label="Dauresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256795" start="2525" end="2539" title="Dendrophorbium" label="Dendrophorbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634151" start="2565" end="2578" title="Dendrosenecio" label="Dendrosenecio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="2650" end="2663" title="high altitude" label="high altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="2673" end="2684" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298150" start="2693" end="2701" title="Dorobaea" label="Dorobaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307092" start="2722" end="2738" title="Dresslerothamnus" label="Dresslerothamnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358735" start="2761" end="2770" title="Elekmania" label="Elekmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896434" start="2794" end="2806" title="Herreranthus" label="Herreranthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927744" start="2830" end="2838" title="Hubertia" label="Hubertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701040" start="2858" end="2866" title="Jacobaea" label="Jacobaea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2884" end="2890" title="Leonis (plant)" label="Leonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156814" start="2914" end="2923" title="Ligularia" label="Ligularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984874" start="2939" end="2947" title="Lundinia" label="Lundinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15558536" start="2971" end="2981" title="Mesogramma (plant)" label="Mesogramma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9034862" start="3000" end="3010" title="Monticalia" label="Monticalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990820" start="3036" end="3049" title="Nelsonianthus" label="Nelsonianthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041073" start="3087" end="3097" title="Nesampelos" label="Nesampelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049715" start="3134" end="3143" title="Oldfeltia" label="Oldfeltia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004070" start="3180" end="3187" title="Packera" label="Packera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839935" start="3224" end="3234" title="Pentacalia" label="Pentacalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10349982" start="3255" end="3265" title="Pippenalia" label="Pippenalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235980" start="3288" end="3299" title="Pittocaulon" label="Pittocaulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208528" start="3337" end="3347" title="Pojarkovia" label="Pojarkovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253894" start="3371" end="3383" title="Psacaliopsis" label="Psacaliopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q520781" start="3421" end="3434" title="Pseudogynoxys" label="Pseudogynoxys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3467" end="3481" title="Pseudojacobaea" label="Pseudojacobaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360613" start="3517" end="3524" title="Roldana" label="Roldana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524950" start="3548" end="3559" title="Sinosenecio" label="Sinosenecio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662619" start="3583" end="3590" title="Synotis" label="Synotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297232" start="3648" end="3661" title="Telanthophora" label="Telanthophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120556" start="3699" end="3710" title="Tephroseris" label="Tephroseris"/>
<link wikidata="Q209596" start="3739" end="3748" title="Vendredia" label="Vendredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171094" start="3770" end="3777" title="Zemisia" label="Zemisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="3814" end="3829" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450366" start="3904" end="3923" title="Senecio ampullaceus" label="Senecio ampullaceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402425" start="4013" end="4030" title="Senecio angulatus" label="Senecio angulatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503325" start="4070" end="4087" title="Senecio antisanae" label="Senecio antisanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415409" start="4101" end="4120" title="Senecio arborescens" label="Senecio arborescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q13952587" start="4134" end="4155" title="Senecio barbertonicus" label="Senecio barbertonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15592098" start="4200" end="4217" title="Senecio bigelovii" label="Senecio bigelovii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4251" end="4268" title="Senecio bosniacus" label="Senecio bosniacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675023" start="4308" end="4328" title="Senecio brasiliensis" label="Senecio brasiliensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15595264" start="4375" end="4392" title="Senecio candicans" label="Senecio candicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436615" start="4420" end="4438" title="Senecio cambrensis" label="Senecio cambrensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450385" start="4485" end="4505" title="Senecio crassissimus" label="Senecio crassissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450388" start="4519" end="4534" title="Senecio elegans" label="Senecio elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q117287528" start="4567" end="4587" title="Senecio falklandicus" label="Senecio falklandicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025700" start="4601" end="4618" title="Senecio flaccidus" label="Senecio flaccidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145110" start="4698" end="4714" title="Senecio gallicus" label="Senecio gallicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450398" start="4753" end="4768" title="Senecio glaucus" label="Senecio glaucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15597314" start="4803" end="4819" title="Senecio howeanus" label="Senecio howeanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q939756" start="4834" end="4853" title="Senecio inaequidens" label="Senecio inaequidens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503328" start="4891" end="4908" title="Senecio iscoensis" label="Senecio iscoensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478537" start="4932" end="4951" title="Senecio keniophytum" label="Senecio keniophytum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390860" start="4965" end="4985" title="Senecio lamarckianus" label="Senecio lamarckianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150433" start="4999" end="5024" title="Senecio leucanthemifolius" label="Senecio leucanthemifolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766514" start="5062" end="5086" title="Senecio madagascariensis" label="Senecio madagascariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955278" start="5121" end="5141" title="Senecio macroglossus" label="Senecio macroglossus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5176" end="5194" title="Senecio neowbsteri" label="Senecio neowbsteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15552901" start="5235" end="5254" title="Senecio patagonicus" label="Senecio patagonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15602914" start="5268" end="5289" title="Senecio pauciradiatus" label="Senecio pauciradiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q94399859" start="5303" end="5324" title="Senecio pokohinuensis" label="Senecio pokohinuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450423" start="5360" end="5375" title="Senecio pulcher" label="Senecio pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720777" start="5389" end="5411" title="Senecio sanmarcosensis" label="Senecio sanmarcosensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10904991" start="5425" end="5441" title="Senecio scandens" label="Senecio scandens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955284" start="5474" end="5491" title="Senecio squalidus" label="Senecio squalidus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5522" end="5543" title="Senecio trapezuntinus" label="Senecio trapezuntinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465957" start="5558" end="5578" title="Senecio triangularis" label="Senecio triangularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15601149" start="5614" end="5637" title="Senecio tropaeolifolius" label="Senecio tropaeolifolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415413" start="5670" end="5687" title="Senecio vaginatus" label="Senecio vaginatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084114" start="5701" end="5717" title="Senecio vernalis" label="Senecio vernalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503708" start="5751" end="5767" title="Senecio viscosus" label="Senecio viscosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504256" start="5798" end="5814" title="Senecio vulgaris" label="Senecio vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096143" start="5905" end="5924" title="Brachyglottis greyi" label="Brachyglottis greyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494593" start="5959" end="6003" title="Pericallis × hybrida" label="&amp;quot;Pericallis&amp;quot; × &amp;quot;hybrida&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378525" start="6041" end="6059" title="Rugelia nudicaulis" label="Rugelia nudicaulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="6229" end="6250" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283266" start="6361" end="6385" title="Ragwort Control Act 2003" label="Ragwort Control Act 2003"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71267" wikidata="Q15630491" url="?curid=71267" title="Jacobaea vulgaris">
<text>Jacobaea vulgaris, syn. Senecio jacobaea, is a very common wild flower in the family Asteraceae that is native to northern Eurasia, usually in dry, open places, and has also been widely distributed as a weed elsewhere.

Common names include ragwort, common ragwort, stinking willie, tansy ragwort, benweed, [[James, son of Zebedee|St. James]]-wort, stinking nanny/ninny/willy, staggerwort, dog standard, cankerwort, stammerwort. In the western United States it is generally known as tansy ragwort, or tansy, though its resemblance to the true tansy is superficial.

In some countries it is an invasive species and regarded as a noxious weed. In the UK, where it is native, it is often unwanted because of its toxic effect for cattle and horses, but it is also valued for its nectar production which feeds insect pollinators and its ecological importance is thus considered significant.

==Description== 
The plant is generally considered to be biennial but it has the tendency to exhibit perennial properties under certain cultural conditions (such as when subjected to repeated grazing or mowing). The stems are erect, straight, have no or few hairs, and reach a height of . The leaves are pinnately lobed and the end lobe is blunt. The many names that include the word &quot;stinking&quot; (and Mare&#x27;s Fart) arise because of the unpleasant smell of the leaves. The hermaphrodite flower heads are diameter, and are borne in dense, flat-topped clusters; the florets are bright yellow. It has a long flowering period lasting from June to November (in the Northern Hemisphere).

Pollination is by a wide range of bees, flies and moths and butterflies. Over a season, one plant may produce 2,000 to 2,500 yellow flowers in 20- to 60-headed, flat-topped corymbs. The achenes have dandelion-like groups of prickly hairs called pappuses, which help seed dispersal by the wind. The number of seeds produced may be as large as 75,000 to 120,000, although in its native range in Eurasia very few of these would grow into new plants and research has shown that most seeds do not travel a great distance from the parent plant.

==Taxonomy==
Two subspecies are accepted:
*&quot;Jacobaea vulgaris&quot; ssp. &quot;vulgaris&quot; - the typical plant, with ray florets present.
*&quot;Jacobaea vulgaris&quot; ssp. &quot;dunensis&quot; - the ray florets are missing.

==Distribution==
Ragwort is native to the Eurasian continent. In Europe it is widely spread, from Scandinavia to the Mediterranean. In Britain and Ireland, where it is native, it is listed as a noxious weed.

Ragwort is abundant in waste land, waysides and grazing pastures. Its natural habitat is sand dunes, but it is commonly found along road sides, railways and in light, low fertility soil.

It has been introduced in many other regions, and is listed as a weed in many. These include:
*North America: The United States, present mainly in the northwest and northeast: California, Idaho, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Washington;
*South America: Argentina;
*Africa: North Africa;
*Asia: India and Siberia;
*Australasia: a widespread weed in New Zealand and Australia.

==Ecological importance==
Although the plant is often unwanted by landowners because of its toxic effect for cattle and horses, and because it is considered a weed by many, it provides a great deal of nectar for pollinators. It was rated in the top 10 for most nectar production (nectar per unit cover per year) in a UK plants survey conducted by the AgriLand project which is supported by the UK Insect Pollinators Initiative. It also was the top producer of nectar sugar in another study in Britain, with a production per floral unit of (2921 ± 448μg).

In the United Kingdom, where the plant is native, ragwort provides a home and food source to at least 77 insect species. Thirty of these species of invertebrate use ragwort exclusively as their food source and there are another 22 species where ragwort forms a significant part of their diet.

English Nature identifies a further 117 species that use ragwort as a nectar source whilst travelling between feeding and breeding sites, or between metapopulations. These consist mainly of solitary bees, hoverflies, moths, and butterflies such as the small copper butterfly (&quot;Lycaena phlaeas&quot;). Pollen is collected by solitary bees.

Besides the fact that ragwort is very attractive to such a vast array of insects, some of these are very rare indeed. Of the 30 species that specifically feed on ragwort alone, seven are officially deemed nationally scarce. A further three species are on the IUCN Red List. In short, ragwort is an exclusive food source for ten rare or threatened insect species, including the cinnabar moth (&quot;Tyria jacobaeae&quot;), the picture winged fly (&quot;Campiglossa malaris&quot;), the scarce clouded knot horn moth (&quot;Homoeosoma nimbella&quot;), and the Sussex emerald moth (&quot;Thalera fimbrialis&quot;). The Sussex Emerald has been labelled a Priority Species in the United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan. A priority species is one which is &quot;scarce, threatened and declining&quot;. The remainder of the ten threatened species include three species of leaf beetle, another picture-winged fly, and three micro moths. All of these species are Nationally Scarce B, with one leaf beetle categorised as Nationally Scarce A.

The most common of those species that are totally reliant on ragwort for their survival is the cinnabar moth. The cinnabar is a United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan Species, its status described as &quot;common and widespread, but rapidly declining&quot;.

==Poisonous effects==

Ragwort contains many different alkaloids, making it poisonous to certain animals. (EHC 80,section 9.1.4). Alkaloids which have been found in the plant confirmed by the WHO report EHC 80 are -- jacobine, jaconine, jacozine, otosenine, retrorsine, seneciphylline, senecionine, and senkirkine (p. 322 Appendix II). There is a strong variation between plants from the same location in distribution between the possible alkaloids and even the absolute amount of alkaloids varies drastically.

Ragwort is of concern to people who keep horses and cattle. In areas of the world where ragwort is a native plant, such as Britain and continental Europe, documented cases of proven poisoning are rare. Horses do not normally eat fresh ragwort due to its taste. The result, if sufficient quantity is consumed, can be irreversible cirrhosis of the liver of a form identified as megalocytosis where cells are abnormally enlarged. Signs that a horse has been poisoned include yellow mucous membranes, depression, and lack of coordination.

There is no definitive test for the poisoning however, since megalocytosis is not a change in the liver which is specific to ragwort poisoning. It is also seen in poisoning by other alkylating agents, such as nitrosamines and aflatoxins. Aflatoxins are a common contaminant formed in feedstuffs by moulds. Research in the United Kingdom has produced results showing megalocytosis, which may be due to various causes, to be a relatively uncommon cause of liver disease in horses.

The alkaloid does not actually accumulate in the liver but a breakdown product can damage DNA and progressively kills cells. About 3-7% of the body weight is sometimes claimed as deadly for horses, but an example in the scientific literature exists of a horse surviving being fed over 20% of its body weight. The effect of low doses is lessened by the destruction of the original alkaloids by the action of bacteria in the digestive tract before they reach the bloodstream. There is no known antidote or cure to poisoning, but examples are known from the scientific literature of horses making a full recovery once consumption has been stopped.

The alkaloids can be absorbed in small quantities through the skin but studies have shown that the absorption is very much less than by ingestion. Also they are in the N-oxide form which only becomes toxic after conversion inside the digestive tract and they will be excreted harmlessly.

Some sensitive individuals can suffer from an allergic reaction because ragwort, like many members of the family Compositae, contains sesquiterpene lactones which can cause compositae dermatitis. These are different from the pyrrolizidine alkaloids which are responsible for the toxic effects.

Honey collected from ragwort has been found to contain small quantities of jacoline, jacobine, jacozine, senecionine, and seneciphylline, but the quantities have been judged as too minute to be of concern.

==Control==
As indicated above, common ragwort has become a problem in several areas in which it has been introduced, and various methods are employed to help prevent its spread.

In many Australian states ragwort has been declared a noxious weed, and landholders are required to remove it from their property by law. In the island state of Tasmania, ragwort is responsible for more than half of the total costs of that state&#x27;s control of invasive species. The species has been calculated as the 8th most expensive invasive species in terms of cost to Australian farmers, at over over 60 years.

It is also legislated as a noxious weed in New Zealand, where farmers sometimes bring in helicopters to spray their farms if the ragwort is too widespread.

===Legislation===
====Ireland====
In Ireland, the Noxious Weeds (Thistle, Ragwort, and Dock) Order 1937, issued under the Noxious Weeds Act 1936, declares ragwort as a noxious weed, requiring landowners to control its growth.

====United Kingdom====
In the United Kingdom, common ragwort (&quot;Senecio jacobaea&quot;) is one of the five plants named as an &quot;injurious weed&quot; under the provisions of the Weeds Act 1959. The word &quot;injurious&quot; in this context indicates that it could be harmful to agriculture, not that it is dangerous to animals, as all the other &quot;injurious weeds&quot; listed are non-toxic. Under the terms of this Act, a land occupier can be required by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to prevent the spread of the plant. However, the growth of the plant is not made illegal by the Act and there is no statutory obligation for control placed upon landowners in general.

The Ragwort Control Act 2003 provides for a code of practice, which the government states is guidance, on ragwort and does not place any further legal responsibilities on landowners to control the plant.

===Biological control===

Ragwort is a food plant for the larvae of &quot;Cochylis atricapitana&quot;, &quot;Phycitodes maritima&quot;, and &quot;Phycitodes saxicolais&quot;. Ragwort is best known as the food of caterpillars of the cinnabar moth &quot;Tyria jacobaeae&quot;. They absorb alkaloids from the plant and become distasteful to predators, a fact advertised by the black and yellow warning colours. The red and black, day-flying adult moth is also distasteful to many potential predators. The moth is used as a control for ragwort in countries in which it has been introduced and become a problem, like New Zealand and the western United States. As both larvae and adults are distinctly colored and marked, identification of cinnabars is easy outside of their natural range, and grounds and range keepers can quickly recognize them. In both countries, the tansy ragwort flea beetle (&quot;Longitarsus jacobaeae&quot;) has been introduced to combat the plant. Another beetle, &quot;Longitarsus ganglbaueri&quot;, also feeds on ragwort, but will feed on other plants as well, making it an unsuitable biological control. Another biological control agent introduced in the western United States is the ragwort seed fly, although it is not considered very effective at controlling ragwort. The biological control of ragwort was already used in the 1930s.

==Other usage==
In ancient Greece and Rome a supposed aphrodisiac was made from the plant; it was called satyrion.

The leaves can be used to obtain a good green dye, although it fades. The flowers can be used to produce a dye that is yellow when the fabric is mordanted with alum. Brown and orange dyes are also reported.

==Literature, poetry and mythology==

The Greek physician Pedanius Dioscorides (c.40-90 CE) recommended the herb. The two &quot;fathers&quot; of herbalism, Gerard and Culpeper, also recommended the herb. Culpeper was an astrological botanist and thought the plant was &quot;under the command of Dame Venus, and [it] cleanses, digests, and discusses.&quot;

The poet John Clare had a more positive opinion of the plant, as revealed in this poem of 1831:

:Ragwort thou humble flower with tattered leaves
:I love to see thee come and litter gold...
:Thy waste of shining blossoms richly shields
:The sun tanned sward in splendid hues that burn
:So bright and glaring that the very light
:Of the rich sunshine doth to paleness turn
:And seems but very shadows in thy sight.

The ragwort, under its Manx name &quot;Cushag&quot;, is the national flower of the Isle of Man According to one story King Orry chose as his emblem the cushag flower, as its twelve petals represent one of the isles of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles: the Isle of Man, Arran, Bute, Islay, Jura, Mull, Iona, Eigg, Rum, Skye, Raasay, and the Outer Hebrides. The ragwort, in fact, usually has thirteen petals. The Manx poet Josephine Kermode (1852–1937) wrote the following poem about the &quot;Cushag&quot;:

:Now, the Cushag, we know,
:Must never grow,
:Where the farmer&#x27;s work is done.
:But along the rills,
:In the heart of the hills,
:The Cushag may shine like the sun.
:Where the golden flowers,
:Have fairy powers,
:To gladden our hearts with their grace.
:And in Vannin Veg Veen,
:In the valleys green,
:The Cushags have still a place.

(Vannin Veg Veen is Manx for &quot;dear little Isle of Man&quot;.)

Donald Macalastair of Druim-a-ghinnir on the Isle of Arran told a story of the fairies journeying to Ireland. The ragwort was their transport and every one of them picked a plant, sat astride and arrived in Ireland in an instant.

==See also==
*List of plants poisonous to equines
*Cichorieae, a tribe also in the family Asteraceae with similar looking genera (&quot;Agoseris&quot;, &quot;Leontodon&quot;, &quot;Sonchus&quot;, etc)
*&quot;Cineraria&quot;, a genus also in the tribe Senecioneae with similar looking species
*&quot;Senecio vulgaris&quot;

==References==
==External links==

*Plume moth working to control ragwort in NZ
*Environmental Health Criteria 80 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids World Health Organisation—the full text of the report is available.
*Ragwort myths and facts This website is the English version of a Dutch ragwort website
*Buglife&#x27;s ragwort pages Information on the importance of ragwort to wildlife on the Buglife website
*The Merck Veterinary Manual introduction to pyrrolizidine alkaloidosis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="85" end="95" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="123" end="130" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="241" end="248" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="ragwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="250" end="264" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="common ragwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="266" end="281" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="stinking willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="283" end="296" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="tansy ragwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="298" end="305" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="benweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="307" end="347" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="[[James, son of Zebedee|St. James]]-wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="349" end="375" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="stinking nanny/ninny/willy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="377" end="388" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="staggerwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="390" end="402" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="dog standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="404" end="414" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="cankerwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="416" end="427" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="stammerwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="483" end="496" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="tansy ragwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630491" start="501" end="506" title="Jacobaea vulgaris" label="tansy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27079" start="543" end="548" title="tansy" label="tansy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="593" end="609" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067310" start="628" end="640" title="noxious weed" label="noxious weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="726" end="732" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="737" end="743" title="horses" label="horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="775" end="781" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="812" end="822" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="1191" end="1200" title="Pinnation" label="pinnately"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1360" end="1366" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1386" end="1392" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="1559" end="1578" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="1616" end="1619" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="1622" end="1627" title="fly" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="1632" end="1653" title="Lepidoptera" label="moths and butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322325" start="1755" end="1761" title="corymb" label="corymb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714" start="1768" end="1774" title="achene" label="achene"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="1781" end="1790" title="dandelion" label="dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146306" start="1827" end="1835" title="Pappus (botany)" label="pappuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q943313" start="1848" end="1862" title="seed dispersal" label="seed dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2455" end="2466" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2930" end="2940" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="2942" end="2947" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="2949" end="2957" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="2959" end="2964" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="2966" end="2979" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="2981" end="2989" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="2991" end="2998" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="3000" end="3010" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3012" end="3020" title="New York state" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="3022" end="3028" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="3030" end="3042" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="3048" end="3058" title="Washington state" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="3163" end="3167" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="3358" end="3362" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="3400" end="3406" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="3411" end="3422" title="pollinators" label="pollinators"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3516" end="3518" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q740169" start="4331" end="4346" title="Lycaena phlaeas" label="Lycaena phlaeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971413" start="4599" end="4616" title="British nature conservation statuses" label="nationally scarce"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="4653" end="4666" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q769234" start="4771" end="4784" title="cinnabar moth" label="cinnabar moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938360" start="4915" end="4934" title="Homoeosoma nimbella" label="Homoeosoma nimbella"/>
<link wikidata="Q382205" start="4978" end="4996" title="Thalera fimbrialis" label="Thalera fimbrialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887917" start="5068" end="5107" title="United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan" label="United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="5742" end="5750" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q21148030" start="5904" end="5912" title="jacobine" label="jacobine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5914" end="5922" title="jaconine" label="jaconine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5924" end="5932" title="jacozine" label="jacozine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5934" end="5943" title="otosenine" label="otosenine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5945" end="5955" title="retrorsine" label="retrorsine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5957" end="5971" title="seneciphylline" label="seneciphylline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083871" start="5973" end="5984" title="senecionine" label="senecionine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5990" end="6000" title="senkirkine" label="senkirkine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="6240" end="6245" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="6528" end="6537" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6917" end="6934" title="Alkylation#Alkylating agents" label="alkylating agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q212936" start="6961" end="6970" title="aflatoxin" label="aflatoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7305" end="7308" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q424405" start="8284" end="8306" title="sesquiterpene lactones" label="sesquiterpene lactones"/>
<link wikidata="Q75005794" start="8375" end="8398" title="pyrrolizidine alkaloids" label="pyrrolizidine alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067310" start="8886" end="8898" title="noxious weed" label="noxious weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="8993" end="9001" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="9447" end="9454" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9460" end="9513" title="Noxious Weeds (Thistle, Ragwort, and Dock) Order 1937" label="Noxious Weeds (Thistle, Ragwort, and Dock) Order 1937"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9532" end="9554" title="Noxious Weeds Act 1936" label="Noxious Weeds Act 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9667" end="9681" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979366" start="9822" end="9836" title="Weeds Act 1959" label="Weeds Act 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q14984399" start="10108" end="10166" title="Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283266" start="10356" end="10380" title="Ragwort Control Act 2003" label="Ragwort Control Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="10596" end="10606" title="Larval food plants of Lepidoptera" label="food plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139468" start="10631" end="10652" title="Cochylis atricapitana" label="Cochylis atricapitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188426" start="10666" end="10685" title="Phycitodes maritima" label="Phycitodes maritima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10703" end="10724" title="Phycitodes saxicolais" label="Phycitodes saxicolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="10769" end="10780" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q769234" start="10789" end="10802" title="cinnabar moth" label="cinnabar moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11169" end="11180" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11197" end="11210" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634537" start="11422" end="11447" title="tansy ragwort flea beetle" label="tansy ragwort flea beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634201" start="11547" end="11570" title="Longitarsus ganglbaueri" label="Longitarsus ganglbaueri"/>
<link wikidata="Q211420" start="11971" end="11982" title="aphrodisiac" label="aphrodisiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426963" start="12022" end="12030" title="satyrion" label="satyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="12079" end="12082" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="12299" end="12319" title="Pedanius Dioscorides" label="Pedanius Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333338" start="12397" end="12403" title="John Gerard" label="Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334667" start="12408" end="12416" title="Nicholas Culpeper" label="Culpeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326525" start="12461" end="12482" title="astrological botany" label="astrological botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q981572" start="12607" end="12617" title="John Clare" label="John Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="13096" end="13107" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718796" start="13131" end="13140" title="Godred Crovan" label="King Orry"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="13235" end="13264" title="Kingdom of the Isles" label="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15069220" start="13435" end="13452" title="Josephine Kermode" label="Josephine Kermode"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="13485" end="13489" title="poem" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="13881" end="13885" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="13908" end="13919" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391564" start="14174" end="14209" title="List of plants poisonous to equines" label="List of plants poisonous to equines"/>
<link wikidata="Q134662" start="14211" end="14221" title="Cichorieae" label="Cichorieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="14250" end="14260" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704468" start="14296" end="14304" title="Agoseris" label="Agoseris"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909" start="14318" end="14327" title="Leontodon" label="Leontodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q830049" start="14341" end="14348" title="Sonchus" label="Sonchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360058" start="14368" end="14377" title="Cineraria" label="Cineraria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134525" start="14411" end="14422" title="Senecioneae" label="Senecioneae"/>
<link wikidata="Q504256" start="14459" end="14475" title="Senecio vulgaris" label="Senecio vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986221" start="14867" end="14874" title="Buglife" label="Buglife"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71268" wikidata="Q11680018" url="?curid=71268" title="Astrochemistry">
<text>Astrochemistry is the study of the abundance and reactions of molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation. The discipline is an overlap of astronomy and chemistry. The word &quot;astrochemistry&quot; may be applied to both the Solar System and the interstellar medium. The study of the abundance of elements and isotope ratios in Solar System objects, such as meteorites, is also called cosmochemistry, while the study of interstellar atoms and molecules and their interaction with radiation is sometimes called molecular astrophysics. The formation, atomic and chemical composition, evolution and fate of molecular gas clouds is of special interest, because it is from these clouds that solar systems form.

== History ==
As an offshoot of the disciplines of astronomy and chemistry, the history of astrochemistry is founded upon the shared history of the two fields. The development of advanced observational and experimental spectroscopy has allowed for the detection of an ever-increasing array of molecules within solar systems and the surrounding interstellar medium. In turn, the increasing number of chemicals discovered by advancements in spectroscopy and other technologies have increased the size and scale of the chemical space available for astrochemical study.

=== History of spectroscopy ===
Observations of solar spectra as performed by Athanasius Kircher (1646), Jan Marek Marci (1648), Robert Boyle (1664), and Francesco Maria Grimaldi (1665) all predated Newton&#x27;s 1666 work which established the spectral nature of light and resulted in the first spectroscope. Spectroscopy was first used as an astronomical technique in 1802 with the experiments of William Hyde Wollaston, who built a spectrometer to observe the spectral lines present within solar radiation. These spectral lines were later quantified through the work of Joseph von Fraunhofer.

Spectroscopy was first used to distinguish between different materials after the release of Charles Wheatstone&#x27;s 1835 report that the sparks given off by different metals have distinct emission spectra. This observation was later built upon by Léon Foucault, who demonstrated in 1849 that identical absorption and emission lines result from the same material at different temperatures. An equivalent statement was independently postulated by Anders Jonas Ångström in his 1853 work &quot;Optiska Undersökningar,&quot; where it was theorized that luminous gases emit rays of light at the same frequencies as light which they may absorb.

This spectroscopic data began to take upon theoretical importance with Johann Balmer&#x27;s observation that the spectral lines exhibited by samples of hydrogen followed a simple empirical relationship which came to be known as the Balmer Series. This series, a special case of the more general Rydberg Formula developed by Johannes Rydberg in 1888, was created to describe the spectral lines observed for hydrogen. Rydberg&#x27;s work expanded upon this formula by allowing for the calculation of spectral lines for multiple different chemical elements. The theoretical importance granted to these spectroscopic results was greatly expanded upon the development of quantum mechanics, as the theory allowed for these results to be compared to atomic and molecular emission spectra which had been calculated &quot;a priori&quot;.

=== History of astrochemistry ===

While radio astronomy was developed in the 1930s, it was not until 1937 that any substantial evidence arose for the conclusive identification of an interstellar &quot;molecule&quot; – up until this point, the only chemical species known to exist in interstellar space were atomic. These findings were confirmed in 1940, when McKellar &quot;et al&quot;. identified and attributed spectroscopic lines in an as-of-then unidentified radio observation to CH and CN molecules in interstellar space. In the thirty years afterwards, a small selection of other molecules were discovered in interstellar space: the most important being OH, discovered in 1963 and significant as a source of interstellar oxygen, and H2CO (formaldehyde), discovered in 1969 and significant for being the first observed organic, polyatomic molecule in interstellar space

The discovery of interstellar formaldehyde – and later, other molecules with potential biological significance, such as water or carbon monoxide – is seen by some as strong supporting evidence for abiogenetic theories of life: specifically, theories which hold that the basic molecular components of life came from extraterrestrial sources. This has prompted a still ongoing search for interstellar molecules which are either of direct biological importance – such as interstellar glycine, discovered in a comet within our solar system in 2009 – or which exhibit biologically relevant properties like chirality – an example of which (propylene oxide) was discovered in 2016 – alongside more basic astrochemical research.

== Spectroscopy ==

One particularly important experimental tool in astrochemistry is spectroscopy through the use of telescopes to measure the absorption and emission of light from molecules and atoms in various environments. By comparing astronomical observations with laboratory measurements, astrochemists can infer the elemental abundances, chemical composition, and temperatures of stars and interstellar clouds. This is possible because ions, atoms, and molecules have characteristic spectra: that is, the absorption and emission of certain wavelengths (colors) of light, often not visible to the human eye. However, these measurements have limitations, with various types of radiation (radio, infrared, visible, ultraviolet etc.) able to detect only certain types of species, depending on the chemical properties of the molecules. Interstellar formaldehyde was the first organic molecule detected in the interstellar medium.

Perhaps the most powerful technique for detection of individual chemical species is radio astronomy, which has resulted in the detection of over a hundred interstellar species, including radicals and ions, and organic (i.e. carbon-based) compounds, such as alcohols, acids, aldehydes, and ketones. One of the most abundant interstellar molecules, and among the easiest to detect with radio waves (due to its strong electric dipole moment), is CO (carbon monoxide). In fact, CO is such a common interstellar molecule that it is used to map out molecular regions. The radio observation of perhaps greatest human interest is the claim of interstellar glycine, the simplest amino acid, but with considerable accompanying controversy. One of the reasons why this detection was controversial is that although radio (and some other methods like rotational spectroscopy) are good for the identification of simple species with large dipole moments, they are less sensitive to more complex molecules, even something relatively small like amino acids.

Moreover, such methods are completely blind to molecules that have no dipole. For example, by far the most common molecule in the universe is H2 (hydrogen gas, or chemically better said dihydrogen), but it does not have a dipole moment, so it is invisible to radio telescopes. Moreover, such methods cannot detect species that are not in the gas-phase. Since dense molecular clouds are very cold (), most molecules in them (other than dihydrogen) are frozen, i.e. solid. Instead, dihydrogen and these other molecules are detected using other wavelengths of light. Dihydrogen is easily detected in the ultraviolet (UV) and visible ranges from its absorption and emission of light (the hydrogen line). Moreover, most organic compounds absorb and emit light in the infrared (IR) so, for example, the detection of methane in the atmosphere of Mars was achieved using an IR ground-based telescope, NASA&#x27;s 3-meter Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii. NASA&#x27;s researchers use airborne IR telescope SOFIA and space telescope Spitzer for their observations, researches and scientific operations. Somewhat related to the recent detection of methane in the atmosphere of Mars. Christopher Oze, of the University of Canterbury in New Zealand and his colleagues reported, in June 2012, that measuring the ratio of dihydrogen and methane levels on Mars may help determine the likelihood of life on Mars. According to the scientists, &quot;...low H2/CH4 ratios (less than approximately 40) indicate that life is likely present and active.&quot; Other scientists have recently reported methods of detecting dihydrogen and methane in extraterrestrial atmospheres.

Infrared astronomy has also revealed that the interstellar medium contains a suite of complex gas-phase carbon compounds called polyaromatic hydrocarbons, often abbreviated PAHs or PACs. These molecules, composed primarily of fused rings of carbon (either neutral or in an ionized state), are said to be the most common class of carbon compound in the Galaxy. They are also the most common class of carbon molecule in meteorites and in cometary and asteroidal dust (cosmic dust). These compounds, as well as the amino acids, nucleobases, and many other compounds in meteorites, carry deuterium and isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen that are very rare on Earth, attesting to their extraterrestrial origin. The PAHs are thought to form in hot circumstellar environments (around dying, carbon-rich red giant stars).

Infrared astronomy has also been used to assess the composition of solid materials in the interstellar medium, including silicates, kerogen-like carbon-rich solids, and ices. This is because unlike visible light, which is scattered or absorbed by solid particles, the IR radiation can pass through the microscopic interstellar particles, but in the process there are absorptions at certain wavelengths that are characteristic of the composition of the grains. As above with radio astronomy, there are certain limitations, e.g. N2 is difficult to detect by either IR or radio astronomy.

Such IR observations have determined that in dense clouds (where there are enough particles to attenuate the destructive UV radiation) thin ice layers coat the microscopic particles, permitting some low-temperature chemistry to occur. Since dihydrogen is by far the most abundant molecule in the universe, the initial chemistry of these ices is determined by the chemistry of the hydrogen. If the hydrogen is atomic, then the H atoms react with available O, C and N atoms, producing &quot;reduced&quot; species like H2O, CH4, and NH3. However, if the hydrogen is molecular and thus not reactive, this permits the heavier atoms to react or remain bonded together, producing CO, CO2, CN, etc. These mixed-molecular ices are exposed to ultraviolet radiation and cosmic rays, which results in complex radiation-driven chemistry. Lab experiments on the photochemistry of simple interstellar ices have produced amino acids. The similarity between interstellar and cometary ices (as well as comparisons of gas phase compounds) have been invoked as indicators of a connection between interstellar and cometary chemistry. This is somewhat supported by the results of the analysis of the organics from the comet samples returned by the Stardust mission but the minerals also indicated a surprising contribution from high-temperature chemistry in the solar nebula.

== Research ==
Research is progressing on the way in which interstellar and circumstellar molecules form and interact, e.g. by including non-trivial quantum mechanical phenomena for synthesis pathways on interstellar particles. This research could have a profound impact on our understanding of the suite of molecules that were present in the molecular cloud when our solar system formed, which contributed to the rich carbon chemistry of comets and asteroids and hence the meteorites and interstellar dust particles which fall to the Earth by the ton every day.

The sparseness of interstellar and interplanetary space results in some unusual chemistry, since symmetry-forbidden reactions cannot occur except on the longest of timescales. For this reason, molecules and molecular ions which are unstable on Earth can be highly 
abundant in space, for example the H3+ ion.

Astrochemistry overlaps with astrophysics and nuclear physics in characterizing the nuclear reactions which occur in stars, as well as the structure of stellar interiors. If a star develops a largely convective envelope, dredge-up events can occur, bringing the products of nuclear burning to the surface. If the star is experiencing significant mass loss, the expelled material may contain molecules whose rotational and vibrational spectral transitions can be observed with radio and infrared telescopes. An interesting example of this is the set of carbon stars with silicate and water-ice outer envelopes. Molecular spectroscopy allows us to see these stars transitioning from an original composition in which oxygen was more abundant than carbon, to a carbon star phase where the carbon produced by helium burning is brought to the surface by deep convection, and dramatically changes the molecular content of the stellar wind.

In October 2011, scientists reported that cosmic dust contains organic matter (&quot;amorphous organic solids with a mixed aromatic-aliphatic structure&quot;) that could be created naturally, and rapidly, by stars.

On August 29, 2012, and in a world first, astronomers at Copenhagen University reported the detection of a specific sugar molecule, glycolaldehyde, in a distant star system. The molecule was found around the protostellar binary &quot;IRAS 16293-2422&quot;, which is located from Earth. Glycolaldehyde is needed to form ribonucleic acid, or RNA, which is similar in function to DNA. This finding suggests that complex organic molecules may form in stellar systems prior to the formation of planets, eventually arriving on young planets early in their formation.

In September, 2012, NASA scientists reported that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), subjected to interstellar medium (ISM) conditions, are transformed, through hydrogenation, oxygenation and hydroxylation, to more complex organics – &quot;a step along the path toward amino acids and nucleotides, the raw materials of proteins and DNA, respectively&quot;. Further, as a result of these transformations, the PAHs lose their spectroscopic signature which could be one of the reasons &quot;for the lack of PAH detection in interstellar ice grains, particularly the outer regions of cold, dense clouds or the upper molecular layers of protoplanetary disks.&quot;

In February 2014, NASA announced the creation of an improved spectral database for tracking polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the universe. According to scientists, more than 20% of the carbon in the universe may be associated with PAHs, possible starting materials for the formation of life. PAHs seem to have been formed shortly after the Big Bang, are widespread throughout the universe, and are associated with new stars and exoplanets.

On August 11, 2014, astronomers released studies, using the Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA) for the first time, that detailed the distribution of HCN, HNC, H2CO, and dust inside the comae of comets C/2012 F6 (Lemmon) and C/2012 S1 (ISON).

For the study of the recourses of chemical elements and molecules in the universe is developed the mathematical model of the molecules composition distribution in the interstellar environment on thermodynamic potentials by professor M.Yu. Dolomatov using methods of the probability theory, the mathematical and physical statistics and the equilibrium thermodynamics. Based on this model are estimated the resources of life-related molecules, amino acids and the nitrogenous bases in the interstellar medium. The possibility of the oil hydrocarbons molecules formation is shown. The given calculations confirm Sokolov&#x27;s and Hoyl&#x27;s hypotheses about the possibility of the oil hydrocarbons formation in Space. Results are confirmed by data of astrophysical supervision and space researches.

In July 2015, scientists reported that upon the first touchdown of the &quot;Philae&quot; lander on comet 67/P surface, measurements by the COSAC and Ptolemy instruments revealed sixteen organic compounds, four of which were seen for the first time on a comet, including acetamide, acetone, methyl isocyanate and propionaldehyde.

In December 2023, astronomers reported the first time discovery, in the plumes of Enceladus, moon of the planet Saturn, of hydrogen cyanide, a possible chemical essential for life as we know it, as well as other organic molecules, some of which are yet to be better identified and understood. According to the researchers, &quot;these [newly discovered] compounds could potentially support extant microbial communities or drive complex organic synthesis leading to the origin of life.&quot;
== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== References ==
== External links ==

* Astrochemistry division of the International Astronomical Union
* The University of Arizona Astrochemistry Group
* Astrophysics &amp; Astrochemistry at Astrochemistry.eu
* The Astrochemistry Lab at NASA Ames Research Center
* The Astrochemistry Lab at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
* The University of Leiden Laboratory for Astrophysics
* The astrochemist (Resources for Astrochemists &amp; Interested Bystanders)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11680018" start="0" end="14" title="Astrochemistry" label="Astrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="62" end="70" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="79" end="87" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="116" end="125" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="159" end="168" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="173" end="182" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="247" end="259" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="268" end="287" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="332" end="339" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="380" end="389" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q911801" start="407" end="421" title="cosmochemistry" label="cosmochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="626" end="646" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular gas clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="948" end="960" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985634" start="997" end="1031" title="List of interstellar and circumstellar molecules" label="ever-increasing array of molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q906396" start="1245" end="1259" title="chemical space" label="chemical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="1374" end="1392" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q63864" start="1401" end="1416" title="Jan Marek Marci" label="Jan Marek Marci"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="1425" end="1437" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q315411" start="1450" end="1474" title="Francesco Maria Grimaldi" label="Francesco Maria Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="1541" end="1549" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectral"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="1592" end="1604" title="optical spectrometer" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q312975" start="1695" end="1717" title="William Hyde Wollaston" label="William Hyde Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="1869" end="1890" title="Joseph Von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph von Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="1985" end="2003" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186548" start="2032" end="2038" title="Atomic emission spectroscopy" label="sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q187966" start="2142" end="2155" title="Léon Foucault" label="Léon Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="2197" end="2207" title="Absorption (electromagnetic radiation)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="2212" end="2220" title="Emission (electromagnetic radiation)" label="emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q187258" start="2340" end="2361" title="Anders Jonas Ångström" label="Anders Jonas Ångström"/>
<link wikidata="Q653711" start="2766" end="2779" title="Balmer Series" label="Balmer Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q661248" start="2829" end="2844" title="Rydberg formula" label="Rydberg Formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q311567" start="2858" end="2874" title="Johannes Rydberg" label="Johannes Rydberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2940" end="2948" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3200" end="3217" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="3405" end="3420" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="4110" end="4122" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="4370" end="4385" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="4438" end="4449" title="Abiogenesis" label="abiogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="4722" end="4729" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="4842" end="4851" title="chirality" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q727742" start="4875" end="4890" title="propylene oxide" label="propylene oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="5049" end="5061" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="5081" end="5090" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="5134" end="5139" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054444" start="5361" end="5379" title="interstellar cloud" label="interstellar cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="5407" end="5410" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="5413" end="5417" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="5657" end="5662" title="radio waves" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="5664" end="5672" title="infrared radiation" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="5683" end="5694" title="ultraviolet radiation" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057123" start="5802" end="5827" title="Interstellar formaldehyde" label="Interstellar formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="5842" end="5858" title="organic molecule" label="organic molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q899336" start="5961" end="5977" title="chemical species" label="chemical species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="5981" end="5996" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6052" end="6072" title="interstellar species" label="interstellar species"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="6084" end="6092" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="6107" end="6114" title="organic compounds" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="6121" end="6127" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="6154" end="6161" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="6164" end="6168" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="6171" end="6179" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="6186" end="6192" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="6321" end="6327" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="6344" end="6359" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="6545" end="6552" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="6567" end="6577" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q904380" start="6735" end="6758" title="rotational spectroscopy" label="rotational spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="6821" end="6835" title="Bond dipole moment" label="dipole moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="7009" end="7015" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7085" end="7093" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7125" end="7135" title="dihydrogen" label="dihydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="7623" end="7636" title="hydrogen line" label="hydrogen line"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="7749" end="7756" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662664" start="7852" end="7879" title="Infrared Telescope Facility" label="Infrared Telescope Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q261229" start="7954" end="7959" title="SOFIA" label="SOFIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="7980" end="7987" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="8094" end="8101" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q218860" start="8109" end="8127" title="atmosphere of Mars" label="atmosphere of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="8153" end="8177" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8181" end="8192" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q601319" start="8339" end="8351" title="life on Mars (planet)" label="life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422261" start="8580" end="8608" title="extraterrestrial atmospheres" label="extraterrestrial atmospheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="8739" end="8764" title="Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polyaromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="8963" end="8969" title="Milky Way" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="9077" end="9088" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="9136" end="9146" title="nucleobase" label="nucleobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="9195" end="9204" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="9209" end="9216" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="9413" end="9422" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="9553" end="9561" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q938398" start="9564" end="9571" title="kerogen" label="kerogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="9601" end="9604" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="10778" end="10788" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="11245" end="11261" title="Stardust (spacecraft)" label="Stardust mission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11523" end="11551" title="Quantum tunnelling#Astrochemistry in interstellar clouds" label="quantum mechanical phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q899608" start="12035" end="12053" title="Woodward–Hoffmann rules" label="symmetry-forbidden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345425" start="12238" end="12241" title="Protonated molecular hydrogen" label="H3+"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="12277" end="12289" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="12294" end="12309" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q129852" start="12469" end="12478" title="dredge-up" label="dredge-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q130019" start="13005" end="13016" title="carbon star" label="carbon star"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="13224" end="13235" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="13245" end="13252" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="13305" end="13313" title="aromatic" label="aromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="13314" end="13323" title="aliphatic" label="aliphatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="13455" end="13476" title="Copenhagen University" label="Copenhagen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q899877" start="13530" end="13544" title="glycolaldehyde" label="glycolaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="13606" end="13618" title="protostar" label="protostellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="13717" end="13733" title="ribonucleic acid" label="ribonucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="13738" end="13741" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="13775" end="13778" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="13980" end="13984" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="14010" end="14049" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="14064" end="14089" title="Interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium (ISM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="14127" end="14140" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115966" start="14142" end="14153" title="Oxygenate" label="oxygenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898497" start="14158" end="14171" title="hydroxylation" label="hydroxylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="14189" end="14197" title="Organic compound" label="organics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="14235" end="14246" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="14251" end="14262" title="nucleotides" label="nucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="14285" end="14293" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="14298" end="14301" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058538" start="14487" end="14503" title="interstellar ice" label="interstellar ice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14504" end="14510" title="Cosmic dust#Dust grain formation" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q505781" start="14598" end="14618" title="protoplanetary disks" label="protoplanetary disks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="14645" end="14649" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="14719" end="14751" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="14766" end="14774" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="14822" end="14828" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755454" start="14883" end="14901" title="PAH world hypothesis" label="starting materials"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14910" end="14919" title="Abiogenesis#PAH world hypothesis" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14923" end="14927" title="Life#Extraterrestrial" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="14977" end="14985" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="15051" end="15060" title="Star formation" label="new stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="15065" end="15075" title="exoplanets" label="exoplanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q725364" start="15138" end="15189" title="Atacama Large Millimeter Array" label="Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="15244" end="15247" title="Hydrogen cyanide" label="HCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107746" start="15249" end="15252" title="Hydrogen isocyanide" label="HNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="15254" end="15258" title="Formaldehyde" label="H2CO"/>
<link wikidata="Q165632" start="15264" end="15268" title="dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="15280" end="15285" title="Coma (cometary)" label="comae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="15289" end="15294" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007231" start="15296" end="15314" title="C/2012 F6 (Lemmon)" label="C/2012 F6 (Lemmon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q301109" start="15319" end="15335" title="Comet ISON" label="C/2012 S1 (ISON)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041962" start="16214" end="16220" title="Philae (spacecraft)" label="Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="16237" end="16242" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q844672" start="16243" end="16247" title="67/P" label="67/P"/>
<link wikidata="Q421721" start="16408" end="16417" title="acetamide" label="acetamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="16419" end="16426" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q410431" start="16428" end="16445" title="methyl isocyanate" label="methyl isocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422909" start="16450" end="16465" title="propionaldehyde" label="propionaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817528" start="16540" end="16545" title="Plume (fluid dynamics)" label="plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303" start="16550" end="16559" title="Enceladus" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="16580" end="16586" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="16591" end="16607" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="16643" end="16647" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="16680" end="16696" title="organic molecule" label="organic molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="16865" end="16886" title="Microorganism" label="microbial communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="16904" end="16921" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="16937" end="16951" title="origin of life" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="17063" end="17095" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71280" wikidata="Q229846" url="?curid=71280" title="Mary of Guise">
<text>Mary of Guise (; 22 November 1515 – 11 June 1560), also called Mary of Lorraine, was Queen of Scotland from 1538 until 1542, as the second wife of King James V. She was a French noblewoman of the House of Guise, a cadet branch of the House of Lorraine and one of the most powerful families in France. As the mother of Mary, Queen of Scots, she was a key figure in the political and religious upheaval that marked mid-16th-century Scotland, ruling the kingdom as queen regent on behalf of her daughter from 1554 until her death in 1560. 

The eldest of the twelve children born to Claude, Duke of Guise, and Antoinette of Bourbon, in 1534 Mary was married to Louis II d&#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville, the Grand Chamberlain of France. The marriage was arranged by King Francis I of France, but proved shortlived. The Duke of Longueville died in 1537, and the widower kings of England and Scotland, Henry VIII and James V, both sought the Duchess of Longueville&#x27;s hand. After much persuasion from Francis I and James V, who wrote a personal letter pleading for her hand and counsel, Mary eventually relented and agreed to marry the King of Scots. Following the new queen&#x27;s arrival in Scotland, James and Mary were married in person in June 1538 at St Andrews Cathedral. Mary was crowned queen at Holyrood Abbey on 22 February 1540, and the marriage produced three children in quick succession: James, Duke of Rothesay; Robert, Duke of Albany; and Mary. Both sons died in April 1541, just 14 hours apart, and when James V himself died in December 1542, his only surviving heir, Mary, became Queen of Scots at the age of six days old.

James V&#x27;s death thrust Mary of Guise into the political arena as mother of the infant Queen of Scots, with the government of Scotland entrusted to James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran, as regent during the early years of the minority and the Rough Wooing. With the Treaty of Haddington in 1548, the child queen Mary was betrothed to Francis, the Dauphin of France, and was sent to be brought up in France under the protection of King Henry II. Mary of Guise replaced Arran as regent in 1554, and her regency was dominated by her determination to protect and advance the dynastic interests of her daughter, maintain the Franco-Scottish alliance, and reassert the power of the Scottish crown. Throughout her regency, Mary displayed tolerance towards the religious reform movement, and implemented a policy of accommodation towards her Protestant subjects, though she was ultimately unable to prevent the Scottish Reformation.

==Early life==
Mary was born at Bar-le-Duc, Lorraine, the eldest daughter of Claude, Duke of Guise, head of the House of Guise, and his wife Antoinette of Bourbon, herself the daughter of Francis, Count of Vendome, and Marie de Luxembourg. Among her 11 siblings were Francis, Duke of Guise; Claude, Duke of Aumale; Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine; and Louis I, Cardinal of Guise.

When Mary was five, she was godmother to her younger sister Louise. Not long afterward, she joined her grandmother Philippa of Guelders in the convent of the Poor Clares at Pont-à-Mousson. Mary grew to be exceptionally tall by the standards of her time and reached a height of . Her mother mentioned that she suffered from bad colds. When she was about 14 her uncle Antoine, Duke of Lorraine, and aunt Renée of Bourbon visited her. Impressed by their niece&#x27;s qualities and stature, they took her away from the convent and prepared her for life at the French court. In 1531, Mary made her first appearance and debut at the wedding of Francis I and Eleanor of Austria. She established a friendship with the king&#x27;s daughters Madeleine (whom she would later succeed as Queen of Scots) and Margaret.

==Duchess of Longueville==

On 4 August 1534, at the age of 18, she became Duchess of Longueville by marrying Louis II d&#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville, the Grand Chamberlain of France, at the Louvre Palace. Their union turned out to be happy, but brief. On 30 October 1535, Mary gave birth to her first son, Francis, but on 9 June 1537, Louis died at Rouen and left her a pregnant widow at the age of 21. For the rest of her life, Mary kept the last letter from her &quot;bon mari et ami&quot; (her good husband and friend) Louis, which mentioned his illness and explained his absence at Rouen. It can still be seen at the National Library of Scotland. On 4 August 1537, Mary gave birth to their second son, who was named Louis after his deceased father. Louis died very young, but Francis wrote letters to his mother in Scotland. On 22 March 1545 he sent a piece of string to show how tall he was, and on 2 July 1546 he sent her his portrait.

== Marriage negotiations ==

Later, in 1537, Mary became the focus of marriage negotiations with James V of Scotland, who had lost his first wife, Madeleine of Valois, to tuberculosis, and wanted a second French bride to further the interests of the Franco-Scottish alliance against England. According to a 17th-century writer, William Drummond of Hawthornden, James V had noticed the attractions of Mary when he went to France to meet Madeleine and Mary of Bourbon, and she was next in his affections. It is known that Mary had attended the wedding of James and Madeleine.

Henry VIII of England, whose third wife Jane Seymour had just died, also asked for Mary&#x27;s hand in an attempt to frustrate James&#x27;s plan. In December 1537, Henry VIII told Castillon, the French ambassador in London, that he was big in person and had need of a big wife. Allegedly, given Henry&#x27;s marital history—banishing his first wife and beheading the second—Mary refused the offer by saying: &quot;I may be a big woman, but I have a very little neck.&quot; This is said to have been a reference to the famously macabre jest made by Henry&#x27;s French-educated second wife, Anne Boleyn, who had joked before her death that the executioner would find killing her easy because she had &quot;a little neck&quot;.

King Francis I of France accepted James&#x27;s proposal over Henry&#x27;s and conveyed his wishes to Mary&#x27;s father. Francis had a marriage contract prepared that offered James a dowry as large as if Mary had been born a princess of France. Mary&#x27;s mother found the contract &quot;marvellously strange&quot;, because the king had included Mary&#x27;s son&#x27;s inheritance in the dowry. Mary received the news with shock and alarm, as she did not wish to leave family and country, especially as she had just lost her first husband and her younger son. Reportedly, her father tried to delay matters, apparently until James, perhaps sensing her reluctance, wrote to her, appealing for her advice and support. However, the authenticity of this letter, which was first produced in 1935, has been questioned.

David Beaton (who was made a cardinal in 1538) travelled to France for the marriage negotiations. He wrote to James V from Lyon on 22 October 1537 that Mary was &quot;stark (strong), well complexioned, and fit to travel&quot;. Beaton wrote that the Duke of Guise was &quot;marvellous desirous of the expedition and hasty end of the matter&quot;, and had already consulted with his brother, the Duke of Lorraine, and Mary herself, who was with her mother in Champagne waiting for the resolution of the negotiations. The marriage contract was finalized in January 1538, with James V receiving a dowry of 150,000 livres. As was customary, if the king died first, Mary would retain for her lifetime her jointure houses of Falkland Palace, Stirling Castle, Dingwall Castle and Threave Castle, along with the rentals of the earldoms of Fife, Strathearn, Ross and Orkney, and the lordships of Galloway, Ardmannoch and the Isles.

Finally, Mary accepted the offer and made hurried plans for departure. The proxy wedding of James V and Mary of Guise was held on 9 May 1538 in the Sainte Chapelle at the Château de Châteaudun. Some 2,000 Scottish lords and barons came from Scotland aboard a fleet of ships under Lord Maxwell to attend. Lord Maxwell brought a diamond ring and stood as proxy for James V at the wedding ceremony on 9 May 1538. 

== Queen of Scots ==
Lord Maxwell, and the other lords and barons who had come to France, travelled back to Scotland with Mary of Guise, who sailed from Le Havre on 10 June 1538, leaving behind her three-year-old son, Francis, Duke of Longueville. She landed in Scotland 6 days later at Crail in Fife. She came in a fleet of three French galleys commanded by Jacques de Fountaines, Sieur de Mormoulins. She was formally received by the king at St Andrews a few days later amid pageants and plays performed in her honour. James and Mary were married in person at St Andrews Cathedral on 18 June 1538. James&#x27;s mother Margaret Tudor wrote to her brother Henry VIII in July, &quot;I trust she will prove a wise Princess. I have been much in her company, and she bears herself very honourably to me, with very good entertaining.&quot; In August, Mary went into the Highlands with James on a hunting trip to Glen Finglas, with six ladies-in-waiting.

The Duchess of Guise sent her masons, including Nicolas Roy, miners and an armourer. She had a French painter, Pierre Quesnel, to decorate her palaces. Her household included a dwarf and a fool who were both dressed in green. In December 1538, the court was at Falkland Palace, and her ladies in waiting were given gowns of purple or black velvet, with white taffeta, red damask, or black satin skirts. Her serving women got gowns of Paris black and French brown cloth. Wild boar were sent to stock the park at Falkland from Elbeuf near Rouen, and Mary of Guise&#x27;s younger brother René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&#x27;Elbeuf later became an enthusiast for boar hunt with dogs and toiles, known as &quot;le vautrait&quot;.

On 24 August 1539 Mary and James V made a pilgrimage to the Isle of May in the Forth. They took three ships, the &quot;Unicorn&quot;, the &quot;Little Unicorn&quot; and the &quot;Mary Willoughby&quot;. It was believed that a visit to the shrine of St Adrian could help a woman become pregnant, and Mary of Guise made a note of her pilgrimages in Scotland.

She was crowned queen at Holyrood Abbey on 22 February 1540. Preparations for her coronation had begun in October 1539 when the jeweller John Mosman made a new crown from Scottish gold and her silver sceptre was gilded. Payments made for the ceremony include the hanging of tapestries; carrying church furnishings from the Palace chapel into the Abbey; the attendance of eleven chaplains; boards for stages in the Abbey; and messengers sent to summon the ladies of the kingdom. A salute of 30 guns was fired from David&#x27;s Tower in Edinburgh Castle, and there were fireworks devised by James and made by his royal gunners.

James and Mary had two sons: James, Duke of Rothesay (born 22 May 1540 at St Andrews), and Robert, Duke of Albany (born and baptised on 12 April 1541); however, they died 14 hours apart on 21 and 20 April, respectively, in 1541, when James was nearly one year old and Robert was nine days old. Mary&#x27;s mother Antoinette of Bourbon wrote that the couple was still young and should hope for more children. She thought a change of wet nurse and over-feeding contributed. The third and last child of the union was a daughter Mary, who was born on 8 December 1542. James died six days later, making the infant Mary queen of Scotland and the youngest ever monarch in Great Britain.

==Residences in Leith==
Mary resided in other palaces and castles in Scotland, apart from Holyrood and Edinburgh Castle, and lodged in at least two houses on Edinburgh&#x27;s High Street. She also had two houses, in Leith, Edinburgh&#x27;s port, where a garrison of French troops were stationed. One house was near Shore at the Paunch Market, afterwards called Queen Street in her honour. The former residence housed Oliver Cromwell in 1651. The building was demolished in 1849, the site, which is now a car park, lies at the south-west section of Shore Place, the new name for Queen Street. Additionally, she had a small palace on Rotten Row (now called Water Street). After her death, this went into the ownership of Andrew Lamb, and it is almost certainly for this reason that her daughter Mary, Queen of Scots, visited on her return to Scotland in 1561. This house was demolished in 1830 to build a whisky warehouse, but Mary&#x27;s memory lived on in the name of the &quot;Mary of Guise Buildings&quot;. The latter was demolished around 1995 and was replaced by a small block of flats. A surviving, later 16th-century residence, is known as Lamb&#x27;s House.

==Arran&#x27;s regency==
Following James V&#x27;s death in 1542, the government of Scotland was first entrusted to James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran, as regent. Henry VIII of England wished the infant Mary to marry his son, Prince Edward. This led to internal conflicts in Scotland between those who favoured the marriage and those who preferred the alliance with France and led to an English invasion, the so-called Rough Wooing. Guise told English diplomat Ralph Sadler that Regent Arran was a &quot;simple man&quot; and she could easily find out his &quot;whole intent&quot;.

At first Mary of Guise stayed at Linlithgow Palace. Sadler visited her on 22 March 1543 to see the infant Mary for the first time. Guise showed him the infant out of her swaddling, to show the child was healthy, because Arran had spread rumours the child was sickly. Sadler wrote that the infant was &quot;as goodly a child I have seen, and like to live&quot;. Guise reminded him of Regent Arran&#x27;s plans to have his son James Hamilton marry Princess Elizabeth. Guise tried to get Sadler to intercede with Regent Arran to release her ally Cardinal Beaton from imprisonment, alleging his political expertise could be employed to mutual benefit.

In April 1543, Arran heard a rumour that Henry VIII now wished to make Mary of Guise his sixth wife. He confronted Mary with this and she prevaricated, learning from him (as she had already guessed) that he told everything to Sadler. She then sent her confidant Lord Fleming to Sadler to report the conversation. In turn, Sadler relayed to Henry VIII his account of &quot;every man&#x27;s tale whereby your grace may perceive the perplexed state of affairs in Scotland.&quot;

In July 1543 she moved with the infant Mary to Stirling Castle. When Ralph Sadler spoke to her again in August, Guise assured him the English marriage would go ahead when Mary was ten years old. In the meantime Mary was safe at Stirling; Guise said she was glad to be at Stirling, and &quot;much she praised there about the house.&quot;

It soon became clear to Henry VIII that Mary and Edward would not be married, despite Scottish promises and the Treaty of Greenwich, and at the end of 1543 he launched the war now called the Rough Wooing, hoping to turn the situation around. In 1544 she spearheaded an unsuccessful attempt to replace Arran as regent.

=== At Haddington===
After a Scottish defeat at the Battle of Pinkie in September 1547, French military aid weakened English resolve and increased the power base of Mary of Guise, who remained in Scotland. Equipped with a newly painted spear for her royal standard, Mary came to view the progress of the siege of Haddington in July 1548. On 9 July her party came in range of the English guns and sixteen of her entourage were killed around her. Following this terrifying incident, Mary gave one of her gunners at Haddington, Andro Straitoun, a reward of a month&#x27;s wages, £4 Scots.

By the resolution of the Scottish Parliament made at Haddington Abbey on 7 July, the child Mary was sent to France in August 1548 to be raised with her husband-to-be, the dauphin Francis, son of Henry II of France. Guise first planned to sail with Mary from Dumbarton as far as Whithorn where she would make pilgrimage. Instead, she returned for a council meeting in Edinburgh.

=== Conclusion of the war ===
At this time, the dedication of the Scottish book, &quot;The Complaynt of Scotland&quot;, recalled Mary of Guise&#x27;s descent from Godfrey de Bouillon and claimed her courage and virtue exceeded those of the ancient heroines Tomyris, Semiramis and Penthesilea.

After negotiating on Christmas Day 1549 at Stirling Castle for more French guns for the siege of Broughty Castle, she showed more prudence by watching the successful assault on Wednesday 6 February 1550 from a vantage point across the Tay. Paul de Thermes led the French troops, 240 were injured and 50 killed. The garrison surrendered six days later at midnight. Mary of Guise was triumphant, writing that &quot;the English had left nothing behind but the plague.&quot;

The peace process began and Scotland was included in the Treaty of Boulogne of 24 March 1550. As part of the treaty, Mary&#x27;s brother Claude, Marquis de Mayenne, was one of six French hostages sent to England. After their father died on 12 April 1550, Claude was allowed to come to Scotland with a passport from Edward VI dated 11 May. Claude wrote from Edinburgh on 18 May that he would survey the fortifications of the realm. After the Treaty was signed, Mary was able to travel to France to see her family.

==Travels in France and England==
Mary left Scotland on 6 September 1550 and arrived at Dieppe in time to participate in a festival with the French court at Rouen with her daughter on 1 October 1550. At Rouen, Mary and the Queen of Scots rode in procession behind soldiers carrying banners depicting Scottish fortresses recently defended and recovered by the French. She brought with her a large retinue of Scottish gentlemen, including the earls of Huntly, Cassillis, Sutherland, Marischal and Wigtown, plus lords Home and Maxwell, and the bishops of Caithness and Galloway. Historians have analysed the Scottish retinue as a team-building exercise for Mary.

Over the winter she stayed with the French court at Blois, then spent the summer with Henry II visiting Tours, Angers and Nantes. She bought fabrics and clothes from Robert Fichepain and René Tardif. At Amboise in April, Mary was sickened by news of a plot to poison the young queen of Scots. A Scottish would-be poisoner, Robert Stewart, discovered in London was delivered to the French in May. Throughout her time in France, Mary was anxious to gain the best settlement for her daughter&#x27;s marriage to the dauphin and financial support for herself in Scotland. At Tours in May, a cynical English observer, John Mason, who scanned the Scottish retinue for signs of dissent, reported, &quot;the Dowager of Scotland maketh all this court weary of her, such an importunate beggar is she for herself. The king would fain be rid of her. The trucking is about money matters&quot;.

While accompanying her to Dieppe on her return, her son Francis died at Amiens on 22 September 1551. In October 1551, she met Edward VI in England. Mary landed at Portsmouth and was given, by the King, an escort of gentlemen to accompany her to London. She stayed her first night at Southwick Priory. On her way to London she stopped at Warblington, Cowdray, Hampton Court, where she was entertained by the Marquess and Marchioness of Northampton, and Fulham Palace. At his meeting with Mary at Whitehall Palace, Edward gave her a diamond ring and two horses with trappings of russet gold tinsel. The ring, &quot;sett with a fayer table diamount&quot;, had belonged to Catherine Parr. The Princess Mary Tudor declined to attend her visit, though the Princess Elizabeth was present, and according to John Aylmer, unlike the other women at Edward&#x27;s court she did not try to emulate the novel French &quot;frounsed, curled and double-curled&quot; hairstyles of Guise&#x27;s Scottish retinue.

On her way north to Scotland Ralph Sadler conveyed her through Hertfordshire, and she stopped at Robert Chester&#x27;s house at Royston Priory and the house of the Dowager Duchess of Suffolk at Grimsthorpe Castle near Stamford. Arran summoned some of the barons of East Lothian to meet her at Berwick, and the gentlemen of Selkirk, Jedburgh and Duns, Scottish Borders, Peebles and Lauder, Haddington, Dunbar and North Berwick were summoned to meet her at Our Lady Kirk of Steill on 24 November 1551. Six cart loads of breech-loading cannon chambers were brought from the armoury at Leith up to Edinburgh Castle to fire salutes on her return.

==Regent of Scotland==

In December 1552, Mary of Austria, Queen of Hungary, sister of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, pointed out to Mary that her diplomatic complaints had no force and must come from Arran. Furthermore, she was dissatisfied by Mary&#x27;s evident friendship with France. Mary&#x27;s power was increasing. In May 1553, the imperial ambassador in London, Jean Scheyfve, heard she had challenged Arran&#x27;s regency and proposed James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray, her illegitimate step-son, as a replacement. From August 1553, she wrote to the French ambassador in London, Antoine de Noailles, using cipher code.

Mary herself became regent on 12 April 1554 at a meeting of Parliament. Henri Cleutin is said to have placed the crown on her head, although the nature of any ceremony is uncertain. The eleven-year-old Queen Mary sent her congratulations to &quot;la Royne, ma mere&quot; (&quot;the Queen, my mother&quot;) from the Château de Meudon at Easter, where she was staying with her grandmother and her uncle, the Cardinal of Lorraine.

In many affairs, Mary of Guise consulted her brothers in France—the Cardinal of Lorraine, and Francis, Duke of Guise, both of whom held government positions in France—so that Scotland and France worked as allies in dealing with other nations. Henry II&#x27;s representative in Scotland from 1546 to 1560 was an ambassador resident, Henri Cleutin, who had been effectively in charge of Scotland during her trip to France. During her regency (1554–60), Frenchmen were put in charge of the treasury and the Great Seal, while the French ambassador sometimes attended the Privy Council. Yves de Rubay was Master of Requests and Keeper of the Seals and Bartholomew de Villemore was Comptroller and Receiver-General of Revenue. Although Cleutin seems to have been universally popular, the resentment of the Scottish nobility at these appointments fuelled the coming crisis.

Mary quickly began to deal effectively with Scottish affairs. In July 1554, she travelled to Jedburgh to hold a Justice Ayre for a fortnight, hoping to quell the longstanding feud between the Scott and Kerr border clans. She was escorted by armed horsemen commanded by Cleutin. In the autumn she paid for a ship, troops and a cannon to help the Earl of Sutherland arrest Iye du Mackay, Lord Reay, who had caused mischief in Sutherland. With much less success the Earls of Huntly and Argyll were despatched to pass with fire and sword to Moidart and Lewis. Huntly&#x27;s failure led to his imprisonment. During another progress in 1556 she visited Inverness, Ross, Elgin, Banff and Aberdeen.

One measure made by Parliament in June 1555 was ineffective and caused problems and resentment. The offices of Deacon of the Crafts in burgh councils was abolished. This may have pleased influential merchants. Mary of Guise went to Perth to meet dissenters who disputed the right of craftsmen to be elected to the burgh council. Subsequently, the legislation was repealed. Scotland&#x27;s burgh craft incorporations rewarded Guise for this reverse in policy by agreeing to contribute to a tax used for defence, including the fortification of Inchkeith. Some contributions were paid directly to the master of works, William MacDowall. Mary of Guise employed an Italian military engineer from Siena, Lorenzo Pomarelli, during the six years of her regency.

Domestic efforts were hampered by the outbreak of international conflict in January 1557 and war with England. An apparent set-back to Guise&#x27;s command occurred in October, when she went south to Hume Castle and sent an army towards England. Instructed to cross the border and attack Wark Castle, the Scottish lords held their own council at Eckford and returned home. Efforts for peace between England and Scotland were helped by the efforts of Christophe d&#x27;Assonleville, a diplomat sent to England and Scotland by Philip II of Spain who was joint ruler of England at that time (husband of Queen Mary Tudor). The Scottish armed presence on the border was reduced in the first months of 1558.

==Conflict with Protestants==

Mary&#x27;s regency was threatened, however, by the growing influence of the Scottish Protestants. To an extent she had tolerated the growing number of Protestant preachers. She needed to win support for her pro-French policies, and they could expect no alternative support from England at a time when Mary Tudor ruled. The marriage of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, to the dauphin of France on 24 April 1558 was quickly followed by Mary Tudor&#x27;s death and the succession to the throne of England by Elizabeth on 17 November 1558. Mary Stuart&#x27;s claim and rights of succession to the English throne depended in part on the Papal view of Elizabeth&#x27;s legitimacy. If Henry II of France was to pursue Mary&#x27;s claim with the Pope, as part of an ambitious plan that Scotland and England would succumb to French domination, he needed Scotland to be a secure Catholic country. Some modern historians such as Pamela E. Ritchie believe that the change to Guise&#x27;s policy was not dramatic, but both Catholic and Protestant would perceive and react to the tense political situation. As the Scottish Reformation crisis was developing, Henry II died on 10 July 1559, and Mary Stuart became Queen Consort of France. In France, Mary and Francis II began to publicly display the arms of England in their blazon. This too was a motivation for English intervention in Scottish affairs.
In 1557, a group of Scottish lords who became known as the &quot;Lords of the Congregation&quot; drew up a covenant to &quot;maintain, set forth, and establish the most blessed Word of God and his Congregation&quot;. This was followed by outbreaks of iconoclasm in 1558/59. At the same time, plans were being drawn up for a Reformed programme of parish worship and preaching, as local communities sought out Protestant ministers. In 1558, the Regent summoned the Protestant preachers to answer for their teaching, but backed down when lairds from the west country threatened to revolt.

The accession of the Protestant Elizabeth I in England in 1558 stirred the hopes and fears of Scottish Protestants. Elizabeth came to secretly support the Lords of the Congregation. In January 1559, the anonymous &quot;Beggars&#x27; Summons&quot; threatened friars with eviction in favour of beggars. This was calculated to appeal to the passions of the populace of towns who appeared to have particular complaints against friars. Fearing disorder and now determined by circumstance to show less tolerance, the Regent summoned the reformed preachers to appear before her at Stirling on 10 May. Insurrection followed. The men of Angus assembled in Dundee to accompany the preachers to Stirling, and on 4 May they were joined by John Knox, who had recently arrived from France. Stirred by Knox&#x27;s sermons in Perth and Dundee, the mob sacked religious houses (including the tomb of James I in Perth). In response, the Regent marched on Perth, but was forced to withdraw and negotiate when another reformed contingent arrived from the west at Cupar Muir.

Among the Regent&#x27;s ambassadors were the Earl of Argyll and Lord James Stewart, Earl of Moray, both professed Protestants. When the Regent stationed French mercenaries in Perth, both abandoned her and joined the Lords of the Congregation at St Andrews, where they were also joined by John Knox. Even Edinburgh soon fell to them in July, as Mary retreated to Dunbar. The Congregation Lords made a truce with Guise and signed the Articles of Leith at Leith Links on 25 July 1559 which promised religious tolerance, then withdrew to Stirling.

In September, the previous regent, the 2nd Earl of Arran, with the safe return of his son, accepted the leadership of the Lords of the Congregation and established a provisional government. However, Mary of Guise was reinforced by professional French troops. Some of these troops established themselves at Kinghorn in Fife, and after they destroyed Hallyards Castle, the house of William Kirkcaldy of Grange, Mary (according to Knox) declared, &quot;Where is now John Knox&#x27;s God? My God is now stronger than his, yea, even in Fife.&quot; In November, the rebels were driven back to Stirling.

Fighting continued in Fife. Mary of Guise, troubled by illness, contemplated resigning the Regency, and returning to France. René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&#x27;Elbeuf was appointed to rule as a French &quot;viceroy&quot; in her stead. His mission was abandoned, but more French troops arrived in Scotland. All seemed lost for the Protestant side until an English fleet arrived in the Firth of Forth in January 1560, which caused the French to retreat to Leith, the port of Edinburgh which Mary of Guise had re-fortified.

The Lords of the Congregation began negotiations with England. John Knox was excluded, as his published tract &quot;The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women&quot;, although it aimed at Mary I of England, rendered him unacceptable to the newly crowned Elizabeth I. The Treaty of Berwick, signed in February, agreed that England would act jointly with the Protestant Lords to expel the French. Elizabeth I, sent an English land army into Scotland to join their Scottish allies in besieging the French at Leith. As the fighting continued, the English ambassador in France Nicholas Throckmorton praised Guise for having the &quot;hart of a man of warre&quot; and the English bishop John Jewel described her as &quot;a woman with a man&#x27;s courage&quot;.

==Death==
After an English assault on Leith was repulsed with heavy losses, some of the leaders of the Lords of the Congregation came to Edinburgh Castle on 12 May 1560 and had dinner with Mary and the keeper of the castle, Lord Erskine. They discussed a plan that had been previously discussed, in which Mary would have travelled to France and met Elizabeth in England, and her brother would have been made viceroy in Scotland. The Lords again complained about Frenchmen being appointed to Scottish government posts. Negotiations to end the siege of Leith and demolish new fortifications at Dunbar Castle continued. The talks ended when permission was refused for the French commanders in Leith to come to the castle to discuss the proposals with Mary.

While continuing to fortify Edinburgh Castle, Mary became seriously ill, and over the course of the next eight days her mind began to wander; on some days she could not even speak. On 8 June she made her will. She died of dropsy on 11 June 1560.

She lay in state in the castle for a time, wrapped in cerecloth and covered with a white sheet, on a bed hung with black satin, attended by her ladies-in-waiting. Her body was then wrapped in lead and rested in a coffin on a bier in St Margaret&#x27;s Chapel in Edinburgh Castle for several months. The chapel was hung with black cloth with a white taffeta cross above the body. On 18 March 1561, it was secretly carried from the castle at midnight and shipped to France. Mary, Queen of Scots attended her funeral at Fécamp in July 1561. Mary of Guise was interred at the church of Saint-Pierre-les-Dames, Reims, where Mary&#x27;s sister Renée was abbess. A marble tomb was erected with a bronze statue of Mary, in royal robes, holding a sceptre and the rod of justice in one hand. The tomb was destroyed during the French revolution. Of Mary&#x27;s five children, only her daughter Mary survived her.

In modern times, there has been speculation that Mary was assassinated (by poisoning), either by order of Queen Elizabeth I of England or possibly by others protecting the Queen&#x27;s interests without any direct order from the Queen. However, no evidence supports such allegations, and there was an autopsy the day after she died. Mary&#x27;s death was evidently from natural causes, since she herself complained she had become lame from the swelling of her legs in April and diagnosed herself as having dropsy. The swelling was confirmed by her enemy, John Knox, who wrote that in May, &quot;began hir bellie and lothsome leggis to swell.&quot; Even in the political climate of the 16th century, in which some royal deaths were suspected to have been murders, none of Mary&#x27;s contemporaries saw signs of &quot;foul play&quot; in her death.

The Regent&#x27;s death made way for the Treaty of Edinburgh, in which France and England agreed they would each withdraw their troops from Scotland. Although the French commissioners were unwilling to make a treaty with the insurgent Lords of the Congregation, they offered the Scots certain concessions from King Francis and Queen Mary, including the right to summon a parliament according to use and custom. The effect of the treaty was to leave power in the hands of the pro-English Protestants.

==Household==
Amongst records of her expenses and household there is a list of her ladies-in-waiting. The names (modernised) of the &quot;dames&quot; or married women are; Lady Arran, Lady Cassillis (senior), Lady Erskine, Lady Elphinston, Lady Livingston and Coullombe (senior). The unmarried &quot;demoiselles&quot; were Margaret Hume, Margery Livingston, Jean Elphinston, Jean Murray, Annabell Murray, Margaret Steward, Anne Scot, Margery Kirkcaldy, Coullombe, Barbara Sandilands, Barbara Kennedy, Cassillis, Crespy, Crespanville, with Elizabeth Murray the wife of Alexander Durham, the daughter of Lady Livingston, and two female fools.

Her household included a female fool or jester, called Serat, who wore a red-and-yellow gown with a green skirt. Jane, or Jean, a dwarf, wore a light-purple velvet. The treasurer&#x27;s accounts do not include detail of her wardrobe expenses during her Regency (1554–1560), but in November 1557 she directed the burgh council of Edinburgh to exempt Archibald Dewar from taxes. He seems to have been her tailor.

== Legacy ==
Apart from her bitter enemy John Knox, the leader of the Scottish Reformation, views by historians have generally been favourable. Marshall says that &quot;her biographers, Strickland in the nineteenth century, McKerlie and Marshall in the twentieth, [have] been unanimous in praising her intelligence and fortitude&quot; as have most other scholars. In evaluating her life, historian Rosalind K. Marshall says:Sacrificing her own comfort, interests, and ultimately her life, Mary of Guise had fought a long, desperate, and, in the end, hopeless struggle to preserve Scotland as a pro-French, Roman Catholic nation for her daughter...Charming, highly intelligent, and hard-working, with a diplomatic manner and an ability to fight on regardless of hostility, disappointment, and ill health, Mary was never merely a pawn of the French king.

== Archival sources ==
A manuscript journal of the siege of Leith, attributed to Jacques de La Brosse, and copies of Mary of Guise&#x27;s correspondence with the French ambassador Michel de Seure are held by the Archives des affaires étrangères, Paris, (Angleterre 15). This material, and an archive of letters known as the Balcarres Papers, held by the National Library of Scotland, possibly represent the papers of one of the secretaries of Mary of Guise, Pierre de Grantrie or Grandrye. The National Records of Scotland holds some state correspondence and exchequer material.

==Portrayal in fiction==
* Marie de Guise is the principal character in &quot;The Five Year Queen&quot; by Janet Walkinshaw.
* Mary de Guise appears in volumes 1, 2, 3 and 5 of the &quot;Lymond Chronicles&quot; by Dorothy Dunnett. Most notably, the events around her visit to her daughter in France in 1550 are portrayed in the second volume, &quot;Queens&#x27; Play&quot;.
* In the 1998 film &quot;Elizabeth&quot;, Mary was played by the French actress Fanny Ardant. Her death was depicted as assassination at the hands of Francis Walsingham.
* In The CW series &quot;Reign&quot;, Amy Brenneman portrays Marie de Guise.

==Ancestry==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Joseph Bain, ed., &quot;Calendar of the State Papers relating to Scotland and Mary Queen of Scots 1547–1603&quot;, vol. 1, H.M. General Register House Edinburgh, (1898)
* Annie I. Cameron, &quot;The Scottish Correspondence of Mary of Lorraine&quot;, Scottish History Society (1927).
* John G. Harrison, , Kirkdale Archaeology / Historic Scotland (2008).
* Rosalind K. Marshall, &quot;Mary of Guise: Queen of Scots&quot;, abridged, NMS Publishing, Edinburgh (2001).
* Marcus Merriman, &quot;The Rough Wooings&quot;, Tuckwell (2000)-
* Pamela E. Ritchie – &quot;Mary of Guise in Scotland, 1548–1560: A Political Study&quot; (2002).
* Strickland, Agnes, &#x27;Mary of Lorraine&#x27; in &quot;Lives of the queens of Scotland and English princesses&quot;, vol. 1, Blackwood (1850) pp. 337–406, to 1542.
* Strickland, Agnes, &#x27;Mary of Lorraine&#x27; in &quot;Lives of the queens of Scotland and English princesses&quot;, vol. 2, Blackwood (1851) pp. 1–206, continued.
*
* Marguerite Wood, &quot;Foreign Correspondence with Marie de Lorraine: the Balcarres Papers&quot;, Scottish History Society, 2 vols (1923, 1925).
** &quot;Balcarres Papers&quot; vol.1 SHS (1923) the Internet Archive.

==External links==

*Sally Rush, &#x27;Looking at Marie de Guise&#x27;, &quot;Études Epistémè&quot;, 37 (2020)
*Elizabeth Bonner, &quot;The &quot;Politique&quot; of Henri II: De Facto French Rule in Scotland, 1550-1554&quot;, &quot;Journal of the Sydney Society for Scottish History&quot;, 7 (1999).
*Mary of Guise – World History Encyclopedia
*A wardrobe account of Mary of Guise, 1552–1554</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="0" end="13" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="63" end="79" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850905" start="85" end="102" title="List of Scottish royal consorts" label="Queen of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="152" end="159" title="James V" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="171" end="177" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336538" start="196" end="210" title="House of Guise" label="House of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057658" start="214" end="226" title="cadet branch" label="cadet branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="234" end="251" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="293" end="299" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="318" end="338" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="430" end="438" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="462" end="474" title="List of regents#Scotland" label="queen regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="580" end="601" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="Claude, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q269239" start="607" end="628" title="Antoinette of Bourbon" label="Antoinette of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741378" start="658" end="702" title="Louis II d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville" label="Louis II d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549372" start="708" end="735" title="Grand Chamberlain of France" label="Grand Chamberlain of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="771" end="790" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="878" end="885" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="900" end="910" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361738" start="1259" end="1279" title="St Andrews Cathedral" label="St Andrews Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="1290" end="1297" title="Coronation" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q966862" start="1307" end="1321" title="Holyrood Abbey" label="Holyrood Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762290" start="1405" end="1428" title="James, Duke of Rothesay (born 1540)" label="James, Duke of Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="1458" end="1462" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="1797" end="1830" title="James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran" label="James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="1889" end="1901" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837088" start="1912" end="1932" title="Treaty of Haddington" label="Treaty of Haddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="1980" end="1987" title="Francis II of France" label="Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="1993" end="2010" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="2081" end="2089" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2480" end="2490" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="2549" end="2569" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="2604" end="2614" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="2616" end="2624" title="Lorraine (province)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="2649" end="2670" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="Claude, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336538" start="2684" end="2698" title="House of Guise" label="House of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q269239" start="2713" end="2734" title="Antoinette of Bourbon" label="Antoinette of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518684" start="2760" end="2785" title="Francis, Count of Vendome" label="Francis, Count of Vendome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962578" start="2791" end="2810" title="Marie de Luxembourg" label="Marie de Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="2839" end="2861" title="Francis, Duke of Guise" label="Francis, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="2863" end="2885" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="Claude, Duke of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="2887" end="2916" title="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q898203" start="2922" end="2948" title="Louis I, Cardinal of Guise" label="Louis I, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q431221" start="3066" end="3086" title="Philippa of Guelders" label="Philippa of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q733658" start="3109" end="3120" title="Poor Clares" label="Poor Clares"/>
<link wikidata="Q461413" start="3124" end="3138" title="Pont-à-Mousson" label="Pont-à-Mousson"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="3317" end="3342" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427187" start="3353" end="3369" title="Renée of Bourbon" label="Renée of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="3589" end="3598" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156045" start="3603" end="3621" title="Eleanor of Austria" label="Eleanor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q231074" start="3683" end="3692" title="Madeleine of Valois" label="Madeleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q235835" start="3746" end="3754" title="Margaret of Valois, Duchess of Berry" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812577" start="3832" end="3854" title="Duchess of Longueville" label="Duchess of Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741378" start="3867" end="3911" title="Louis II d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville" label="Louis II d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549372" start="3917" end="3944" title="Grand Chamberlain of France" label="Grand Chamberlain of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="3953" end="3966" title="Louvre Palace" label="Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615586" start="4069" end="4076" title="François III d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville" label="Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="4112" end="4117" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="4384" end="4412" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="4803" end="4822" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q231074" start="4853" end="4872" title="Madeleine of Valois" label="Madeleine of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="4956" end="4980" title="Franco-Scottish alliance" label="Franco-Scottish alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4989" end="4996" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q544953" start="5034" end="5065" title="William Drummond of Hawthornden" label="William Drummond of Hawthornden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781037" start="5156" end="5171" title="Mary of Bourbon" label="Mary of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="5281" end="5302" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q182637" start="5321" end="5333" title="Jane Seymour" label="Jane Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688460" start="5461" end="5470" title="Louis de Perreau, Sieur de Castillon" label="Castillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="5871" end="5882" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="6013" end="6032" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173680" start="6822" end="6834" title="David Beaton" label="David Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="6945" end="6949" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="7216" end="7232" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14103" start="7279" end="7288" title="Champagne-Ardenne" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="7415" end="7420" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q607248" start="7432" end="7438" title="French livre" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269581" start="7521" end="7529" title="jointure" label="jointure"/>
<link wikidata="Q565345" start="7540" end="7555" title="Falkland Palace" label="Falkland Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="7557" end="7572" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278282" start="7574" end="7589" title="Dingwall Castle" label="Dingwall Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q607339" start="7594" end="7608" title="Threave Castle" label="Threave Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991018" start="7652" end="7656" title="Earl of Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922653" start="7658" end="7668" title="Earl of Strathearn" label="Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277400" start="7670" end="7674" title="Earl of Ross" label="Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564297" start="7679" end="7685" title="Earl of Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="7708" end="7716" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869930" start="7733" end="7742" title="Lord of the Isles" label="the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898928" start="7820" end="7825" title="Proxy marriage" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815544" start="7916" end="7937" title="Château de Châteaudun" label="Château de Châteaudun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972091" start="8025" end="8037" title="Robert Maxwell, 5th Lord Maxwell" label="Lord Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="8310" end="8318" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010416" start="8444" end="8449" title="Crail" label="Crail"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="8453" end="8457" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="8601" end="8611" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361738" start="8719" end="8739" title="St Andrews Cathedral" label="St Andrews Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="8777" end="8791" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Margaret Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567750" start="9064" end="9076" title="Glen Finglas" label="Glen Finglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="9087" end="9104" title="ladies-in-waiting" label="ladies-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q107468041" start="9155" end="9166" title="Nicolas Roy (mason)" label="Nicolas Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192409" start="9218" end="9232" title="Pierre Quesnel" label="Pierre Quesnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="9284" end="9289" title="Dwarfism" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="9296" end="9300" title="Jester" label="fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q565345" start="9368" end="9383" title="Falkland Palace" label="Falkland Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q733414" start="9632" end="9638" title="Elbeuf" label="Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="9644" end="9649" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297325" start="9692" end="9734" title="René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Elbeuf" label="René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575611" start="9893" end="9904" title="Isle of May" label="Isle of May"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="9912" end="9917" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378655" start="10012" end="10027" title="English ship Mary Willoughby" label="Mary Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084031" start="10071" end="10077" title="Isle of May Priory" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057971" start="10081" end="10090" title="Adrian of May" label="St Adrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q966862" start="10215" end="10229" title="Holyrood Abbey" label="Holyrood Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q100686888" start="10327" end="10338" title="John Mosman (goldsmith)" label="John Mosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="10390" end="10397" title="sceptre" label="sceptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437966" start="10464" end="10474" title="Scottish royal tapestry collection" label="tapestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="10725" end="10741" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762290" start="10846" end="10869" title="James, Duke of Rothesay (born 1540)" label="James, Duke of Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="11249" end="11258" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="11342" end="11346" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q852908" start="11673" end="11684" title="Royal Mile" label="High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="11714" end="11719" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q107924208" start="11813" end="11818" title="The Shore, Leith" label="Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="11915" end="11930" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="12291" end="12311" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q17570809" start="12644" end="12661" title="Lamb&amp;#x27;s House" label="Lamb&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="12779" end="12812" title="James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran" label="James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="12817" end="12823" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="12865" end="12869" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="12888" end="12901" title="Edward VI" label="Prince Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="13014" end="13034" title="Auld Alliance" label="alliance with France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="13081" end="13093" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288055" start="13123" end="13135" title="Ralph Sadler" label="Ralph Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q564868" start="13277" end="13294" title="Linlithgow Palace" label="Linlithgow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="13350" end="13354" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q74317" start="13669" end="13683" title="James Hamilton, 3rd Earl of Arran" label="James Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="13690" end="13708" title="Elizabeth I" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="13754" end="13766" title="Regent Arran" label="Regent Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173680" start="13787" end="13802" title="David Beaton" label="Cardinal Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886996" start="14155" end="14167" title="Malcolm Fleming, 3rd Lord Fleming" label="Lord Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="14409" end="14413" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="14417" end="14432" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569675" start="14820" end="14839" title="Treaty of Greenwich" label="Treaty of Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368123" start="15079" end="15095" title="Battle of Pinkie" label="Battle of Pinkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510065" start="15331" end="15350" title="siege of Haddington" label="siege of Haddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q35921" start="15606" end="15611" title="Pound Scots" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15667" end="15683" title="Abbey of St Mary, Haddington" label="Haddington Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="15705" end="15709" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="15793" end="15800" title="Francis II of France" label="Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="15809" end="15827" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="15872" end="15881" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788927" start="15892" end="15900" title="Whithorn" label="Whithorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727088" start="16080" end="16105" title="The Complaynt of Scotland" label="The Complaynt of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76721" start="16156" end="16175" title="Godfrey de Bouillon" label="Godfrey de Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q464777" start="16250" end="16257" title="Tomyris" label="Tomyris"/>
<link wikidata="Q103960" start="16259" end="16268" title="Semiramis" label="Semiramis"/>
<link wikidata="Q379828" start="16273" end="16284" title="Penthesilea" label="Penthesilea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278449" start="16384" end="16399" title="Broughty Castle" label="Broughty Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063354" start="16527" end="16542" title="Paul de Thermes" label="Paul de Thermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="16816" end="16834" title="Treaty of Boulogne" label="Treaty of Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="16896" end="16922" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="Claude, Marquis de Mayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="17074" end="17083" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="17361" end="17367" title="Dieppe, Seine-Maritime" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="17430" end="17435" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q495531" start="17723" end="17729" title="George Gordon, 4th Earl of Huntly" label="Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561027" start="17731" end="17740" title="Gilbert Kennedy, 3rd Earl of Cassilis" label="Cassillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991046" start="17742" end="17752" title="Earl of Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616592" start="17754" end="17763" title="William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal" label="Marischal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326391" start="17768" end="17775" title="Earl of Wigtown" label="Wigtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719150" start="17788" end="17792" title="Alexander Home, 5th Lord Home" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326345" start="17797" end="17804" title="Earl of Nithsdale" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718980" start="17825" end="17834" title="Alexander Gordon (bishop of Galloway)" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756858" start="17839" end="17847" title="Andrew Durie" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055" start="17986" end="17991" title="Château de Blois" label="Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="18038" end="18043" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="18045" end="18051" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="18056" end="18062" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117267624" start="18100" end="18116" title="Robert Fichepain" label="Robert Fichepain"/>
<link wikidata="Q389908" start="18137" end="18144" title="Château d&amp;#x27;Amboise" label="Amboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247059" start="18546" end="18556" title="John Mason (diplomat)" label="John Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="18887" end="18893" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="18978" end="18988" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571472" start="19098" end="19114" title="Southwick Priory" label="Southwick Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968844" start="19152" end="19163" title="Warblington" label="Warblington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179634" start="19165" end="19172" title="Cowdray House" label="Cowdray"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="19174" end="19187" title="Hampton Court" label="Hampton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797815" start="19222" end="19261" title="William Parr, 1st Marquess of Northampton" label="Marquess and Marchioness of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507927" start="19267" end="19280" title="Fulham Palace" label="Fulham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="19310" end="19326" title="Whitehall Palace" label="Whitehall Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q950799" start="19379" end="19388" title="Horse tack" label="trappings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707568" start="19404" end="19410" title="tinsel" label="tinsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192943" start="19484" end="19498" title="Catherine Parr" label="Catherine Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="19500" end="19523" title="Mary I of England" label="The Princess Mary Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="19561" end="19583" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="the Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q675190" start="19614" end="19625" title="John Aylmer (bishop)" label="John Aylmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204140" start="19723" end="19731" title="Ruffle (sewing)" label="frounsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288055" start="19839" end="19851" title="Ralph Sadler" label="Ralph Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="19873" end="19886" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19804" start="19938" end="19952" title="Royston, Hertfordshire" label="Royston Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q269702" start="19974" end="20000" title="Catherine Willoughby" label="Dowager Duchess of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546926" start="20004" end="20022" title="Grimsthorpe Castle" label="Grimsthorpe Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000662" start="20028" end="20036" title="Stamford, Lincolnshire" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="20075" end="20087" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q772507" start="20133" end="20140" title="Selkirk, Scottish Borders" label="Selkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012401" start="20142" end="20150" title="Jedburgh" label="Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q425611" start="20155" end="20177" title="Duns, Scottish Borders" label="Duns, Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011507" start="20179" end="20186" title="Peebles" label="Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017204" start="20191" end="20197" title="Lauder" label="Lauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="20211" end="20217" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012054" start="20222" end="20235" title="North Berwick" label="North Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470772" start="20265" end="20288" title="Ladykirk, Scottish Borders" label="Our Lady Kirk of Steill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="20392" end="20397" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q157077" start="20495" end="20528" title="Mary of Austria, Queen of Hungary" label="Mary of Austria, Queen of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="20540" end="20558" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="20559" end="20568" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113401" start="20823" end="20836" title="Jean Scheyfve" label="Jean Scheyfve"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="20897" end="20929" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056247" start="21040" end="21059" title="Antoine de Noailles" label="Antoine de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130844" start="21153" end="21166" title="Henri Cleutin" label="Henri Cleutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626747" start="21396" end="21413" title="Château de Meudon" label="Château de Meudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="21487" end="21507" title="Charles of Guise" label="Cardinal of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="21604" end="21626" title="Francis, Duke of Guise" label="Francis, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130844" start="21842" end="21855" title="Henri Cleutin" label="Henri Cleutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599947" start="22014" end="22024" title="Great Seal of Scotland" label="Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="22077" end="22090" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410563" start="22133" end="22152" title="Keeper of the Seals" label="Keeper of the Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q107468299" start="22157" end="22181" title="Bartholomew de Villemore" label="Bartholomew de Villemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003852" start="22186" end="22197" title="Comptroller of Scotland" label="Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012401" start="22471" end="22479" title="Jedburgh" label="Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639293" start="22490" end="22502" title="Justice Ayre" label="Justice Ayre"/>
<link wikidata="Q913761" start="22570" end="22575" title="Clan Scott" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222904" start="22580" end="22584" title="Clan Kerr" label="Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235735" start="22723" end="22741" title="John Gordon, 11th Earl of Sutherland" label="Earl of Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56227733" start="22749" end="22773" title="Clan Mackay" label="Iye du Mackay, Lord Reay"/>
<link wikidata="Q495531" start="22850" end="22856" title="George Gordon, 4th Earl of Huntly" label="Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627091" start="22861" end="22867" title="Archibald Campbell, 4th Earl of Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750114" start="22915" end="22922" title="Moidart" label="Moidart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="22927" end="22932" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="23025" end="23034" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q841074" start="23042" end="23047" title="Elgin, Moray" label="Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54809" start="23049" end="23054" title="Banff, Aberdeenshire" label="Banff"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="23059" end="23067" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="23205" end="23210" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610322" start="23612" end="23621" title="Inchkeith" label="Inchkeith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303319" start="23668" end="23683" title="Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland" label="master of works"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014954" start="23685" end="23702" title="William MacDowall" label="William MacDowall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940598" start="24025" end="24036" title="Hume Castle" label="Hume Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332897" start="24171" end="24178" title="Eckford, Scottish Borders" label="Eckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="24350" end="24368" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24645" end="24655" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="24861" end="24871" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q123593181" start="24883" end="24922" title="Wedding of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Francis, Dauphin of France" label="marriage of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="24931" end="24948" title="Francis II of France" label="dauphin of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q117758577" start="24990" end="25013" title="Death and funeral of Mary I of England" label="Mary Tudor&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="25061" end="25070" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="25234" end="25252" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="25865" end="25871" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446391" start="26010" end="26035" title="Lords of the Congregation" label="Lords of the Congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="26196" end="26206" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515878" start="26480" end="26485" title="laird" label="laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="26564" end="26575" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="26790" end="26795" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="27160" end="27165" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="27179" end="27185" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="27259" end="27268" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="27342" end="27347" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q235234" start="27415" end="27422" title="James I of Scotland" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699531" start="27575" end="27585" title="Cupar Muir" label="Cupar Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368509" start="27633" end="27647" title="Archibald Campbell, 5th Earl of Argyll" label="Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="27652" end="27685" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="Lord James Stewart, Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969165" start="27950" end="27956" title="Dunbar Castle" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800926" start="28020" end="28037" title="Articles of Leith" label="Articles of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520393" start="28041" end="28052" title="Leith Links" label="Leith Links"/>
<link wikidata="Q74317" start="28215" end="28222" title="James Hamilton, 3rd Earl of Arran" label="his son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010266" start="28439" end="28447" title="Kinghorn" label="Kinghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643791" start="28482" end="28498" title="Hallyards Castle" label="Hallyards Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q934847" start="28513" end="28540" title="William Kirkcaldy of Grange" label="William Kirkcaldy of Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297325" start="28856" end="28898" title="René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Elbeuf" label="René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="29116" end="29130" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="29186" end="29191" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777000" start="29370" end="29440" title="The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women" label="The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="29469" end="29486" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q40923399" start="29521" end="29546" title="Coronation of Elizabeth I" label="newly crowned Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836985" start="29552" end="29569" title="Treaty of Berwick (1560)" label="Treaty of Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510186" start="29762" end="29791" title="Siege of Leith" label="besieging the French at Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q715321" start="29853" end="29874" title="Nicholas Throckmorton" label="Nicholas Throckmorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q350427" start="29962" end="29972" title="John Jewel" label="John Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389496" start="30262" end="30274" title="John Erskine, Earl of Mar (died 1572)" label="Lord Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="30446" end="30453" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969165" start="30630" end="30643" title="Dunbar Castle" label="Dunbar Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="31015" end="31021" title="Edema" label="dropsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365316" start="31094" end="31103" title="Shroud" label="cerecloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061784" start="31273" end="31298" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Edinburgh" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q269732" start="31557" end="31563" title="Fécamp" label="Fécamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212738" start="31622" end="31651" title="Saint-Pierre-les-Dames, Reims" label="Saint-Pierre-les-Dames, Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="31688" end="31694" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="31923" end="31927" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="32018" end="32024" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="32055" end="32077" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="32244" end="32251" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q947050" start="32832" end="32851" title="Treaty of Edinburgh" label="Treaty of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q64875960" start="33680" end="33695" title="Annabell Murray, Countess of Mar" label="Annabell Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q107468263" start="33860" end="33876" title="Alexander Durham" label="Alexander Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836758" start="34103" end="34128" title="Treasurer of Scotland" label="treasurer&amp;#x27;s accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q59991517" start="34744" end="34764" title="Rosalind K. Marshall" label="Rosalind K. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120981" start="35281" end="35301" title="Jacques de La Brosse" label="Jacques de La Brosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311216" start="35380" end="35395" title="Michel de Sèvre" label="Michel de Seure"/>
<link wikidata="Q182542" start="35412" end="35451" title="Archives Nationales (France)" label="Archives des affaires étrangères, Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="35554" end="35582" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932348" start="35694" end="35722" title="National Records of Scotland" label="National Records of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708219" start="35967" end="35984" title="Lymond Chronicles" label="Lymond Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q273799" start="35994" end="36009" title="Dorothy Dunnett" label="Dorothy Dunnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q499656" start="36179" end="36188" title="Elizabeth (film)" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106349" start="36234" end="36246" title="Fanny Ardant" label="Fanny Ardant"/>
<link wikidata="Q138409" start="36304" end="36322" title="Francis Walsingham" label="Francis Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="36329" end="36335" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099470" start="36349" end="36354" title="Reign (TV series)" label="Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q232520" start="36362" end="36375" title="Amy Brenneman" label="Amy Brenneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q63727739" start="37422" end="37437" title="Marguerite Wood" label="Marguerite Wood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71289" wikidata="Q1165219" url="?curid=71289" title="Extended Backus–Naur form">
<text>In computer science, extended Backus–Naur form (EBNF) is a family of metasyntax notations, any of which can be used to express a context-free grammar. EBNF is used to make a formal description of a formal language such as a computer programming language. They are extensions of the basic Backus–Naur form (BNF) metasyntax notation.
The earliest EBNF was developed by Niklaus Wirth, incorporating some of the concepts (with a different syntax and notation) from Wirth syntax notation. Today, many variants of EBNF are in use.
The International Organization for Standardization adopted an EBNF Standard, ISO/IEC 14977, in 1996.

According to Zaytsev, however, this standard &quot;only ended up adding yet another three dialects to the chaos&quot; and, after noting its lack of success, also notes that the ISO EBNF is not even used in all ISO standards.

Wheeler argues against using the ISO standard when using an EBNF and recommends considering alternative EBNF notations such as the one from the W3C Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition).

This article uses EBNF as specified by the ISO for examples applying to all EBNFs. Other EBNF variants use somewhat different syntactic conventions.

== Basics ==
EBNF is a code that expresses the syntax of a formal language. An EBNF consists of terminal symbols and non-terminal production rules which are the restrictions governing how terminal symbols can be combined into a valid sequence. Examples of terminal symbols include alphanumeric characters, punctuation marks, and whitespace characters.

The EBNF defines production rules where sequences of symbols are respectively assigned to a nonterminal:
digit excluding zero = &quot;1&quot; | &quot;2&quot; | &quot;3&quot; | &quot;4&quot; | &quot;5&quot; | &quot;6&quot; | &quot;7&quot; | &quot;8&quot; | &quot;9&quot; ;
digit = &quot;0&quot; | digit excluding zero ;
This production rule defines the nonterminal &quot;digit&quot; which is on the left side of the assignment. The vertical bar represents an alternative and the terminal symbols are enclosed with quotation marks followed by a semicolon as terminating character. Hence a &quot;digit&quot; is a &quot;0&quot; or a &quot;digit excluding zero&quot; that can be &quot;1&quot; or &quot;2&quot; or &quot;3&quot; and so forth until &quot;9&quot;.

A production rule can also include a sequence of terminals or nonterminals, each separated by a comma:
twelve = &quot;1&quot;, &quot;2&quot; ;
two hundred one = &quot;2&quot;, &quot;0&quot;, &quot;1&quot; ;
three hundred twelve = &quot;3&quot;, twelve ;
twelve thousand two hundred one = twelve, two hundred one ;
Expressions that may be omitted or repeated can be represented through curly braces { ... }:
positive integer = digit excluding zero, { digit } ;
In this case, the strings &quot;1&quot;, &quot;2&quot;, ..., &quot;10&quot;, ..., &quot;10000&quot;, ... are correct expressions. To represent this, everything that is set within the curly braces may be repeated arbitrarily often, including not at all.

An option can be represented through squared brackets [ ... ]. That is, everything that is set within the square brackets may be present just once, or not at all:
integer = &quot;0&quot; | [ &quot;-&quot; ], positive integer ;
Therefore, an integer is a zero (&quot;0&quot;) or a positive integer that may be preceded by an optional minus sign.

EBNF also provides, among other things, the syntax to describe repetitions (of a specified number of times), to exclude some part of a production, and to insert comments in an EBNF grammar.

=== Table of symbols ===
The following represents a proposed ISO/IEC 14977 standard, by R. S. Scowen, page 7, tables 1 and 2.

== Examples ==

===Syntax diagram===

===EBNF===

Even EBNF can be described using EBNF. Consider below grammar (using conventions such as &quot;-&quot; to indicate set disjunction, &quot;+&quot; to indicate one or more matches, and &quot;?&quot; for optionality):
letter = &quot;A&quot; | &quot;B&quot; | &quot;C&quot; | &quot;D&quot; | &quot;E&quot; | &quot;F&quot; | &quot;G&quot;
 | &quot;H&quot; | &quot;I&quot; | &quot;J&quot; | &quot;K&quot; | &quot;L&quot; | &quot;M&quot; | &quot;N&quot;
 | &quot;O&quot; | &quot;P&quot; | &quot;Q&quot; | &quot;R&quot; | &quot;S&quot; | &quot;T&quot; | &quot;U&quot;
 | &quot;V&quot; | &quot;W&quot; | &quot;X&quot; | &quot;Y&quot; | &quot;Z&quot; | &quot;a&quot; | &quot;b&quot;
 | &quot;c&quot; | &quot;d&quot; | &quot;e&quot; | &quot;f&quot; | &quot;g&quot; | &quot;h&quot; | &quot;i&quot;
 | &quot;j&quot; | &quot;k&quot; | &quot;l&quot; | &quot;m&quot; | &quot;n&quot; | &quot;o&quot; | &quot;p&quot;
 | &quot;q&quot; | &quot;r&quot; | &quot;s&quot; | &quot;t&quot; | &quot;u&quot; | &quot;v&quot; | &quot;w&quot;
 | &quot;x&quot; | &quot;y&quot; | &quot;z&quot; ;

digit = &quot;0&quot; | &quot;1&quot; | &quot;2&quot; | &quot;3&quot; | &quot;4&quot; | &quot;5&quot; | &quot;6&quot; | &quot;7&quot; | &quot;8&quot; | &quot;9&quot; ;

symbol = &quot;[&quot; | &quot;]&quot; | &quot;{&quot; | &quot;}&quot; | &quot;(&quot; | &quot;)&quot; | &quot;&lt;&quot; | &quot;&gt;&quot;
 | &quot;+&quot; | &quot;*&quot; | &quot;?&quot; | &quot;\n&quot; | &quot;\t&quot; | &quot;\r&quot; | &quot;\f&quot; | &quot;\b&quot; ;

character = letter | digit | symbol | &quot;_&quot; | &quot; &quot; ;
identifier = letter , { letter | digit | &quot;_&quot; } ;

S = { &quot; &quot; | &quot;\n&quot; | &quot;\t&quot; | &quot;\r&quot; | &quot;\f&quot; | &quot;\b&quot; } ;

terminal = &quot;&#x27;&quot; , character - &quot;&#x27;&quot; , { character - &quot;&#x27;&quot; } , &quot;&#x27;&quot;
 | &#x27;&quot;&#x27; , character - &#x27;&quot;&#x27; , { character - &#x27;&quot;&#x27; } , &#x27;&quot;&#x27; ;

terminator = &quot;;&quot; | &quot;.&quot; ;

term = &quot;(&quot; , S , rhs , S , &quot;)&quot;
 | &quot;[&quot; , S , rhs , S , &quot;]&quot;
 | &quot;{&quot; , S , rhs , S , &quot;}&quot;
 | terminal
 | identifier ;

factor = term , S , &quot;?&quot;
 | term , S , &quot;*&quot;
 | term , S , &quot;+&quot;
 | term , S , &quot;-&quot; , S , term
 | term , S ;

concatenation = ( S , factor , S , &quot;,&quot; ? ) + ;
alternation = ( S , concatenation , S , &quot;|&quot; ? ) + ;

rhs = alternation ;
lhs = identifier ;

rule = lhs , S , &quot;=&quot; , S , rhs , S , terminator ;

grammar = ( S , rule , S ) * ;

===Pascal===
A Pascal-like programming language that allows only assignments can be defined in EBNF as follows:
 (* a simple program syntax in EBNF - Wikipedia *)
 program = &#x27;PROGRAM&#x27;, white space, identifier, white space, 
 &#x27;BEGIN&#x27;, white space, 
 { assignment, &quot;;&quot;, white space },
 &#x27;END.&#x27; ;
 identifier = alphabetic character, { alphabetic character | digit } ;
 number = [ &quot;-&quot; ], digit, { digit } ;
 string = &#x27;&quot;&#x27; , { all characters - &#x27;&quot;&#x27; }, &#x27;&quot;&#x27; ;
 assignment = identifier , &quot;:=&quot; , ( number | identifier | string ) ;
 alphabetic character = &quot;A&quot; | &quot;B&quot; | &quot;C&quot; | &quot;D&quot; | &quot;E&quot; | &quot;F&quot; | &quot;G&quot;
 | &quot;H&quot; | &quot;I&quot; | &quot;J&quot; | &quot;K&quot; | &quot;L&quot; | &quot;M&quot; | &quot;N&quot;
 | &quot;O&quot; | &quot;P&quot; | &quot;Q&quot; | &quot;R&quot; | &quot;S&quot; | &quot;T&quot; | &quot;U&quot;
 | &quot;V&quot; | &quot;W&quot; | &quot;X&quot; | &quot;Y&quot; | &quot;Z&quot; ;
 digit = &quot;0&quot; | &quot;1&quot; | &quot;2&quot; | &quot;3&quot; | &quot;4&quot; | &quot;5&quot; | &quot;6&quot; | &quot;7&quot; | &quot;8&quot; | &quot;9&quot; ;
 white space = ? white space characters ? ;
 all characters = ? all visible characters ? ;
For example, a syntactically correct program then could be:

 PROGRAM DEMO1
 BEGIN
 A:=3;
 B:=45;
 H:=-100023;
 C:=A;
 D123:=B34A;
 BABOON:=GIRAFFE;
 TEXT:=&quot;Hello world!&quot;;
 END.
The language can easily be extended with control flows, arithmetical expressions, and Input/Output instructions. Then a small, usable programming language would be developed.

== Advantages over BNF ==
Any grammar defined in EBNF can also be represented in BNF, though representations in the latter are generally lengthier. E.g., options and repetitions cannot be directly expressed in BNF and require the use of an intermediate rule or alternative production defined to be either nothing or the optional production for option, or either the repeated production of itself, recursively, for repetition. The same constructs can still be used in EBNF.

The BNF uses the symbols (codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4) for itself, but does not include quotes around terminal strings. This prevents these characters from being used in the languages, and requires a special symbol for the empty string. In EBNF, terminals are strictly enclosed within quotation marks (codice_5...codice_5 or codice_7...codice_7). The angle brackets (&quot;codice_1...codice_2&quot;) for nonterminals can be omitted.

BNF syntax can only represent a rule in one line, whereas in EBNF a terminating character, the semicolon character “codice_11” marks the end of a rule.

Furthermore, EBNF includes mechanisms for enhancements, defining the number of repetitions, excluding alternatives, comments, etc.

== Conventions ==

As examples, the following syntax rules illustrate the facilities for expressing repetition:

aa = &quot;A&quot;;
bb = 3 * aa, &quot;B&quot;;
cc = 3 * [aa], &quot;C&quot;;
dd = {aa}, &quot;D&quot;;
ee = aa, {aa}, &quot;E&quot;;
ff = 3 * aa, 3 * [aa], &quot;F&quot;;
gg = {3 * aa}, &quot;G&quot;;
hh = (aa | bb | cc), &quot;H&quot;;

Terminal strings defined by these rules are as follows:
 aa: A
 bb: AAAB
 cc: C AC AAC AAAC
 dd: D AD AAD AAAD AAAAD etc.
 ee: AE AAE AAAE AAAAE AAAAAE etc.
 ff: AAAF AAAAF AAAAAF AAAAAAF
 gg: G AAAG AAAAAAG etc.
 hh: AH AAABH CH ACH AACH AAACH

== Extensibility ==
According to the ISO 14977 standard EBNF is meant to be extensible, and two facilities are mentioned. The first is part of EBNF grammar, the special sequence, which is arbitrary text enclosed with question marks. The interpretation of the text inside a special sequence is beyond the scope of the EBNF standard. For example, the space character could be defined by the following rule:
 space = ? ASCII character 32 ?;
The second facility for extension is using the fact that parentheses in EBNF cannot be placed next to identifiers (they must be concatenated with them). The following is valid EBNF:
 something = foo, ( bar );
The following is &quot;not&quot; valid EBNF:
 something = foo ( bar );
Therefore, an extension of EBNF could use that notation. For example, in a Lisp grammar, function application could be defined by the following rule:
 function application = list( symbol, { expression } );
==Related work==
* The W3C publishes an EBNF notation.
* The W3C used a different EBNF to specify the XML syntax.
* The British Standards Institution published a standard for an EBNF: BS 6154 in 1981.
* The IETF uses augmented BNF (ABNF), specified in .

==See also==
* Meta-II – An early compiler writing tool and notation
* Phrase structure rules – The direct equivalent of EBNF in natural languages
* Regular expression
* Spirit Parser Framework

==References==


==External links==
* ISO/IEC 14977 : 1996(E)
* BNF/EBNF variants – A table by Pete Jinks comparing several syntaxes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1165219" start="21" end="46" title="Extended Backus–Naur form" label="extended Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165219" start="48" end="52" title="Extended Backus–Naur form" label="EBNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823262" start="69" end="79" title="metasyntax" label="metasyntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="129" end="149" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="288" end="304" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="1229" end="1233" title="code" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="1253" end="1259" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1302" end="1317" title="Terminal and nonterminal symbols#Terminal symbols" label="terminal symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q737372" start="1487" end="1510" title="Alphanumerics" label="alphanumeric characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="1512" end="1529" title="Punctuation" label="punctuation marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q591615" start="1535" end="1555" title="whitespace character" label="whitespace character"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111781" start="1576" end="1592" title="Production (computer science)" label="production rules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1651" end="1662" title="Terminal and nonterminal symbols#Nonterminal symbols" label="nonterminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="3271" end="3278" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3310" end="3326" title="positive integer" label="positive integer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3363" end="3373" title="Plus and minus signs#Minus sign" label="minus sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="6364" end="6370" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="7905" end="7917" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="8070" end="8077" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q954063" start="8771" end="8780" title="Terminal symbol" label="terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q954063" start="8929" end="8941" title="Terminal and nonterminal symbols" label="nonterminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="10635" end="10639" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="10789" end="10792" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="10827" end="10830" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="10868" end="10871" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778585" start="10886" end="10915" title="British Standards Institution" label="British Standards Institution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10950" end="10957" title="BS 6154" label="BS 6154"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="10973" end="10977" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q538050" start="10983" end="10996" title="augmented Backus–Naur form" label="augmented BNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715473" start="11036" end="11043" title="Meta-II" label="Meta-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188074" start="11092" end="11114" title="Phrase structure rules" label="Phrase structure rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="11170" end="11188" title="Regular expression" label="Regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311085" start="11191" end="11214" title="Spirit Parser Framework" label="Spirit Parser Framework"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71290" wikidata="Q138046" url="?curid=71290" title="England, England">
<text>England, England is a satirical postmodern novel by Julian Barnes, published and shortlisted for the Booker Prize in 1998. While researchers have also pointed out the novel&#x27;s characteristic dystopian and farcical elements, Barnes himself described the novel as a &quot;semi-farce&quot;.

&quot;England, England&quot; broaches the idea of replicating England in a theme park on the Isle of Wight. It calls into question ideas of national identity, invented traditions, the creations of myths and the authenticity of history and memory.

==Plot summary==

&quot;England, England&quot; is divided into three parts entitled &quot;England&quot;, &quot;England, England&quot; and &quot;&quot;. The first part focuses on the protagonist Martha Cochrane and her childhood memories. Growing up in the surrounding of the English countryside, her peaceful childhood is disrupted when her father leaves the family. Martha&#x27;s memories of her father are closely related to playing a Counties of England jigsaw puzzle with him.

The second part, &quot;England, England&quot;, is set in the near future. Martha is now in her forties and is employed by the entrepreneur Sir Jack Pitman for a megalomaniacal project: Sir Jack aims to turn the Isle of Wight into a gigantic theme park which contains everything that people, especially tourists, consider to be quintessentially English, selected according to what Sir Jack himself approves of. The theme park − called &quot;England, England&quot; − thus becomes a replica of England&#x27;s best known historical buildings, figures and sites. Popular English tourist attractions and icons of &quot;Englishness&quot; are crammed together to be easily accessible without having to travel the whole of &quot;real&quot; England.

While working on the set-up of the project, Martha starts an affair with one of her colleagues, Paul Harrison. They discover Sir Jack&#x27;s adult baby fetish and blackmail him with incriminating evidence when Sir Jack wants to dismiss Martha. She thus becomes CEO of the Island project, which turns out to be a highly popular tourist attraction. As a consequence of the huge success, &quot;England, England&quot; becomes an independent state and part of the European Union, while the real, &quot;Old England&quot; suffers a severe decline and increasingly falls into international irrelevance. After a major scandal in the theme park, however, Martha is eventually expelled from the island.

The third part of the novel, &quot;Anglia&quot;, is set decades later and depicts Martha who has returned to a village in Old England after many years of wandering abroad. The original nation has regressed into a vastly de-populated, agrarian and pre-industrial state without any international political influence, while &quot;England, England&quot; continues to prosper.

==Reception==
Upon release, &quot;England, England&quot; was generally well-received among British press. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; reported on reviews from several publications with a rating scale for the novel out of &quot;Love It&quot;, &quot;Pretty Good&quot;, &quot;Ok&quot;, and &quot;Rubbish&quot;: &quot;Sunday Times&quot; review under &quot;Love It&quot; and &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;, &quot;Guardian&quot;, &quot;Sunday Telegraph&quot;, &quot;Observer&quot;, and &quot;TLS&quot; reviews under &quot;Pretty Good&quot; and &quot;Times&quot;, &quot;Mail On Sunday&quot;, &quot;Spectator&quot;, and &quot;Literary Review&quot; review under &quot;Ok&quot;. Globally, Complete Review saying on the consensus &quot;No consensus -- most think the elegant first and third sections are excellent, but opinions vary widely regarding the large middle portion. Most think the three parts are not made to fit together well, and many don&#x27;t like Barnes&#x27; efforts at satire (though others find it hilarious)&quot;.

== Themes ==

Beyond the basic twin plots surrounding Pitman and Cochrane, &quot;England, England&quot; is a novel of ideas – mainly ideas that correspond to the criticism of society voiced by French philosophers of the second half of the 20th century. The seminal work in this respect is Jean Baudrillard&#x27;s (b. 1929) &quot;L&#x27;échange symbolique et la mort&quot; (1976), in which Baudrillard claims that in the course of the 20th century reality has been superseded by &quot;simulacra&quot;, by representations of the original which – in a world where technology has developed the means to replicate each and everything, including works of art (cf. Walter Benjamin&#x27;s 1936 essay &quot;Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit&quot;) and humans (by means of cloning) – acquire an independent and increasingly higher status than the original: because they are safer, easier to handle, more cost-effective, ubiquitous and thus more easily accessible, renewable, and predictable. (Cf. &quot;postmodernism&quot; and also US sociologist George Ritzer&#x27;s &quot;McDonaldization&quot; thesis of the 1990s, in particular his discussion of tourism).

This is exactly the purpose of Pitman&#x27;s final project: he wants his island to epitomise everything that is truly English. As a fervent patriot, he wants to put England in a nutshell for all the world to see and to cash in on England at the same time: he does not mind that the real thing takes a turn for the worse and eventually deteriorates.

The two strands of action – Martha Cochrane&#x27;s rise to fame and her subsequent downfall on the one hand and the launching of the project and its continuing success on the other – are intertwined when Martha applies for a job as Special Consultant in Pitman&#x27;s personal staff, which she gets. Martha has acquired all the professional skills necessary to succeed in our post-industrialist society, yet she has retained from her childhood at least some of her emotional and sentimental inclinations. Although she has become scheming, calculating and ruthless in her professional life, she is still able, at times, to listen to her heart – especially in her relationship with Paul Harrison, the &quot;Ideas Catcher&quot;. This ability of hers also helps her cope with old age back in rural Anglia.

By having his characters uninhibitedly subvert all of England&#x27;s long-standing customs and traditions, Barnes inadvertently also collects, registers and critically assesses these myths. For the sake of simplification, however, in the novel old English folklore, customs and legends, but also historical facts, are altered to fit the overall purpose of the Project. As the whole island is supposed to be fit for family consumption, history has to be rewritten and bowdlerised (to pay lip service to political correctness and avoid sexual harassment actions). As they are paying high prices, mainly in advance, the visitors to the island are supposed never to be faced with anything incomprehensible or illogical because that would spoil the fun for them and could even give rise to complaints.

The majority of attractions of England, England enjoy great popularity. For example, tourists are fascinated by the artificially recreated London &quot;pea soup&quot; fog or by a re-enactment of the Battle of Britain. Visitors also like watching the King, nicknamed &quot;Kingy-Thingy&quot; by his wife, who is still a Windsor; but after the death of Elizabeth II the strict line of succession has been abandoned. Both the King and his Queen enjoy having affairs with other people, and their escapades are regularly exposed by the tabloid papers. Pitman persuades the King to move permanently to the Isle of Wight, where his only duty is to appear regularly on the balcony of a half-size replica (but with double glazing) of Buckingham Palace for the paying visitors to see. Special script-writers have been hired for him and Queen
Denise for the rare instances where they are allowed to say something.

However, because the actors sooner or later over-identify with their roles, some of the other attractions go terribly wrong. Robin Hood and his band actually start hunting their own food in the Island&#x27;s heritage parks and old-English farmyards; the smugglers really start smuggling (cf. Adam Smith&#x27;s approval of smuggling); and the &quot;Samuel Johnson Dining Experience&quot; turns out to be a flop because Doctor Johnson is regularly rude to the guests who dine at his table.

== Notes ==
==References==
* Guignery, Vanessa (2006). &quot;The Fiction of Julian Barnes. A reader&#x27;s guide to essential criticism&quot;. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
* Henke, Christoph (2003). &quot;Remembering Selves, Constructing Selves: Memory and Identity in Contemporary British Fiction&quot;. &quot;Journal for the Study of British Cultures&quot; 10(1), 77–100.
* &quot;He&#x27;s turned towards Python&quot;. (30 August 1998). &quot;The Observer&quot;.
* Holmes, Frederick M. (2009). &quot;Julian Barnes&quot;. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
* Korte, Barbara (2002). &quot;Julian Barnes&#x27; &quot;England, England&quot;: Tourism as a Critique of Postmodernism&quot;. In H. Berghoff, C. Harvie, B. Korte, &amp; R. Schneider (Eds.), &quot;The Making of Modern Tourism: The Cultural History of the British Experience, 1600–2000&quot;, pp. 285–303. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
* Mergenthal, Silvia (2003). &quot;A Fast-Forward Version of England. Constructions of Englishness in Contemporary Fiction&quot;. Heidelberg: Winter.
* Nünning, Vera (2001). &quot;The Invention of Cultural Traditions: The Construction and Deconstruction of Englishness and Authenticity in Julian Barnes&#x27; &quot;England, England&quot;&quot;. 1–28. The article is available on Julian Barnes&#x27; website.

==External links==
*Julian Barnes website (&quot;England, England&quot;): https://web.archive.org/web/20060324151156/http://www.julianbarnes.com/bib/england.html, with extensive bibliography of translations and scholarly articles.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="22" end="31" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="32" end="42" title="postmodern" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q295431" start="52" end="65" title="Julian Barnes" label="Julian Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="101" end="113" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="195" end="204" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="209" end="217" title="farcical" label="farcical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="386" end="399" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="433" end="450" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350207" start="452" end="471" title="invented traditions" label="invented traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="1234" end="1247" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="1264" end="1274" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q181757" start="1905" end="1922" title="Paraphilic infantilism" label="adult baby fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2223" end="2237" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="2942" end="2961" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="3148" end="3160" title="Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="3210" end="3225" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3239" end="3247" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="3261" end="3277" title="Sunday Telegraph" label="Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="3291" end="3299" title="The Observer" label="Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="3317" end="3320" title="Times Literary Supplement" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3375" end="3380" title="The Times" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463285" start="3394" end="3408" title="Mail On Sunday" label="Mail On Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="3422" end="3431" title="The Spectator" label="Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q998383" start="3449" end="3464" title="Literary Review" label="Literary Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q182960" start="3510" end="3525" title="Complete Review" label="Complete Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="4145" end="4161" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412596" start="4340" end="4349" title="simulacrum" label="simulacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="4514" end="4529" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169425" start="4554" end="4618" title="The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" label="Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="4650" end="4657" title="cloning" label="cloning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754768" start="4781" end="4795" title="cost-effective" label="cost-effective"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="4880" end="4893" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q981936" start="4924" end="4937" title="George Ritzer" label="George Ritzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517005" start="4951" end="4966" title="McDonaldization" label="McDonaldization"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="5763" end="5789" title="post-industrial society" label="post-industrialist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="6373" end="6377" title="mythology" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="6446" end="6454" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="6456" end="6463" title="Convention (philosophy and social sciences)" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="6468" end="6474" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333546" start="6657" end="6668" title="Thomas Bowdler" label="bowdlerised"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="6692" end="6713" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="6724" end="6741" title="sexual harassment" label="sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="7187" end="7204" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="7307" end="7314" title="House of Windsor" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="7339" end="7351" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="7363" end="7381" title="line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="7519" end="7526" title="tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="7713" end="7730" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="8017" end="8027" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="8184" end="8194" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="8214" end="8223" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="8240" end="8254" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71291" wikidata="Q443291" url="?curid=71291" title="PLI">
<text>PLI or pli may refer to:

==Companies and organizations==
* Pascual Liner Inc., a transport company in the Philippines
* Perpetual Income &amp; Growth Investment Trust (LSE: PLI)
* Practising Law Institute
* Portland–Lewiston Interurban, a former railroad subsidiary in Maine, US

===Politics===
* Independent Liberal Party (Nicaragua) (&quot;Partido Liberal Independiente&quot;)
* Italian Liberal Party (&quot;Partito Liberale Italiano&quot;)
* Italian Liberal Party (1997)

==Science and technology==
* PL/I (Programming Language One), a programming language
* &quot;PLI&quot; (gene)
* Private Line Interface, part of ARPANET encryption devices
* Program Language Interface, in Verilog
** Verilog Procedural Interface or PLI 2

==Other uses==
* Performance-linked incentives
* Pragmatic language impairment
* &quot;&quot;, published by the Department of Philosophy, University of Warwick, UK
* Professional liability insurance
* Pali (ISO 639:pli), a language

==See also==
* Ply (disambiguation)
* &quot;Pli selon pli&quot; (Fold by fold), a 1960 classical piece by French composer Pierre Boulez</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q443291" start="0" end="3" title="PLI" label="PLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q443291" start="7" end="10" title="PLI" label="pli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386876" start="60" end="78" title="Pascual Liner Inc." label="Pascual Liner Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7169535" start="121" end="167" title="Perpetual Income &amp;amp; Growth Investment Trust" label="Perpetual Income &amp;amp; Growth Investment Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237367" start="181" end="205" title="Practising Law Institute" label="Practising Law Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234431" start="208" end="236" title="Portland–Lewiston Interurban" label="Portland–Lewiston Interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054647" start="298" end="335" title="Independent Liberal Party (Nicaragua)" label="Independent Liberal Party (Nicaragua)"/>
<link wikidata="Q508733" start="382" end="403" title="Italian Liberal Party" label="Italian Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076494" start="446" end="474" title="Italian Liberal Party (1997)" label="Italian Liberal Party (1997)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="505" end="509" title="PL/I" label="PL/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864955" start="563" end="585" title="PLI (gene)" label="&amp;quot;PLI&amp;quot; (gene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65621359" start="588" end="610" title="Private Line Interface" label="Private Line Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q827773" start="649" end="675" title="Program Language Interface" label="Program Language Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921343" start="691" end="719" title="Verilog Procedural Interface" label="Verilog Procedural Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168189" start="747" end="776" title="Performance-linked incentives" label="Performance-linked incentives"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847240" start="779" end="808" title="Pragmatic language impairment" label="Pragmatic language impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65076743" start="842" end="889" title="Department of Philosophy, University of Warwick" label="Department of Philosophy, University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q472902" start="896" end="928" title="Professional liability insurance" label="Professional liability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="931" end="935" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888116" start="978" end="998" title="Ply (disambiguation)" label="Ply (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q591542" start="1007" end="1020" title="Pli selon pli" label="Pli selon pli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71299" wikidata="Q150688" url="?curid=71299" title="Porfirio Díaz">
<text>José de la Cruz Porfirio Díaz Mori (; 15 September 1830 – 2 July 1915) was a Mexican politician and military general who was the dictator of Mexico from 1876 to 1911 seizing power in a military coup. He served on three separate occasions as President of Mexico, a total of over 30 years, this period has been called a &quot;de facto&quot; dictatorship. Díaz’s time in office is the longest in the country’s history.

Díaz was born to a Oaxacan family of modest means. He initially studied to become a priest but eventually switched his studies to law, and among his mentors was the future President of Mexico, Benito Juárez. Díaz increasingly became active in Liberal Party politics fighting with the Liberals to overthrow Santa Anna in the Plan of Ayutla, and also fighting on their side against the Conservative Party in the Reform War.

During the second French intervention in Mexico, Díaz fought in the Battle of Puebla in 1862, which temporarily repulsed the invaders, but was captured when the French besieged the city with reinforcements a year later. He escaped captivity and made his way to Oaxaca City, becoming political and military commander over all of Southern Mexico, and successfully resisting French efforts to advance upon the region, until Oaxaca City fell before a French siege in 1865. Díaz once more escaped captivity seven months later and rejoined the army of the Mexican Republic as the Second Mexican Empire disintegrated in the wake of the French departure. As Emperor Maximilian made a last stand in Querétaro, Díaz was in command of the forces that took back Mexico City in June 1867.

During the era of the Restored Republic, he subsequently revolted against presidents Benito Juárez and Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada on the principle of no re-election. Díaz succeeded in seizing power, ousting Lerdo in a coup in 1876, with the help of his political supporters, and was elected in 1877. In 1880, he stepped down and his political ally Manuel González was elected president, serving from 1880 to 1884. In 1884, Díaz abandoned the idea of no re-election and held office continuously until 1911.

A controversial figure in Mexican history, Díaz&#x27;s regime ended political instability and achieved growth after decades of economic stagnation. He and his allies comprised a group of technocrats known as &quot;científicos&quot; (&quot;scientists&quot;), whose economic policies benefited a circle of allies and foreign investors, helping &quot;hacendados&quot; consolidate large estates, often through violent means and legal abuse. These policies grew increasingly unpopular, resulting in civil repression and regional conflicts, as well as strikes and uprisings from labor and the peasantry, groups that did not share in Mexico&#x27;s growth.

Despite public statements in 1908 favoring a return to democracy and not running again for office, Díaz reversed himself and ran in the 1910 election. Díaz, then 80 years old, failed to institutionalize presidential succession, triggering a political crisis between the &quot;científicos&quot; and the followers of General Bernardo Reyes, allied with the military and peripheral regions of Mexico. After Díaz declared himself the winner for an eighth term, his electoral opponent, wealthy estate owner Francisco I. Madero, issued the Plan of San Luis Potosí calling for armed rebellion against Díaz, leading to the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution. In May 1911, after the Federal Army suffered several defeats against the forces supporting Madero, Díaz resigned in the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez and went into exile in Paris, where he died four years later.

== Early years ==

Porfirio Díaz was the sixth of seven children, baptized on 15 September 1830, in Oaxaca, Mexico, but his exact date of birth is unknown. 15 September is an important date in Mexican history, the eve of Miguel Hidalgo&#x27;s Grito de Dolores, which triggered the Mexican War of Independence in 1810. After Díaz became president, it would become customary to commemorate the &quot;Grito de Dolores&quot; on the eve of its anniversary.

Díaz&#x27;s father, José Díaz, was a Criollo (a Mexican of predominantly Spanish ancestry). José Díaz was an illiterate &quot;dependiente&quot;, or workman employed by a firm of merchants. In 1808, he had married Patrona Mori, whose mother was Mixtec, and whose father could trace his ancestry from Asturias.

Eventually, Jose de la Cruz had saved enough to start planting agave, and he opened a wayside inn in Oaxaca City to sell the products of his business. Jose de la Cruz died in 1833 of cholera when Díaz was only three years old. Patrona Mori began to manage the inn while raising her multiple children.

===Education===
The young Díaz was sent to primary school at the age of 6 and at one point was apprenticed to a carpenter. In 1845, at the age of fifteen, Díaz entered the &quot;Colegio Seminario Conciliar de Oaxaca&quot;, to study for the priesthood, sponsored by his godfather, José Agustín Domínguez, canon of and eventually Bishop of Oaxaca.

In 1846, the Mexican-American War broke out, and Díaz joined a Oaxacan military battalion. He practiced drills and attended lectures on tactics and strategy at the Institute of Arts and Sciences, but he never saw combat by the time the war ended in 1848.

By 1849, Díaz decided that he did not have a vocation to the priesthood and over the objections of his family decided to switch his studies to law. He gained the friendship of Don Marcos Pérez and Indigenous judge and professor of law at the Institute of Arts and Sciences through which Díaz also came to know his future colleague and president of Mexico, Benito Juárez who was at that time Governor of Oaxaca. Díaz passed his first examination in civil and canon law in 1853, at the age of 23.

===Plan of Ayutla===
In that same year however, a Conservative Party coup overthrew the Liberal government of Mariano Arista and raised Santa Anna for what would turn out to be his final dictatorship. Many prominent Liberals were expelled from the country, including Benito Juárez who found refuge in New Orleans. Don Marcos Pérez was arrested, but Díaz was able to communicate with him in prison with the help of Díaz&#x27;s brother .

In March 1854 the Plan of Ayutla broke out against Santa Anna led by the Liberal caudillo Juan Álvarez. After openly expressing support for Álvarez, Díaz was forced to flee Oaxaca and joined up with the Liberal partisan, Francisco Herrera. Authorities managed to attack and disperse Herrera&#x27;s troops, and Díaz once more had to flee, but the Ayutla movement was increasingly growing in strength. When the Liberals captured the city of Oaxaca, Díaz was made subprefect of Ixtlan. As sub-prefect Díaz helped in an ill-fated effort to put down a barracks revolt in Oaxaca, but the Ayutla movement ultimately triumphed by August 1855, when Santa Anna resigned, subsequently fleeing the nation.

==Reform War==
Juan Álvarez was elected president in October 1855 and his administration inaugurated what would come to be known as La Reforma an unprecedented attempt to pass through progressive constitutional reforms for Mexico culminating in the promulgation of the Constitution of 1857. Conservative Party resistance ended up triggering the outbreak of the Reform War in late 1857, at the same time when Díaz&#x27;s old mentor, Benito Juarez became president. The Conservatives set up their rival government in opposition to Juarez and the Liberals.

Díaz at this time was still in Oaxaca. He had previously accepted a commission as captain in the National Guard in December 1856. As the Reform War broke out, he maintained his command in Ixtlan, until the Conservative General Marcelino Cobos defeated the Liberal forces in Oaxaca in January 1858 Díaz was shot in the leg and would not recover for four months.

Díaz rejoined the war and was present when Cobos was defeated in Xalapa in February 1858. Diaz was subsequently named Governor and Military Commandant of the district of Tehuantepec. He was given command over 150 men and tasked with raising funds and receiving arms imported from the United States. Díaz chose the coast town of Juchitán de Zaragoza as his headquarters and exercised his command for two years. For winning repeated victories against the Conservatives he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel.

At the beginning of 1860, Díaz went to the aid of the Liberal general José María Díaz Ordaz in defending Oaxaca City against Cobos. The latter fell upon Díaz at Mitla on 20 January and defeated him, but Cobos retreated as Ordaz arrived with reinforcements, only for Ordaz to lose his life in the effort. His command over the forces of Oaxaca was passed down to Cristóbal Salinas. Díaz&#x27;s old mentor Marcos Perez fell into a quarrel with Salinas over his strategy, and Díaz failed to mediate. Juarez replaced Salinas with Vicente Rosas Landa, but the Liberals in Oaxaca were defeated at the hands of Cobos in November 1859. Díaz and Salinas found refuge in the mountains of Ixtlan.

While the fortune of the Liberals appeared to be at a low ebb at Oaxaca, the Conservatives as a whole at this point, were losing the war throughout the entire country, rapidly being drained of funds and resources. This helped Díaz and Salinas take back Oaxaca City by August 1860. Díaz was promoted to colonel and transferred from the National Guard to the regular army. He was present at the decisive Battle of Calpulalpan, which decisively ended the war in favor of the Liberals.

The victorious President Juarez reentered the capital in January 1861. Díaz also joined the national congress as a deputy from Ocotlan. The Conservative government had ceased to operate and its president, Miguel Miramon had fled the nation, but Conservative guerillas were still active in the countryside. In June 1861, the Conservative General Leonardo Márquez made a raid upon the capital and Díaz left his congressional seat to join Ignacio Mejía and Jesús González Ortega in once more defending the city. At Xalatlaco, Díaz without waiting for orders fell upon the forces of Marquez and won a notable victory. The Conservative forces were scattered and fled into the hills.

== Second French Intervention in Mexico ==
===Battle of Puebla===

At the opening of the Second French Intervention, in which France would attempt to overthrow the Mexican Republic and replace it with a client monarchy, Díaz had advanced to the rank of general and was in command of an infantry brigade. He was present at the first engagement of the war when he lost three-fourths of his men after the French attacked his brigade in the state of Veracruz. He retreated and joined up with the forces of Ignacio Zaragoza to continue harassing the enemy in the vicinity of Orizaba. Díaz and Zaragoza were forced to retreat before ending up in the city of Puebla by 3 May.

On the morning of 5 May, Díaz was in command of the &quot;Oaxaca battalion&quot;, guarding one of the roads leading into Puebla. Commander of the French forces, Charles de Lorencez ordered his troops to ascend a hill overlooking the town for a direct attack upon the forts of Loreto and Guadalupe. The ascent failed, and the French were repulsed by attacks of Mexican cavalry and infantry. During the battle, Díaz was not present at the hill but rather on the plains to the right of the Mexican front, where he repulsed another French attack. General Díaz pursued the French on their retreat to the Hacienda San Jose Renteria until recalled by Zaragoza.

The French attributed their defeat at Puebla to a lack of Conservative Party support. The Mexican monarchist expatriates who had given the idea of a Mexican monarchy to Napoleon III had also been working independently of any Mexican authority or political party. When the French invaders arrived in Mexico they found the Conservatives reluctant to help the French in establishing a monarchy and proclaiming their loyalty to the type of centralist republic they had once established in Mexico. However, the Conservatives were increasingly won over to collaborate with the French as a means of receiving the military aid that would return them to power. Díaz would once again have to fight many of the men he once faced in the Reform War such as Leonardo Márquez and the ex-Conservative president Miguel Miramon. Eventually, Porfirio Díaz as well would be personally asked to join the French, an offer which he would refuse.

===Second Battle of Puebla===

The French loss at the Battle of Puebla delayed the French march into the interior of Mexico by a year while Lorencez awaited reinforcements from France. Meanwhile, Díaz had been made military governor of the Veracruz district. Soon after the Battle of Puebla, General Zaragoza died of typhus and was replaced in his command by Jesús González Ortega.

A second French siege of Puebla was this time led by Élie Frédéric Forey with 26,000 men, against the 20,000 troops commanded by Ortega. The Mexican defenders would hold out for two months from 16 March to 17 May in 1863, until they ran out of provisions. Against the advice of Díaz who suggested an offense, Ortega simply maintained a policy of defense, until the city was stormed.

As street fighting broke out at the beginning of April, Díaz was in command of the most exposed quarter of the city made up of seventeen blocks, and he made his headquarters at the strongest point of the district which was a large building known as the &quot;meson de San Marcos&quot;. As Díaz planned his defenses, the French advanced with artillery and cannonballs began to crash through the building.

As French zouaves poured through the breaches, they were repulsed every time, and by the evening Díaz had regained complete control over his headquarters. Similar scenes occurred throughout the city and by April 25, Forey was contemplating suspending military operations until larger siege guns could arrive. Despite the ongoing stalemate, the French were reassured by the knowledge that the Mexicans were running out of food and supplies.

===First Escape===

Díaz, among other officers, managed to escape before even arriving in Veracruz. Díaz then headed for Mexico City to report to President Benito Juárez. The president prepared to depart Mexico City and commissioned Díaz to raise troops for the military district of Queretaro.

After capturing Mexico City in June 1863, Dubois de Saligny, Napoleon&#x27;s representative, appointed the members of a Mexican puppet government tasked with ratifying French intentions of establishing a monarchy. On 8 July 1863, this so-called &quot;Assembly of Notables&quot; resolved to change the nation into a monarchy, inviting Napoleon&#x27;s candidate, Maximilian of Habsburg, to become Emperor of Mexico.

In August, Forey and Saligny were recalled to France, and command over the French administration and the military of the conquered Mexican territories fell upon Marshal Bazaine, already present with the expedition, who officially assumed his post on 1 October 1862.

By October 1863 Díaz was placed in charge of the Eastern division of the Mexican military with command over 3000 men. General Díaz proceeded to sweep through the states of Queretaro, Michoacan, and Mexico, into Guerrero, proceeding to capture the rich silver-bearing town of Taxco on 29 October. Díaz then proceeded south toward Oaxaca recruiting more men on the way until his forces had swelled to 8000 troops. The state of Oaxaca would be his main base of operations for the rest of the war.

===Commander of the South===

Porfirio Díaz was now not only the military but also the political commander over all unoccupied territories south of Veracruz. As the French made encroachments, forces under the command of Díaz managed in the Battle of San Juan Bautista to back the capital of Tabasco, in February 1864. Díaz&#x27;s hold was consolidated enough that he began making excursions into Veracruz, and Minatitlán was taken by 28 March 1864.

Meanwhile, French control over central Mexico was rapidly expanding, and by March 1864 President Juárez had fled to Monterrey. Even as the northern military situation was dire, Díaz still maintained a solid hold over Guerrero, Oaxaca, Tabasco, and Chiapas. Meanwhile, Emperor Maximilian and his wife Charlotte, now Empress of Mexico finally arrived in Mexico City on 12 June 1864.

By December 1864, forces under Díaz had taken back the port of Acapulco. The French still struggled to make any inroads south against the forces commanded by Díaz and his lieutenant, the elderly Liberal caudillo, and former president of Mexico, Juan Álvarez. By the end of the year, the French were making scouting expeditions and building roads to make further attempts south.

Finally, in early 1865, a French expedition against Díaz&#x27;s base of operations in Oaxaca City set out under General Courtois d’Hurbal by way of Yanhuitlan. Díaz evacuated Oaxaca City and began to build barricades while commanding 6000 troops for the defense of the city. It was such an important republican stronghold, that Bazaine himself assumed command of the operation in person.

By February 1865, the French had surrounded the city with siege materials and 7000 troops. An assault was scheduled for 9 February. Due to mass desertions which left him outnumbered ten to one, Díaz chose not to fight, instead surrendering unconditionally. Díaz and his officers were taken prisoner and sent to Puebla.

===Second Escape===

After being kept seven months in Puebla, Díaz managed to escape from French confinement yet again and returned to Oaxaca. When news of this reached Paris, former commander of the French Intervention, Forey who had once fought against Díaz at Puebla, criticized Bazaine for not having had Díaz shot immediately upon capturing him.

Throughout late 1865, as the French were still unable to secure the entire country, Napoleon III was led to the conclusion that France had gotten involved in a military quagmire. At the opening of the French Chambers in January 1866, he announced his intention of withdrawing French troops from Mexico. The French considered Emperor Maximilian to be doomed due to a lack of popular support and began to pressure him to abdicate.

French authorities considered forming an alternative Liberal government, more accommodating, and less humiliating to French interests than Juárez, and Díaz was proposed but ultimately rejected as a candidate to lead such a government due to his loyalty to Juárez. The alternative government scheme never materialized, Maximilian refused to abdicate, and the French left him in Mexico to his fate, the last French troops departing by March 1867.

===Fall of the Second Mexican Empire===

When Díaz returned to Oaxaca in late 1865, he found his army of the South dispersed, and enemy forces controlling the Oaxacan coast along with Tehuantepec. By Spring, 1866, Díaz had gained some victories, aided by local uprisings. He began to focus on cutting off communications between Oaxaca City and Veracruz Díaz won the Battle of Miahuatlán on 3 October, and then advanced upon Oaxaca City which surrendered by 1 November 1866. Most of southern Mexico except for certain areas of Yucatan were now back in the hands of the Mexican Republic.

Díaz now concentrated his forces in northern Oaxaca, Vera Cruz, Mexico, and Puebla for future operations. On 9 March 1867, Díaz began the Third Battle of Puebla, subjecting the city to an attack much like the one he had once defended it from, taking the city by 2 April. Díaz spared the troops, but ordered the execution of the officers, taunting them by saying that “even though they had not lived like men, they could die like men”.

All that remained of the Empire were Querétaro City, where Maximilian and his leading generals were present, Mexico City, and Veracruz, the latter two which had, through Díaz’ capture of Puebla, been cut off from communications with each other. Leonardo Márquez had been sent from Queretaro to relieve the siege of Puebla, but he was too late. Díaz pursued Márquez and a skirmish ensued on 8 April, but Márquez got away and made it back to Mexico City

===Siege of Mexico City===

Díaz now focused on taking back Mexico City and succeeded in seizing Chapultepec Castle, Maximilian&#x27;s former residence, from its remaining imperial defenders, subsequently making it his headquarters. Díaz now had Mexico City surrounded with 28,000 troops yet being concerned with preventing damage to the capital he did not attack, and a seventy-day standoff ensued. Meanwhile, the Siege of Querétaro against Emperor Maximilian&#x27;s headquarters was ongoing and ultimately ended by May 14 in a Liberal victory.

Even after Maximilian had been captured, Leonardo Márquez was stalling for time at Mexico City, but hope for the imperialists was running out. Márquez&#x27; officer General O’Horan went to meet Díaz without authorization and offered to surrender the city, warning Díaz that Márquez was about the escape, but Díaz rejected the offer. On 20 June, the day after Maximilian had been executed, Díaz ordered a barrage of artillery against the positions of the enemy, and his observers suddenly began to notice white flags of surrender. The remaining imperialist officers were arrested and it was discovered that Márquez had disappeared the day before. Upon occupying the city Díaz ordered his military bakers to begin supplying the city&#x27;s starving population with food. He placed the city under martial law to prevent looting but also began a house-by-house search for any remaining imperialist officers. Márquez would never be found and he successfully escaped the country to find refuge in Cuba.

==Díaz Rebels Against the Government==
===Plan de la Noria===
Díaz declared himself a candidate for presidential elections scheduled for August 1867 Meanwhile, President Juarez proposed certain amendments to the constitution, and opponents of them began to coalesce around Diaz&#x27;s campaign. Juárez subsequently won the presidential election and began a new term scheduled to end on 30 November 1871.

Juárez controversially once more declared his candidacy for the 1871 elections which he won again against Díaz. Supporters of Díaz accused the government of engaging in election fraud, refused to recognize Juárez as the legitimate president, and prepared to take up arms. The subsequent insurrection would come to be known as the Plan de la Noria from the eponymous Oaxacan town in which the revolution was proclaimed on 8 November 1871.

Supporting revolts flared up across the country, but Juárez sustained himself against them until dying in office on 18 July 1872, the presidency passing on to the legal successor Sebastian Lerdo de Tejada.

President Lerdo offered an amnesty to the rebels in July 1872, an offer which many commanders subsequently took. Díaz himself refused it, and on 1 August, sent a letter to the president urging a modification of the amnesty terms and urging an extension for upcoming presidential elections in October ostensibly to allow rebellious regions to fully participate. The president was unyielding but so was Díaz, who urged Lerdo, in a later communication to also initiate constitutional reforms to prohibit presidential reelection.

As more rebel commanders yielded and the October elections came and went with Lerdo winning an overwhelming majority of votes, Díaz realized that his case was hopeless and finally submitted unconditionally before the amnesty in late October.

===Plan of Tuxtepec===

Díaz was eventually restored to official military rank in 1874 but retired to private life, and subsequently moved to the United States in December 1875, settling in Brownsville, Texas, across the border from Matamoros.

In early 1876, President Lerdo doomed his already unpopular presidency by announcing his plans for re-election scheduled for June of that year. On 15 January 1876, the Plan of Tuxtepec was proclaimed in Tuxtepec, Oaxaca. Porfirio Díaz was invited to assume leadership of the revolution.

As support for the Tuxtepec Plan rapidly spread throughout the country, Díaz returned to the country on March 22. At the town of Palo Blanco, he published a revised version of the Tuxtepec Plan. The plan was a miscellaneous set of critiques against the Lerdo Administration focusing on the claim that the president&#x27;s domination of the electoral process rendered free suffrage null. Díaz was declared the military leader of the revolution and Lerdo was declared deposed along with all governors who would not accede to the Tuxtepec Plan. The interim executive was first offered to the president of the supreme court and legal successor to the president José María Iglesias, but he rejected any role in the plan as a violation of the constitution. The revolutionaries now recognized Díaz as president.

As federalist forces under Mariano Escobedo approached Díaz, the latter was forced to take flight, intending to rejoin the revolution in his familiar base of Oaxaca. He crossed back into the United States, disguised himself as a Cuban doctor, and boarded a steamer bound for Veracruz. He was detected by military officers on board as the ship approached Veracruz. Although the ship was four miles from the coast, Díaz jumped overboard and attempted to swim ashore, but officers sent a boat after him and he was returned to the ship. The ship&#x27;s purserAlexander Coney a fellow Mason was sympathetic to Díaz and helped him escape again from which he hastened to Oaxaca, arriving by July.

On 15 November, as Díaz approached Mexico City from Oaxaca his troops clashed at Tecoac with those of the federalist General Alatorre. The outcome of the hours-long battle hung in the balance, but Díaz routed the Federalist troops after reinforcements arrived. Mexico City now lay open to Díaz&#x27;s forces, and President Lerdo de Tejada, realizing his cause was lost, evacuated the capital with military and civilian supporters, intending to flee the country.

After the elections of July, a rival revolt known as the Plan of Salamanca had flared up under Iglesias, alleging that Lerdo&#x27;s election had been fraudulent and that he was now the legitimate president of Mexico until legal elections could be held. Iglesias began to correspond with Díaz, hoping to unite their movements, but no agreement could be reached, even after the flight of Lerdo.

Díaz entered Mexico City on 29 November and finally ascended to the presidency. He organized his cabinet but now focused on crushing the movement of Iglesias and set out for the latter&#x27;s base in Guanajuato with 10,000 men.

Iglesias began to experience mass defections in both political and military support and after a series of failed negotiations with Díaz in December, decided upon giving up and departing the country. The victorious Díaz reentered the capital on 12 February 1877.

==Becoming president and first term, 1876–1880==

Díaz did not take formal control of the presidency until the beginning of 1877, putting in General Juan N. Méndez as provisional president, followed by new presidential elections in 1877 that gave Díaz the presidency. Ironically, one of his government&#x27;s first amendments to the liberal 1857 constitution was to prevent re-election.

Although the new election gave some air of legitimacy to Díaz&#x27;s government, the United States did not recognize the regime. It was not clear that Díaz would continue to prevail against supporters of ousted President Lerdo, who continued to challenge Díaz&#x27;s regime by insurrections, which ultimately failed. In addition, cross-border Apache attacks with raids on one side and sanctuary on the other were a sticking point. Mexico needed to meet several conditions before the U.S. would consider recognizing Díaz&#x27;s government, including payment of a debt to the U.S. and restraining the cross-border Apache raids. The U.S. emissary to Mexico, John W. Foster, had the duty to protect the interests of the U.S. first and foremost. Lerdo&#x27;s government had entered into negotiations with the U.S. over claims that each had against the other in previous conflicts. A joint U.S.-Mexico Claims Commission was established in 1868, in the wake of the fall of the French Empire. When Díaz seized power from Lerdo&#x27;s government, he inherited Lerdo&#x27;s negotiated settlement with the U.S. As Mexican historian Daniel Cosío Villegas put it, &quot;He Who Wins Pays.&quot; Díaz secured recognition by paying $300,000 to settle claims by the U.S. In 1878, the U.S. government recognized the Díaz regime, and former U.S. president and Civil War hero Ulysses S. Grant visited Mexico. &quot;See also: Lerdista Uprising of 1878&quot;

During his first term in office, Díaz developed a pragmatic and personalist approach to solving political conflicts. Although a political liberal who had stood with radical liberals in Oaxaca (&quot;rojos&quot;), he was not a liberal ideologue, preferring pragmatic approaches towards political issues. He was explicit about his pragmatism. He maintained control through generous patronage of political allies. In his first term, members of his political alliance were discontented that they had not sufficiently benefited from political and financial rewards. In general, he sought conciliation, but force could be an option. &quot;&#x27;Five fingers or five bullets,&#x27; as he was fond of saying.&quot; Although he was an authoritarian ruler, he maintained the structure of elections, so that there was the façade of liberal democracy. His administration became famous for the suppression of civil society and public revolts. One of the catchphrases of his later terms in office was the choice between &quot;pan o palo&quot;, (&quot;bread or the bludgeon&quot;)—that is, &quot;benevolence or repression&quot;. Díaz saw his task in his term as president to create internal order so that economic development could be possible. As a military hero and astute politician, Díaz&#x27;s eventual successful establishment of that peace (&quot;Paz Porfiriana&quot;) became &quot;one of [Díaz&#x27;s] principal achievements, and it became the main justification for successive re-elections after 1884.&quot;

Díaz and his advisers&#x27; pragmatism about the United States became the policy of &quot;defensive modernization&quot;, which attempted to make the best of Mexico&#x27;s weak position against its northern neighbor. Attributed to Díaz was the phrase &quot;so far from God, so close to the United States.&quot; Díaz&#x27;s advisers Matías Romero, Juárez&#x27;s emissary to the U.S., and Manuel Zamacona, a minister in Juárez&#x27;s government, advised a policy of &quot;peaceful invasion&quot; of U.S. capital to Mexico, with the expectation that it would then be &quot;naturalized&quot; in Mexico. In their view, such an arrangement would &quot;provide &#x27;all possible advantages of annexation without ...its inconveniences&#x27;.&quot; Díaz was won over to that viewpoint, which promoted Mexican economic development and gave the U.S. an outlet for its capital and allowed for its influence in Mexico. By 1880, Mexico was forging a new relationship with the U.S. as Díaz&#x27;s term of office was ending.

==González presidency, 1880–1884==

Díaz stepped down from the presidency, with his ally, General Manuel González, one of the trustworthy members of his political network (&quot;camarilla&quot;), elected president in a fully constitutional manner. This four-year period, often characterized as the &quot;González Interregnum&quot;, is sometimes seen as Díaz placing a puppet in the presidency, but González ruled in his own right and was viewed as a legitimate president free of the taint of coming to power by coup. During this period, Díaz briefly served as governor of his home state of Oaxaca. He also devoted time to his personal life, highlighted by his marriage to Carmen Romero Rubio, the devout 17-year-old daughter of Manuel Romero Rubio, a supporter of Lerdo. The couple honeymooned in the U.S., going to the World Cotton Centennial in New Orleans, then St. Louis, Washington, D.C., and New York. Accompanying them on their travels was Matías Romero and his U.S.-born wife. This working honeymoon allowed Díaz to forge personal connections with politicians and powerful businessmen with Romero&#x27;s friends, including former U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant. Romero then publicized the growing amity between the two countries and the safety of Mexico for U.S. investors.

President González was making room in his government for political networks not originally part of Díaz&#x27;s coalition, some of whom had been loyalists to Lerdo, including Evaristo Madero, whose grandson Francisco would challenge Díaz for the presidency in 1910. Important legislation changing rights to land and subsoil rights, and encouraging immigration and colonization by U.S. nationals was passed during the González presidency. The administration also extended lucrative railway concessions to U.S. investors. Despite those developments, the González administration met financial and political difficulties, with the later period bringing the government to bankruptcy and popular opposition. Díaz&#x27;s father-in-law Manuel Romero Rubio linked these issues to personal corruption by González. Despite Díaz&#x27;s previous protestations of &quot;no re-election&quot;, he ran for a second term in the 1884 elections.
During this period the Mexican underground political newspapers spread the new ironic slogan for the Porfirian Times, based on the slogan &quot;&quot;Sufragio Efectivo, No Reelección&quot; (Effective suffrage, no re-election) and changed it to its opposite, &quot;Sufragio Efectivo No, Reelección&quot;&quot; (Effective suffrage – No. Re-election!). Díaz had the constitution amended, first to allow two terms in office, and then to remove all restrictions on re-election. With these changes in place, Díaz was re-elected four more times by implausibly high margins, and on some occasions claimed to have won with either unanimous or near-unanimous support.

Over the next twenty-six years as president, Díaz created a systematic and methodical regime with a staunch military mindset. His first goal was to establish peace throughout Mexico. According to John A. Crow, Díaz &quot;set out to establish a good strong &quot;Paz Porfiriana&quot;, or Porfirian peace, of such scope and firmness that it would redeem the country in the eyes of the world for its sixty-five years of revolution and anarchy&quot; since independence. His second goal was outlined in his motto – &quot;little of politics and plenty of administration&quot;, meaning the replacement of open political conflict by a well-functioning government apparatus.

==Administration, 1884–1896==
To secure his power, Díaz engaged in various forms of co-optation and coercion. He constantly balanced between the private desires of different interest groups and playing off one interest against another. Following the González presidency, Díaz abandoned favoring his political group (&quot;camarilla&quot;) that brought him to power in 1876 in the Plan of Tuxtepec and selected ministers and other high officials from other factions. Those included those loyal to Juárez (Matías Romero) and Lerdo (Manuel Romero Rubio). Manuel Dublán was one of the few loyalists from the Plan of Tuxtepec that Díaz retained as a cabinet minister. As money flowed to the Mexican treasury from foreign investments, Díaz could buy off his loyalists from Tuxtepec. An important group supporting the regime were foreign investors, especially from the U.S. and Great Britain, as well as Germany and France. Díaz himself met with investors, binding him with this group in a personal rather than institutional fashion. The close cooperation between these foreign elements and the Díaz regime was a key nationalist issue in the Mexican Revolution.

To satisfy any competing domestic forces, such as mestizos and Indigenous leaders, Díaz gave them political positions or made them intermediates for foreign interests. He acted similarly to rural elites by not interfering with their wealth and haciendas. The urban middle classes in Mexico City were often in opposition to the government, but with the country&#x27;s economic prosperity and the expansion of the government, they had job opportunities in federal employment.

Covering both pro- and anti-clerical elements, Díaz was both the head of the Freemasons in Mexico and an important advisor to the Catholic bishops. Díaz proved to be a different kind of liberal than those of the past. He neither assaulted the Church nor protected it. With the influx of foreign investment and investors, Protestant missionaries arrived in Mexico, especially in Mexico&#x27;s north, and Protestants became an opposition force during the Mexican Revolution.

Although there was factionalism in the ruling group and some regions, Díaz suppressed the formation of opposition parties. Díaz dissolved all local authorities and all aspects of federalism that once existed. Not long after he became president, the governors of all federal states in Mexico answered directly to him. Those who held high positions of power, such as members of the legislature, were almost entirely his closest and most loyal friends. Congress was a rubber stamp for his policy plans and they were compliant in amending the 1857 Constitution to allow his re-election and extension of the presidential term. In his quest for political control, Díaz suppressed the press and controlled the court system. Díaz could intervene in political matters that threatened political stability, such as in the conflict in the northern Mexican state of Coahuila, placing José María Garza Galan in the governorship, undercutting wealthy estate owner Evaristo Madero, grandfather of Francisco I. Madero, who would challenge Díaz in the 1910 election. In another case, Díaz placed General Bernardo Reyes in the governorship of the state of Nuevo León, displacing existing political elites.

A key supporter of Díaz was former Lerdista Manuel Romero Rubio. According to historian Friedrich Katz, &quot;Romero Rubio was in many respects the architect of the Porfirian state.&quot; The relationship between the two was cemented when Díaz married Romero Rubio&#x27;s young daughter, Carmen. Romero Rubio and his supporters did not oppose the amendment to the Constitution to allow Díaz&#x27;s initial re-election and then indefinite re-election. One of Romero Rubio&#x27;s protégés was José Yves Limantour, who became the main financial adviser to the regime, stabilizing the country&#x27;s public finances. Limantour&#x27;s political network was dubbed the Científicos, &quot;the scientists&quot;, for their approach to governance. They sought reforms, such as decreasing corruption and increasing uniform application of laws. Díaz opposed any significant reform and continued to appoint governors and legislators and control the judiciary.

==Díaz and the military==

Díaz had not trained as a soldier, but made his career in the military during a tumultuous era of the U.S. invasion of Mexico, the age of General Antonio López de Santa Anna, the Reform War, and the Second French Intervention. A study of his presidential cabinets found that 83% of cabinet members old enough had fought in one or more of those conflicts. The tradition of post-independence Mexico of the military intervening and dominance over civilian politicians continued under Díaz. A closer study shows that over time prominent military figures increasingly played a much smaller role in his government. Civilian politicians loyal to him rather than his military comrades in arms came to dominate his cabinet. His regime was not a military dictatorship but rather had strong civilian allies. His replacement of military advisors for civilians signaled that it was civilians who held power in the political arena.

In office, Díaz was able to bring provincial military strongmen under the control of the central government, a process that took fifteen years. He provided opportunities for graft for military men he could not successfully confront on the battlefield. Ample salaries helped maintain the loyalty of others. Dangerous military leaders could be sent on foreign missions to study military training in Europe as well as nonmilitary issues, and thereby keep them out of Mexico. Officers who retired could receive half the salary of their highest rank. He created military zones that were not contiguous with state boundaries and rotated the commanders regularly, preventing them from becoming entrenched in any one zone, then extended the practice to lower-ranking officers. &quot;Díaz destroyed provincial militarism and developed in its stead a national army that sustained the central government.&quot;

A potential opposition force was the Mexican Federal Army. Troops were often men forced into military service and poorly paid. Díaz increased the size of the military budget and began modernizing the institution along the lines of European militaries, including the establishment in 1897 of separate military academies to train army and naval officers. High-rank officers were brought into government service. Díaz expanded the crack police force, the &quot;Rurales&quot;, who were under the control of the president. Díaz knew that he needed to suppress banditry; he expanded the &quot;Rurales&quot;, although it guarded chiefly only transport routes to major cities. Díaz thus worked to enhance his control over the military and the police. By the time of the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution in 1910, the Federal Army had an aging leadership, and disgruntled troops, and they were unable to control the revolutionary forces in active multiple locations.

== Relations with the Catholic Church ==

Unlike other Mexican liberals, Díaz was not anti-clerical, which became a political advantage when Díaz came to power. He won over conservatives, including the Catholic Church as an institution and social conservatives supporting it.

Radical liberalism was anti-clerical, seeing the privileges of the Church as challenging the idea of equality before the law and individual, rather than corporate identity. They considered the economic power of the Catholic Church a detriment to modernization and development. The Church as a major corporate landowner and &quot;de facto&quot; banking institution shaped investments to conservative landed estates more than industry, infrastructure building, or exports. In power after the ouster of Santa Anna, liberals implemented legal measures to curtail the power of the Church. The Juárez Law abolished special privileges (&quot;fueros&quot;) of ecclesiastics and the military, and the Lerdo law mandated disentailment of the property of corporations, specifically the Church and indigenous communities. The liberal constitution of 1857 removed the privileged position of the Catholic Church and opened the way to religious tolerance, considering religious expression as freedom of speech. Catholic priests were ineligible for elective office but could vote. Conservatives fought back in the Reform War, under the banner of &quot;religión y fueros&quot; (religion and privileges), but were defeated in 1861. Following the fall of the Second Empire in 1867, liberal president Benito Juárez and his successor Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada began implementing the anti-clerical measures of the constitution. Lerdo went further, extending the laws of the Reform to formalize the separation of Church and State; civil marriage as the only valid manner for State recognition; prohibitions of religious corporations to acquire real estate; elimination of religious elements from legal oaths; and the elimination of monastic vows as legally binding. Further prohibitions on the Church in 1874 included the exclusion of religion in public institutions; restriction of religious acts to church precincts; banning of religious garb in public except within churches; and prohibition of the ringing of church bells except to summon parishioners.

Díaz was a political pragmatist, seeing that the religious question re-opened political discord in Mexico. When he rebelled against Lerdo, Díaz had at least the tacit and perhaps even the explicit support of the Catholic Church. When he came to power in 1877, Díaz left the anti-clerical laws in place, but no longer enforced them as state policy, leaving that to individual Mexican states. This led to the re-emergence of the Church in many areas but in others a less full role. The Church flouted the Reform prohibitions against wearing clerical garb, there were open-air processions and Masses, and religious orders existed. The Church also recovered its property, sometimes through intermediaries, and tithes were again collected. The church regained its role in education, with the complicity of the Díaz regime which did not invest in public education. The Church also regained its role in running charitable institutions. Despite the increasingly visible role of the Catholic Church during the Porfiriato, the Vatican was unsuccessful in getting the reinstatement of a formal relationship between the papacy and Mexico, and the constitutional limitations of the Church as an institution remained as law.

This &quot;modus vivendi&quot; between Díaz and the Church had pragmatic and positive consequences. Díaz did not publicly renounce liberal anti-clericalism, meaning that the Constitution of 1857 remained in place, but he did not enforce its anti-clerical measures. Conflict could reignite, but it was to the advantage of both the Church and the Díaz government for this arrangement to continue. If the Church did counter Díaz, he had the constitutional means to rein in its power. The Church regained considerable economic power, with conservative intermediaries holding lands for it. The Church remained important in education and charitable institutions. Other important symbols of the normalization of religion in late 19th century Mexico included: the return of the Jesuits (expelled by the Bourbon Charles III in 1767); the crowning of the Virgin of Guadalupe as &quot;Queen of Mexico&quot;; and the support of Mexican bishops for Díaz&#x27;s work as a peacemaker. When the Mexican Revolution broke out in 1910, the Catholic Church was a staunch supporter of the Díaz regime.

== Economic liberalization under Díaz ==

Díaz sought to attract foreign investment to Mexico to aid the development of mining, agriculture, industry, and infrastructure. Political stability and the revision of laws, some dating to the colonial era, created a legal structure and an atmosphere where entrepreneurs felt secure in investing capital in Mexico. Railways, financed by foreign capital, transformed areas that were remote from markets into productive regions. The government mandate to survey land meant that secure title was established for investors. The process often obliterated claims of local communities that could not prove title or extinguished traditional usage of forests and other areas not under cultivation. The private survey companies bid for contracts from the Mexican government, with the companies acquiring one-third of the land measured, often prime land that was along proposed railway routes. Companies usually sold that land, often to foreigners who pursued large-scale cultivation of crops for export. Crops included coffee, rubber, henequen (for twine used in binding wheat), sugar, wheat, and vegetable production. Land only suitable for pasturage was enclosed with barbed wire, extinguishing traditional communal grazing of cattle, and premium cattle were imported. Owners of large landed estates (&quot;haciendas&quot;) often took the opportunity to sell to foreign investors as well. The result by the turn of the twentieth century was the transfer of a vast amount of Mexican land in all parts of the country into foreign hands, either individuals or land companies. Along the northern border with the U.S., American investors were prominent, but they owned land along both coasts, across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and central Mexico. Rural communities and small-scale farmers lost their holdings and were forced to be agricultural wage laborers or pursue or move. Conditions on haciendas were often harsh. Landlessness caused rural discontent and a major cause of peasant participation in the Mexican Revolution, seeking a reversal of the concentration of land ownership through land reform.

For elites, &quot;it was the golden age of Mexican economics, 3.2 dollars per peso. Mexico was compared economically to economic powers of the time such as France, Great Britain, and Germany. For some Mexicans, there was no money, and the doors were thrown open to those who had.&quot; Economic progress varied drastically from region to region. The north was defined by mining and ranching while the central valley became the home of large-scale farms for wheat and grain and large industrial centers.

One component of economic growth involved stimulating foreign investment in the Mexican mining sector. Through tax waivers and other incentives, investment and growth were effectively realized. The secluded southern Baja California region benefited from the establishment of an economic zone with the founding of the town of Santa Rosalía and the prosperous development of the El Boleo copper mine. This came about when Díaz granted a French mining company a 70-year tax waiver in return for its substantial investment in the project. Similarly, the city of Guanajuato realized substantial foreign investment in local silver mining ventures. The city subsequently experienced a period of prosperity, symbolized by the construction of numerous landmark buildings, most notably, the magnificent Juárez Theatre. By 1900 over 90% of the communal land of the Central Plateau had been sold off or expropriated, forcing 9.5 million peasants off the land and into the service of big landowners.

Because Díaz had created such an effective centralized government, he was able to concentrate decision-making and maintain control over the economic instability. This instability arose largely as a result of the dispossession of hundreds of thousands of peasants of their land. Communal indigenous landholdings were privatized, subdivided, and sold. The Porfiriato thus generated a stark contrast between rapid economic growth and sudden, severe impoverishment of the rural masses, a situation that was to explode in the Mexican Revolution of 1910.

During 1883–1894, laws were passed to give fewer and fewer people large amounts of land, which was taken away from people by bribing local judges to declare it vacant or unoccupied (&quot;terrenos baldíos&quot;). A friend of Díaz obtained 12 million acres of land in Baja California by bribing local judges. Those who opposed were killed or captured and sold as slaves to plantations. The manufacture of cheap alcohol increased prompting the number of bars in Mexico City to rise from 51 in 1864 to 1,400 in 1900. This caused the rate of death from alcoholism and alcohol-related accidents to rise to levels higher than anywhere else in the world.

One location effected by Diaz&#x27;s new laws and the privatization of communal indigenous lands was the town of Papantla. A town that became synonymous with Mexican vanilla the local Totonac revolted after locals were phased out the condueñazgo, a type of land distribution where individuals could co-own land and buy shares of property and its profits. These new laws stripped shareholders of ownership causing violence and rebellions against Mexican and indigenous elites. Diaz intervened numerous times stating, &quot;I have been informed...that the subdivision of Papantla&#x27;s lands is a very difficult thing, and that it is provoking much irritation.&quot; These laws ultimately ended traditional views of communal landownership and restructured the social hierarchy in the region.
== Cracks in the political system ==

Díaz has been characterized as a &quot;republican monarch and his regime a synthesis of pragmatic [colonial-era] Bourbon methods and Liberal republican ideals... As much by longevity as by design, Díaz came to embody the nation.&quot; Díaz did not plan well for the transition to a regime other than his own. As Díaz aged and continued to be re-elected, the question of presidential succession became more urgent. Political aspirants within his regime envisioned succeeding to the presidency and opponents began organizing in anticipation of Díaz&#x27;s exit.

In 1898, the Díaz regime faced several important issues, with the death of Matías Romero, Díaz&#x27;s long-time political adviser who had made great efforts to strengthen Mexico&#x27;s ties with the U.S. since the Juárez regime, and a major shift in U.S. foreign policy toward imperialism with its success in the Spanish–American War. Romero&#x27;s death created new dynamics amongst the three political groups that Díaz both relied upon and manipulated. Romero&#x27;s faction had strongly supported U.S. investment in Mexico, and was largely pro-American, but with Romero&#x27;s death, his faction declined in power. The other two factions were José Yves Limantour&#x27;s Científicos and Bernardo Reyes&#x27;s followers, the Reyistas. Limantour pursued a policy of offsetting U.S. influence by favoring European investment, especially British banking houses and entrepreneurs, such as Weetman Pearson. U.S. investment in Mexico remained robust and even grew, but the economic climate was more hostile to their interests and their support for the regime declined.

The U.S. had asserted that it had the preeminent role in the Western hemisphere, with U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt modifying the Monroe Doctrine via the Roosevelt Corollary, which declared that the U.S. could intervene in other countries&#x27; political affairs if the U.S. determined they were not well run. Díaz pushed back against this policy, saying that the security of the hemisphere was a collective enterprise of all its nations. There was a meeting of American states, in the second Pan-American Conference, which met in Mexico City from 22 October 1901 – 31 January 1902, and the U.S. backed off from its hard-line policy of interventionism, at least for the moment regarding Mexico.
In domestic politics, Bernardo Reyes became increasingly powerful, and Díaz appointed him Minister of War. The Mexican Federal Army was becoming increasingly ineffective. With wars being waged against the Yaqui in northwest Mexico and the Maya, Reyes requested and received increased funding to augment the number of men at arms. 
There was some open opposition to Díaz&#x27;s regime, with eccentric lawyer Nicolás Zúñiga y Miranda running against Díaz. Zúñiga lost every election but always claimed fraud and considered himself to be the legitimately elected president, but he did not mount a serious challenge to the regime. More importantly, as the 1910 election approached and Díaz stated he would not run for re-election, Limantour and Reyes vied against each other for favor.
On 17 February 1908, in an interview with the U.S. journalist James Creelman of &quot;Pearson&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, Díaz stated that Mexico was ready for democracy and elections and that he would retire and allow other candidates to compete for the presidency. Without hesitation, several opposition and pro-government groups united to find suitable candidates who would represent them in the upcoming presidential elections. Many liberals formed clubs supporting Bernardo Reyes, then the governor of Nuevo León, as a candidate. Even though Reyes never formally announced his candidacy, Díaz continued to perceive him as a threat and sent him on a mission to Europe, so that he was not in the country for the elections.

In 1909, Díaz and William Howard Taft, the then president of the United States, planned a summit in El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua, Mexico, a historic first meeting between a U.S. president and a Mexican president and also the first time an American president would cross the border into Mexico. Díaz requested the meeting to show U.S. support for his planned seventh run as president, and Taft agreed to protect the several billion dollars of American capital then invested in Mexico. After nearly 30 years with Díaz in power, U.S. businesses controlled &quot;nearly 90 percent of Mexico&#x27;s mineral resources, its national railroad, its oil industry and, increasingly, its land.&quot; Both sides agreed that the disputed Chamizal strip connecting El Paso to Ciudad Juárez would be considered neutral territory with no flags present during the summit, but the meeting focused attention on this territory and resulted in assassination threats and other serious security concerns. The Texas Rangers, 4,000 U.S. and Mexican troops, U.S. Secret Service agents, FBI agents, and U.S. marshals were all called in to provide security. An additional 250-man private security detail led by Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated scout, was hired by John Hays Hammond, a close friend of Taft from Yale and a former candidate for U.S. vice president in 1908 who, along with his business partner Burnham, held considerable mining interests in Mexico. On 16 October, the day of the summit, Burnham and Private C.R. Moore, a Texas Ranger, discovered a man holding a concealed palm pistol standing at the El Paso Chamber of Commerce building along the procession route. Burnham and Moore captured and disarmed the assassin within only a few feet of Díaz and Taft.

==1910 Centennial of Independence==
The year 1910 was important in Mexico&#x27;s history—the centennial of the revolt by Miguel Hidalgo, seen as the beginning of the Mexican War of independence. On the cover of the official program for the centennial, three figures are shown: Hidalgo, father of independence; Benito Juárez, with the label &quot;Lex&quot; (law); and Porfirio Díaz, with the label &quot;Pax&quot; (peace). Also on the cover are the emblem of Mexico and the cap of liberty. Díaz inaugurated the monument to Independence with its golden angel during the September centennial celebrations. Although Díaz and Juárez had been political rivals after the French Intervention, Díaz had done much to promote the legacy of his dead rival and had a large monument to Juárez built by the Alameda Park, which Díaz inaugurated during the centennial. A work published in 1910 details the day-by-day events of the September festivities.

==1910 election and ousting==
As groups began to settle on their presidential candidate, Díaz decided that he was not going to retire but rather allow Francisco I. Madero, an elite but democratically leaning reformer, to run against him. Although Madero, a landowner, was very similar to Díaz in his ideology, he hoped for other elites in Mexico to rule alongside the president. Ultimately, however, Díaz did not approve of Madero and had him jailed during the 1910 election.

The election went ahead. Madero had gathered much popular support, but when the government announced the official results, Díaz was proclaimed to have been re-elected almost unanimously, with Madero said to have attained a minuscule number of votes. This case of massive electoral fraud aroused widespread anger throughout the Mexican citizenry. Madero called for revolt against Díaz in the Plan of San Luis Potosí, and the violence to oust Díaz is now seen as the first phase of the Mexican Revolution. Rebellions in many different places stretched the Federal Army&#x27;s and the Rurales&#x27;s ability to suppress them all, revealing the regime&#x27;s weakness. Díaz was forced to resign from office on 25 May 1911 and left the country for Spain six days later, on 31 May 1911.

==Later days in exile and death==

Díaz kept his brother&#x27;s son Félix Díaz away from political or military power. He did, however, allow his nephew to enrich himself. It was only after Díaz went into exile in 1911 that his nephew became prominent in politics, as the embodiment of the old regime. Even so, Díaz&#x27;s assessment of his nephew proved astute since Félix never successfully led troops or garnered sustained support, and was forced into exile several times.

On 2 July 1915, Díaz died in exile in Paris, France. He was buried in the Cimetière du Montparnasse. His other children died as infants or young children. His widow Carmen and his son were allowed to return to Mexico.

==Personal life==
Díaz came from a devoutly Catholic family; his relative, José Agustín Domínguez y Diaz, was bishop of Oaxaca. Díaz had trained for the priesthood, and it seemed likely that was his career path. Oaxaca was a center of liberalism, and the founding of the Institute of Arts and Sciences, a secular institution, helped foster professional training for Oaxacan liberals, including Benito Juárez and Porfirio Díaz. When Díaz abandoned his ecclesiastical career for one in the military, his powerful uncle disowned him.

In Díaz&#x27;s personal life, it is clear that religion still mattered and that fierce anti-clericalism could have a high price. In 1870, his brother Félix, a fellow liberal, who was then governor of Oaxaca, had rigorously applied the anti-clerical laws of the Reform. In the rebellious and supposedly idolatrous town of Juchitán in Tehuantepec, Félix Díaz had &quot;roped the image of the patron saint of Juchitán … to his horse and dragged it away, returning the saint days later with its feet cut off&quot;. When Félix had to flee Oaxaca City in 1871 following Porfirio&#x27;s failed coup against Juárez, Félix ended up in Juchitán, where the villagers killed him, doing to his body even worse than he did to their saint. Having lost a brother to the fury of religious peasants, Díaz had a cautionary tale about the dangers of enforcing anti-clericalism. Even so, it is clear that Díaz wanted to remain in good standing with the Church.

Díaz married his niece Delfina Ortega Díaz (1845–1880), the daughter of his sister, Manuela Josefa Díaz Mori (1824–1856). Díaz and she would have seven children, with Delfina dying due to complications of her seventh delivery. Following her death, he wrote a private letter to Church officials renouncing the Laws of the Reform, which allowed his wife to be buried with Catholic rites in sacred ground.

Díaz had a relationship with a soldadera, Rafaela Quiñones, during the war of the French Intervention, which resulted in the birth of (1867–1962), whom he recognized. Amada went to live in Díaz&#x27;s home with his wife Delfina. Amada married Ignacio de la Torre y Mier, but the couple had no children. De la Torre was said to have been present at the 1901 Dance of the Forty-One, a gathering of gay men and cross-dressers that was raided by police. The report that de la Torre was there was neither confirmed nor denied, but the dance was a huge scandal at the time, satirized by caricaturist José Guadalupe Posada.

Díaz remarried in 1881, to Carmen Romero Rubio, the pious 17-year-old daughter of his most important advisor, Manuel Romero Rubio. Oaxaca cleric Father Eulogio Gillow y Zavala gave his blessing. Gillow was later appointed archbishop of Oaxaca. Doña Carmen is credited with bringing Díaz into closer reconciliation with the Church, but Díaz was already inclined in that direction. The marriage produced no children, but Díaz&#x27;s surviving children lived with the couple until adulthood.

In 1938, the 430-piece collection of arms of the late General Porfirio Díaz was donated to the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston, Ontario.

Although Díaz is criticized on many grounds, he did not create a family dynasty. His only son to survive to adulthood, , known as &quot;Porfirito&quot;, trained to be an officer at the military academy. He graduated as a military engineer and never served in combat. He and his family went into European exile after Díaz&#x27;s resignation. They were allowed to return to Mexico during the amnesty of Lázaro Cárdenas.
== Legacy ==

The legacy of Díaz has undergone revision since the 1990s. In Díaz&#x27;s lifetime before his ouster, there was adulatory literature, which has been named &quot;Porfirismo&quot;. He maintained an international reputation as the statesman that had finally brought stability to Mexico.

The vast literature that characterizes him as a tyrant and dictator has its origins in the late period of Díaz&#x27;s rule and has continued to shape Díaz&#x27;s historical image. In recent years, however, there has been an effort to rehabilitate Díaz&#x27;s figure, most prominently by television personality and historian Enrique Krauze, in what has been termed &quot;Neo-Porfirismo&quot;. As Mexico pursued a neoliberal path under President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the policies of Díaz that opened Mexico up to foreign investment fit with the turn of the Institutional Revolutionary Party toward privatization of state companies and market-oriented reforms. Díaz was characterized as a far more benign figure for these revisionists.

Díaz is usually credited with the saying, &quot;¡Pobre México! ¡Tan lejos de Dios y tan cerca de los Estados Unidos!&quot; (&quot;Poor Mexico, so far from God and so close to the United States!&quot;).

Partly due to Díaz&#x27;s lengthy tenure, the current Mexican constitution limits a president to a single six-year term with no possibility of re-election, even if it is nonconsecutive. Additionally, no one who holds the post, even on a caretaker basis, is allowed to run or serve again. This provision is so entrenched that it remained in place even after legislators were allowed to run for a second consecutive term.

There have been several attempts to return Díaz&#x27;s remains to Mexico since the 1920s. The most recent movement started in 2014 in Oaxaca by the &quot;Comisión Especial de los Festejos del Centenario Luctuoso de Porfirio Díaz Mori&quot;, which is headed by Francisco Jiménez. According to some, the fact that Díaz&#x27;s remains have not been returned to Mexico &quot;symbolizes the failure of the post-Revolutionary state to come to terms with the legacy of the Díaz regime.&quot;

== Honors ==

List of notable foreign awards awarded to President Díaz:

== See also ==

* List of heads of state of Mexico
* Mexican Revolution
* 1884 in Mexico
* Porfirionism
* Porfiriato
* Emiliano Zapata
* History of Mexico

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Porfiriato===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Historiography ===
* 
== External links ==
* Historical Text Archive: Díaz, Porfirio (1830–1915)
* 
* The New Student&#x27;s Reference Work/Diaz, Porfirio
* Creelman&#x27;s interview in Spanish
* Creelman&#x27;s interview in English</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="0" end="34" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="José de la Cruz Porfirio Díaz Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531650" start="100" end="116" title="General (Mexico)" label="military general"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="129" end="137" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="141" end="165" title="Porfiriato" label="Mexico from 1876 to 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200933" start="185" end="198" title="Plan of Tuxtepec" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="241" end="260" title="President of Mexico" label="President of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="339" end="351" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="436" end="442" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="610" end="623" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366487" start="660" end="673" title="Liberal Party (Mexico)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="723" end="733" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q538766" start="741" end="755" title="Plan of Ayutla" label="Plan of Ayutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984928" start="801" end="819" title="Conservative Party (Mexico)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="827" end="837" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="851" end="887" title="second French intervention in Mexico" label="second French intervention in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061228" start="908" end="924" title="Battle of Puebla" label="Battle of Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277366" start="1008" end="1025" title="Siege of Puebla (1863)" label="besieged the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q131429" start="1101" end="1112" title="Oaxaca City" label="Oaxaca City"/>
<link wikidata="Q371334" start="1414" end="1435" title="Second Mexican Empire" label="Second Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="1490" end="1508" title="Maximilian of Mexico" label="Emperor Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173121" start="1530" end="1539" title="Querétaro City" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788450" start="1639" end="1656" title="Restored Republic (Mexico)" label="Restored Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="1702" end="1715" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q316210" start="1720" end="1745" title="Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada" label="Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200933" start="1815" end="1846" title="Plan of Tuxtepec" label="ousting Lerdo in a coup in 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828122" start="1899" end="1914" title="1877 Mexican presidential election" label="elected in 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q380975" start="1964" end="1979" title="Manuel González Flores" label="Manuel González"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="2310" end="2320" title="technocrat" label="technocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091796" start="2337" end="2347" title="científico" label="científico"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="2471" end="2481" title="Hacienda" label="hacendados"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828154" start="2909" end="2922" title="1910 Mexican general election" label="1910 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="3096" end="3110" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="3275" end="3294" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q263249" start="3307" end="3330" title="Plan of San Luis Potosí" label="Plan of San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="3404" end="3422" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="3447" end="3459" title="Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298181" start="3544" end="3567" title="Treaty of Ciudad Juárez" label="Treaty of Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131429" start="3731" end="3745" title="Oaxaca City" label="Oaxaca, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="3852" end="3866" title="Miguel Hidalgo" label="Miguel Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145411" start="3874" end="3890" title="Grito de Dolores" label="Grito de Dolores"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="3912" end="3939" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="4121" end="4128" title="Criollo people" label="Criollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623215" start="4328" end="4334" title="Mixtec" label="Mixtec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="4383" end="4391" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="4457" end="4462" title="agave" label="agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q131429" start="4495" end="4506" title="Oaxaca City" label="Oaxaca City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="5056" end="5076" title="Mexican-American War" label="Mexican-American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796927" start="5207" end="5237" title="Benito Juárez Autonomous University of Oaxaca" label="Institute of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796927" start="5541" end="5571" title="Benito Juárez Autonomous University of Oaxaca" label="Institute of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="5655" end="5668" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984928" start="5845" end="5863" title="Conservative Party (Mexico)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366487" start="5883" end="5890" title="Liberal Party (Mexico)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q431576" start="5905" end="5919" title="Mariano Arista" label="Mariano Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q538766" start="6250" end="6264" title="Plan of Ayutla" label="Plan of Ayutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="6313" end="6321" title="caudillo" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q460776" start="6322" end="6334" title="Juan Álvarez" label="Juan Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q394917" start="6707" end="6713" title="Ixtlán District" label="Ixtlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258685" start="7059" end="7069" title="La Reforma" label="La Reforma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009194" start="7196" end="7216" title="Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1857" label="Constitution of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984928" start="7218" end="7236" title="Conservative Party (Mexico)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="7288" end="7298" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="7359" end="7372" title="Benito Juarez" label="Benito Juarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q221051" start="7909" end="7915" title="Xalapa" label="Xalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q629479" start="8014" end="8025" title="Tehuantepec" label="Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710837" start="8172" end="8192" title="Juchitán de Zaragoza" label="Juchitán de Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366027" start="8524" end="8529" title="Mitla" label="Mitla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591315" start="9451" end="9472" title="Battle of Calpulalpan" label="Battle of Calpulalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893678" start="9659" end="9666" title="Ocotlán de Morelos" label="Ocotlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q449439" start="9737" end="9751" title="Miguel Miramon" label="Miguel Miramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q282732" start="9877" end="9893" title="Leonardo Márquez" label="Leonardo Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9968" end="9981" title=":es:Ignacio Mejía" label="Ignacio Mejía"/>
<link wikidata="Q520298" start="9986" end="10007" title="Jesús González Ortega" label="Jesús González Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019415" start="10044" end="10053" title="Xalatlaco" label="Xalatlaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443295" start="10375" end="10391" title="Second Federal Republic of Mexico" label="Mexican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="10657" end="10665" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q558759" start="10713" end="10729" title="Ignacio Zaragoza" label="Ignacio Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q993904" start="10781" end="10788" title="Orizaba" label="Orizaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="10863" end="10869" title="Puebla (city)" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q369781" start="11042" end="11061" title="Charles de Lorencez" label="Charles de Lorencez"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984928" start="11594" end="11612" title="Conservative Party (Mexico)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="11705" end="11717" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062192" start="11972" end="11991" title="Centralist Republic of Mexico" label="centralist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="12261" end="12271" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q282732" start="12280" end="12296" title="Leonardo Márquez" label="Leonardo Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q449439" start="12331" end="12345" title="Miguel Miramon" label="Miguel Miramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q520298" start="12819" end="12840" title="Jesús González Ortega" label="Jesús González Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277366" start="12859" end="12874" title="Siege of Puebla (1863)" label="siege of Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q82992" start="12896" end="12915" title="Élie Frédéric Forey" label="Élie Frédéric Forey"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="13230" end="13245" title="Urban warfare" label="street fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638325" start="13642" end="13648" title="zouave" label="zouave"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="14229" end="14242" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="14356" end="14365" title="Queretaro" label="Queretaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="14496" end="14513" title="puppet government" label="puppet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="14729" end="14751" title="Maximilian of Mexico" label="Maximilian of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q81518" start="14944" end="14959" title="François Achille Bazaine" label="Marshal Bazaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="15222" end="15231" title="Queretaro" label="Queretaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="15233" end="15242" title="Michoacan" label="Michoacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="15248" end="15254" title="State of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="15261" end="15269" title="Guerrero" label="Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q990095" start="15325" end="15330" title="Taxco" label="Taxco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="15379" end="15385" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872282" start="15785" end="15812" title="Battle of San Juan Bautista" label="Battle of San Juan Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="15836" end="15843" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q991006" start="15955" end="15965" title="Minatitlán, Veracruz" label="Minatitlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="16111" end="16120" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="16212" end="16220" title="Guerrero" label="Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="16222" end="16228" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="16230" end="16237" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="16243" end="16250" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="16440" end="16448" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q460776" start="16622" end="16634" title="Juan Álvarez" label="Juan Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967255" start="16904" end="16914" title="Santo Domingo Yanhuitlán" label="Yanhuitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="17456" end="17462" title="Puebla (city)" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="17901" end="17913" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997799" start="18018" end="18033" title="Corps législatif" label="French Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q629479" start="18877" end="18888" title="Tehuantepec" label="Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871728" start="19059" end="19079" title="Battle of Miahuatlán" label="Battle of Miahuatlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784782" start="19418" end="19440" title="Third Battle of Puebla" label="Third Battle of Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q173121" start="19753" end="19767" title="Querétaro City" label="Querétaro City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="20266" end="20284" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Chapultepec Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486010" start="20584" end="20602" title="Siege of Querétaro" label="Siege of Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q282732" start="20757" end="20773" title="Leonardo Márquez" label="Leonardo Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818324" start="20881" end="20896" title="Tomás O&amp;#x27;Horán y Escudero" label="General O’Horan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200916" start="22449" end="22465" title="Plan de la Noria" label="Plan de la Noria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="22485" end="22491" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q316210" start="22737" end="22762" title="Sebastian Lerdo de Tejada" label="Sebastian Lerdo de Tejada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963359" start="23983" end="23991" title="San Juan Bautista Tuxtepec" label="Tuxtepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="23993" end="23999" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196814" start="24725" end="24744" title="José María Iglesias" label="José María Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366515" start="24901" end="24917" title="Mariano Escobedo" label="Mariano Escobedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="25149" end="25157" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307407" start="25423" end="25429" title="purser" label="purser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918442" start="25635" end="25652" title="Battle of Tecoac" label="clashed at Tecoac"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25682" end="25698" title=":es:Ignacio R. Alatorre" label="General Alatorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="26622" end="26632" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q519806" start="27063" end="27077" title="Juan N. Méndez" label="Juan N. Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q703642" start="27957" end="27971" title="John W. Foster" label="John W. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114669" start="28186" end="28215" title="American-Mexican Claims Commission" label="U.S.-Mexico Claims Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429592" start="28423" end="28444" title="Daniel Cosío Villegas" label="Daniel Cosío Villegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="28658" end="28674" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974080" start="28707" end="28732" title="Lerdista Uprising of 1878" label="Lerdista Uprising of 1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367183" start="30574" end="30587" title="Matías Romero" label="Matías Romero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30629" end="30644" title=":es:Manuel María de Zamacona y Murphy" label="Manuel Zamacona"/>
<link wikidata="Q380975" start="31351" end="31366" title="Manuel González Flores" label="Manuel González"/>
<link wikidata="Q275278" start="31925" end="31944" title="Carmen Romero Rubio" label="Carmen Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234979" start="31981" end="32000" title="Manuel Romero Rubio" label="Manuel Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035588" start="32073" end="32096" title="World Cotton Centennial" label="World Cotton Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367183" start="32200" end="32213" title="Matías Romero" label="Matías Romero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32711" end="32726" title=":es:Evaristo Madero Elizondo" label="Evaristo Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="32743" end="32752" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367183" start="35292" end="35305" title="Matías Romero" label="Matías Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234979" start="35318" end="35337" title="Manuel Romero Rubio" label="Manuel Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009194" start="37432" end="37449" title="Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1857" label="1857 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293242" start="37764" end="37786" title="José María Garza Galán" label="José María Garza Galan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="37874" end="37893" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="37979" end="37993" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="38030" end="38040" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234979" start="38125" end="38144" title="Manuel Romero Rubio" label="Manuel Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q84848" start="38169" end="38183" title="Friedrich Katz" label="Friedrich Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q684289" start="38572" end="38591" title="José Yves Limantour" label="José Yves Limantour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091796" start="38744" end="38754" title="Científico" label="Científico"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="39202" end="39229" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="39235" end="39245" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="39255" end="39281" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="Second French Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448148" start="41334" end="41341" title="Rurales" label="Rurales"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="42442" end="42450" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258685" start="42701" end="42711" title="Juárez Law" label="Juárez Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q123550" start="42742" end="42760" title="Fuero" label="&amp;quot;fueros&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022042" start="42805" end="42814" title="Lerdo law" label="Lerdo law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="43211" end="43221" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="43589" end="43619" title="Separation of church and state" label="separation of Church and State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="45149" end="45159" title="Porfiriato" label="Porfiriato"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="46130" end="46137" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46139" end="46147" title="Suppression of the Society of Jesus#Spanish Empire suppression of 1767" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="46155" end="46162" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="46163" end="46174" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q31877" start="46205" end="46224" title="Virgin of Guadalupe" label="Virgin of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q136120" start="47510" end="47518" title="henequen" label="henequen"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="47784" end="47792" title="hacienda" label="hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q392250" start="48176" end="48198" title="Isthmus of Tehuantepec" label="Isthmus of Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="48478" end="48496" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693764" start="48564" end="48575" title="Land reform in Mexico" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951646" start="49298" end="49313" title="Baja California Territory" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640231" start="49407" end="49420" title="Santa Rosalía, Baja California Sur" label="Santa Rosalía"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350829" start="49459" end="49467" title="El Boleo" label="El Boleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61306" start="49640" end="49650" title="Guanajuato City" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50946" end="51003" title="Yaqui#1820s–1920s: Yaqui Wars and enslavement" label="were killed or captured and sold as slaves to plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="52972" end="52992" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091796" start="53332" end="53342" title="Científico" label="Científico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="53348" end="53362" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612753" start="53545" end="53560" title="Weetman Pearson" label="Weetman Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="53825" end="53843" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="53858" end="53873" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143231" start="53882" end="53901" title="Roosevelt Corollary" label="Roosevelt Corollary"/>
<link wikidata="Q122119" start="54221" end="54244" title="Pan-American Conference" label="Pan-American Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q428575" start="54628" end="54633" title="Yaqui" label="Yaqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q772814" start="54662" end="54666" title="Caste War of Yucatan" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843984" start="54830" end="54854" title="Nicolás Zúñiga y Miranda" label="Nicolás Zúñiga y Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131924" start="55267" end="55281" title="James Creelman" label="James Creelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158311" start="55291" end="55314" title="Pearson&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Pearson&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="55707" end="55717" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="55945" end="55964" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948525" start="56667" end="56681" title="Chamizal dispute" label="Chamizal strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="56928" end="56941" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q458036" start="57125" end="57150" title="Frederick Russell Burnham" label="Frederick Russell Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181717" start="57187" end="57204" title="John Hays Hammond" label="John Hays Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810098" start="57509" end="57520" title="Protector Palm Pistol" label="palm pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="57818" end="57832" title="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla" label="Miguel Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="57863" end="57890" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q928541" start="58207" end="58231" title="Angel of Independence" label="monument to Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020213" start="58457" end="58475" title="Benito Juárez Hemicycle" label="monument to Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355305" start="58489" end="58501" title="Alameda Central" label="Alameda Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="58786" end="58805" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828154" start="59096" end="59109" title="1910 Mexican general election" label="1910 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q263249" start="59503" end="59526" title="Plan of San Luis Potosí" label="Plan of San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="59596" end="59614" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394953" start="59962" end="59972" title="Félix Díaz (politician)" label="Félix Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q272208" start="60444" end="60469" title="Montparnasse Cemetery" label="Cimetière du Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q64733700" start="60664" end="60693" title="José Agustín Domínguez y Diaz" label="José Agustín Domínguez y Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253683" start="62085" end="62104" title="Delfina Ortega Díaz" label="Delfina Ortega Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298558" start="62497" end="62506" title="soldadera" label="soldadera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62508" end="62524" title="Rafaela Quiñones" label="Rafaela Quiñones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332780" start="62709" end="62735" title="Ignacio de la Torre y Mier" label="Ignacio de la Torre y Mier"/>
<link wikidata="Q924917" start="62823" end="62845" title="Dance of the Forty-One" label="Dance of the Forty-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="63060" end="63081" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q275278" start="63111" end="63130" title="Carmen Romero Rubio" label="Carmen Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234979" start="63194" end="63213" title="Manuel Romero Rubio" label="Manuel Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409455" start="63236" end="63259" title="Eulogio Gillow y Zavalza" label="Eulogio Gillow y Zavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="63669" end="63701" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="63705" end="63722" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="64126" end="64141" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124217327" start="64318" end="64328" title="Porfirionism" label="Porfirismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="64729" end="64751" title="television personality" label="television personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="64756" end="64765" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q528185" start="64766" end="64780" title="Enrique Krauze" label="Enrique Krauze"/>
<link wikidata="Q124217327" start="64812" end="64826" title="Porfirionism" label="Neo-Porfirismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="64854" end="64864" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="64886" end="64911" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="65003" end="65036" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="65431" end="65459" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="current Mexican constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8310435" start="66383" end="66415" title="List of heads of state of Mexico" label="List of heads of state of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="66418" end="66436" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556036" start="66439" end="66453" title="1884 in Mexico" label="1884 in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q124217327" start="66456" end="66468" title="Porfirionism" label="Porfirionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="66471" end="66481" title="Porfiriato" label="Porfiriato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="66484" end="66499" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q212763" start="66502" end="66519" title="History of Mexico" label="History of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66772" end="66824" title=":s:The New Student&amp;#x27;s Reference Work/Diaz, Porfirio" label="The New Student&amp;#x27;s Reference Work/Diaz, Porfirio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71301" wikidata="Q550" url="?curid=71301" title="Champs-Élysées">
<text>The Avenue des Champs-Élysées (, ; ) is an avenue in the 8th arrondissement of Paris, France, long and wide, running between the Place de la Concorde in the east and the Place Charles de Gaulle in the west, where the Arc de Triomphe is located. It is known for its theatres, cafés, and luxury shops; as the finish of the Tour de France cycling race; and for its annual Bastille Day military parade. 

The name is French for the Elysian Fields, the place for dead heroes in Greek mythology. It has been described as the &quot;most beautiful avenue in the whole world&quot;.

==Description==
The avenue runs for through the 8th arrondissement in northwestern Paris, from the Place de la Concorde in the east, with the Obelisk of Luxor, to the Place Charles de Gaulle (formerly the &quot;Place de l&#x27;Étoile&quot;) in the west, location of the Arc de Triomphe. The Champs-Élysées forms part of the &quot;Axe historique&quot;.

The lower part of the Champs-Élysées, from the Place de la Concorde to the Rond-Point, runs through the Jardin des Champs-Élysées, a park which contains the Grand Palais, the , the Théâtre Marigny, and several restaurants, gardens, and monuments. The Élysée Palace on the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré—official residence of the President of the French Republic—borders the park, but is not on the Avenue itself. The Champs-Élysées ends at the Arc de Triomphe, built to honor the victories of Napoléon Bonaparte.

==History==
Until the reign of Louis XIV, the land where the Champs-Élysées runs today was largely occupied by fields and kitchen gardens. The Champs-Élysées and its gardens were originally laid out in 1667 by André Le Nôtre as an extension of the Tuileries Garden, the gardens of the Tuileries Palace, which had been built in 1564, and which Le Nôtre had rebuilt in his own formal style for Louis XIV in 1664. Le Nôtre planned a wide promenade between the palace and the modern Rond Point, lined with two rows of elm trees on either side, and flowerbeds in the symmetrical style of the French formal garden. The new boulevard was called the &quot;Grand Cours&quot;, or &quot;Grand Promenade&quot;. It did not take the name of Champs-Élysées until 1709.

In 1710 the avenue was extended beyond the Rond-Point as far as the modern Place d&#x27;Étoile. In 1765 the garden was remade in the Le Nôtre style by Abel François Poisson, the marquis de Marigny, brother of the Madame de Pompadour and Director-General of the King&#x27;s Buildings. Marigny extended the avenue again in 1774 as far as the modern Porte Maillot.

Following the French Revolution, two equestrian statues, made in 1745 by Nicolas and Guillaume Coustou, were transferred from the former royal palace at Marly and placed at the beginning of the boulevard and park. After the downfall of Napoleon and the restoration of the French monarchy, the trees had to be replanted, because the occupation armies of the Russians, British, and Prussians during the Hundred Days had camped in the park and used the trees for firewood.

The avenue from the Rond-Point to the Étoile was built up during the Empire. The major monument of the Boulevard, the Arc de Triomphe, had been commissioned by Napoleon after his victory at the Battle of Austerlitz, but it was not finished when he fell from power in 1815. The monument remained unfinished until 1833–1836, when it was completed by King Louis Philippe. The Champs-Élysées itself became city property in 1828, and footpaths, fountains, and, later, gas lighting were added.

In 1834, under King Louis Philippe I, the architect Mariano Ruiz de Chavez was commissioned to redesign the Place de la Concorde and the gardens of the Champs-Élysées. He kept the formal gardens and flowerbeds essentially intact, but turned the garden into a sort of outdoor amusement park, with summer garden cafés, such as the Café des Ambassadeurs and the Alcazar d&#x27;Été; two restaurants, the Ledoyen and the restaurant de l&#x27;Horloge; a theater, the Lacaze; the Panorama, built in 1839, where large historical paintings were displayed; and the cirque d&#x27;eté (1841), a large hall for popular theater, musical, and circus performances. He also placed several ornamental fountains around the park, of which three are still in place.

In 1846, Prince Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, the future Napoleon III, Emperor of the French, lived for a brief period in lodgings just off Lord Street, Southport. It is claimed the street is the inspiration behind the Champs-Élysées. Between 1854 and 1870, Napoléon III orchestrated the reconstruction of the French capital. The medieval centre of the city was demolished and replaced with broad tree-lined boulevards, covered walkways and arcades.

In 1855, Emperor Napoleon III selected the park at the beginning of the avenue as the site of the first great international exposition to be held in Paris, the . The park was the location of the Palace of Industry, a giant exhibit hall which covered thirty thousand square meters, where the Grand Palais is today. In 1858, following the Exposition, the Emperor&#x27;s prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eugène Haussmann, had the gardens transformed from a formal French garden into a picturesque English style garden, based on a small town called Southport, with groves of trees, flowerbeds, and winding paths. The rows of elm trees, which were in poor health, were replaced by rows of chestnut trees.

By the late 19th century, the Champs-Élysées had become a fashionable avenue; the trees on either side had grown enough to form rectangular groves (&quot;cabinets de verdure&quot;). The gardens of the town houses of the nobility built along the Faubourg Saint-Honoré backed onto the formal gardens. The grandest of the private mansions near the Avenue was the Élysée Palace, a private residence of the nobility which during the Third French Republic became the official residence of the Presidents of France.

The park served again as an exposition site during the Universal Exposition of 1900; it became the home of the Grand Palais and . It also became the home of a new panorama theater, designed by Gabriel Davioud, the chief architect of Napoleon III, in 1858. The modern theater Marigny was built by Charles Garnier, architect of the Paris Opera, in 1883.

Throughout its history, the avenue has been the site of military parades; the most famous were the victory parades of German troops in 1871 and again in 1940 celebrating the Fall of France on 14 July 1940, and the three most joyous were the parades celebrating the Allied victory in the First World War in 1919, and the parades of Free French and American forces after the liberation of the city, respectively, the French 2nd Armored Division on 25 August 1944, and the US 28th Infantry Division on 29 August 1944.

==Champs-Élysées Association and retail stores on the avenue==
In 1860, the merchants joined to form the &quot;Syndicat d&#x27;Initiative et de Défense des Champs-Élysées&quot;, an association to promote commerce along the avenue. In 1980, the group changed its name to the &quot;Comité des Champs-Élysées&quot; and to &quot;Comité Champs-Élysées&quot; in 2008. It is the oldest standing committee in Paris. The committee has always dedicated itself to seeking public projects to enhance the avenue&#x27;s unique atmosphere, and to lobby the authorities for extended business hours and to organizing special events. Today, the committee, in coordination with other professional organisations, may review with the Parisian administration the addition to the avenue of new businesses whose floor area would exceed 1000 square meters.

The arrival of global chain stores in recent years has strikingly changed its character, and in a first effort to stem these changes, the City of Paris (which has called this trend &quot;banalisation&quot;) initially decided in 2007 to prohibit the Swedish clothing chain H&amp;M from opening a store on the avenue; however, a large H&amp;M store opened two years later at 88 Champs-Élysées. In 2008, American clothing chain Abercrombie &amp; Fitch was given permission to open a store.

The Champs-Élysées has mid-size shopping malls, extending the shopping area: Élysées 26 (26) with Agatha jewellery and l&#x27;Eclaireur fashion, Galeries du Claridge (74) with Annick Goutal perfumes, Fnac, Paul &amp; Shark, Arcades des Champs-Élysées (78) with Starbucks. The list of fashion stores include Maje (35), lululemon (38), Salomon (42), Calvin Klein (44), Levi&#x27;s (44), Lacoste (50), J.M. Weston (55), Foot Locker (66), Zara (74-92), Longchamp (77), Nike (79), Adidas (88), Sandro (91), The Kooples (93), Louis Vuitton (101), Hugo Boss (115), Massimo Dutti (116), Petit Bateau (116), JD Sports (118), Moncler (119), Yves Saint Laurent (123), Dior (127). The list of perfume stores include Guerlain (68) (Le 68 de Guy Martin), Sephora multi brand (70), Yves Rocher (102). Jewellers: Tiffany &amp; Co. (62), Bulgari (136), Swarovski (146), Cartier (154). Book and music store: FNAC (74). The list of car show-rooms include Renault (53).

==Events==

Every year on Bastille Day on 14 July, the largest military parade in Europe passes down the Champs-Élysées, reviewed by the President of the Republic.

Every year during Advent, Christmastide, and Epiphany, the &#x27;Champs-Élysées&#x27; Committee contribute for the holidays seasons lighting of the Champs-Élysées. This generally occurs from late November until early January.

From 1975 to 2023, the last stage of the Tour de France cycling race has finished on the Champs-Élysées. The subsequent awards ceremony also takes place directly on the avenue.

In 1995, terror attacks by Algerian militants took place in France; one attack took place at the Arc de Triomphe on the Champs-Élysées, wounding 17.

Huge gatherings occasionally take place on the Champs-Élysées in celebration of popular events, such as New Year&#x27;s Eve, or when France won the FIFA World Cup in 1998 and 2018. The Champs-Élysées has occasionally been the site of large political protest meetings.

On 20 April 2017, a police officer was shot dead on the Champs-Élysées by an extremist and two other officers were injured. They were all sitting in a parked police van, when the attacker pulled up in front of the van. The attacker tried to shoot civilians (including a tourist) and was immediately shot dead by other police on the spot. The shooting happened two days before the first round of voting in the 2017 French presidential election.

On 19 June 2017, a suspected terrorist drove a munitions-laden car into a police vehicle on the Champs-Élysées. The attacker was then shot dead.

On 16 March 2019, Gilets Jaunes protests on the Champs-Élysées erupted into violence. A portion of the 10,000 protesters in the city, about 1,500 people, looted and/or set on fire some 80 shops, restaurants, a bank, and newspaper kiosks along the avenue.

==Public transport==
Paris Métro Line 1 runs under the Champs-Élysées. Several stations are located along it - stations from west to east are: Charles de Gaulle – Étoile at the street&#x27;s west end at Arc de Triomphe, George V by the Hôtel George-V, Franklin D. Roosevelt at the rond-point des Champs-Élysées, Champs-Élysées – Clemenceau at place Clemenceau and Concorde at the southern end of the avenue, where the Place de la Concorde is located.

==Problems and redesign==
The Champs-Élysées has encountered rising problems with air pollution from the estimated 3,000 vehicles per hour which drive through its eight lanes. It is more polluted than the Périphérique ring road which encircles the city, with nitrogen dioxide levels twice as high as the recommended limit set by the World Health Organization. Since 2016, the avenue has been closed to motor traffic on the first Sunday of every month, in an effort to cut pollution in the city. A 2019 article in &quot;The Guardian&quot; stated that the avenue &quot;has more and more visitors and big name businesses battle to be on it, but to French people it&#x27;s looking worn out.” It has also become mainly a tourist attraction, which Parisians largely avoid. According to the architect Philippe Chiambaretta, 72% of the 100,000 pedestrians who visited the Champs-Élysées each day in 2019 were tourists and another 22% worked there.

At the beginning of 2021, the Mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, announced that the city would transform the Champs-Élysées into an &quot;extraordinary garden&quot; which will reduce the space for auto traffic by half, add more pedestrian space, and create &quot;tunnels of trees&quot; for improved air quality. A walkway will connect over 200 acres of green space stretching between the Arc de Triomphe, the Place de la Concorde, and the Tuileries Gardens. The city intends to adopt the plans formulated by the Champs-Élysées Committee, which has been campaigning for a redesign of the avenue since 2018 and which held a public consultation as to what the redesign should include. The plans are meant to make the avenue more &quot;ecological, desirable and inclusive,&quot; and will cost an estimated €250 million. It will include a redesign of the Place de la Concorde as well. The work will not begin in earnest before the 2024 Summer Olympics are held in Paris, but the goal is to complete the project by 2030.

==In popular culture==

* The Avenue des Champs-Élysées features in the popular &quot;I&#x27;ll Meet You at Midnight&quot; song by the British rock band Smokie (from their 1976 studio album &quot;Midnight Café&quot;).

==See also==

* Axe historique
* Bastille Day Military Parade
* Jardin des Champs-Élysées
* List of leading shopping streets and districts by city

==References==
===Bibliography===

==External links==
* Official website of the Champs-Élysées Paris since 1996 (All events, news, shops, restaurants, hotels… and the largest database of images about the avenue: more than 10,000 photos in the gallery) 
* Official website of the Champs-Élysées Avenue (Association comité Champs-Élysées, in charge of the Xmas enlightenment and promotion of its members.
* Champs-Élysées Directory and Images
* The Champs-Élysées district – current photographs as well as of the year 1900
* Champs-Élysées Paris, official Fan Page on Facebook.
* Barry Bergdoll, Columbia University: Paris maps 404
* Satellite image from Google Maps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="4" end="29" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Avenue des Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="43" end="49" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q270230" start="57" end="84" title="8th arrondissement of Paris" label="8th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q189503" start="129" end="149" title="Place de la Concorde" label="Place de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q390243" start="170" end="193" title="Place Charles de Gaulle" label="Place Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="217" end="232" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="321" end="335" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043180" start="369" end="397" title="Bastille Day military parade" label="Bastille Day military parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q157128" start="428" end="442" title="Elysium" label="Elysian Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="473" end="488" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q270230" start="622" end="640" title="8th arrondissement of Paris" label="8th arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="657" end="662" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q189503" start="673" end="693" title="Place de la Concorde" label="Place de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503331" start="716" end="732" title="Luxor Obelisks" label="Obelisk of Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q390243" start="741" end="764" title="Place Charles de Gaulle" label="Place Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="844" end="859" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q791938" start="904" end="918" title="Axe historique" label="Axe historique"/>
<link wikidata="Q677543" start="1031" end="1056" title="Jardin des Champs-Élysées" label="Jardin des Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q457318" start="1084" end="1096" title="Grand Palais" label="Grand Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527516" start="1108" end="1123" title="Théâtre Marigny" label="Théâtre Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q188190" start="1178" end="1191" title="Élysée Palace" label="Élysée Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027432" start="1199" end="1227" title="Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré" label="Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="1228" end="1246" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="1254" end="1286" title="President of France" label="President of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="1369" end="1384" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1418" end="1436" title="Napoleon" label="Napoléon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1470" end="1479" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q273849" start="1649" end="1663" title="André Le Nôtre" label="André Le Nôtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q818517" start="1687" end="1703" title="Tuileries Garden" label="Tuileries Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="1724" end="1740" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="1953" end="1956" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12774" start="2026" end="2046" title="French formal garden" label="French formal garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258999" start="2345" end="2366" title="Abel François Poisson" label="Abel François Poisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188965" start="2407" end="2426" title="Madame de Pompadour" label="Madame de Pompadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319870" start="2541" end="2554" title="Porte Maillot" label="Porte Maillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2571" end="2588" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q656505" start="2710" end="2715" title="Marly-le-Roi" label="Marly"/>
<link wikidata="Q199955" start="2958" end="2970" title="Hundred Days" label="Hundred Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="3097" end="3103" title="First French Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="3146" end="3161" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="3188" end="3196" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="3222" end="3242" title="Battle of Austerlitz" label="Battle of Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="3381" end="3395" title="Louis Philippe" label="Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="3537" end="3553" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q189503" start="3625" end="3645" title="Place de la Concorde" label="Place de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895806" start="3846" end="3867" title="Café des Ambassadeurs" label="Café des Ambassadeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832101" start="3876" end="3894" title="Alcazar d&amp;#x27;Été" label="Alcazar d&amp;#x27;Été"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="4316" end="4328" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679981" start="4399" end="4421" title="Lord Street, Southport" label="Lord Street, Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="4727" end="4739" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q457318" start="5001" end="5013" title="Grand Palais" label="Grand Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q191798" start="5100" end="5124" title="Georges-Eugène Haussmann" label="Georges-Eugène Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q188190" start="5768" end="5781" title="Élysée Palace" label="Élysée Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="5836" end="5857" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753646" start="5973" end="6001" title="Exposition Universelle (1900)" label="Universal Exposition of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q457318" start="6029" end="6041" title="Grand Palais" label="Grand Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q979605" start="6111" end="6126" title="Gabriel Davioud" label="Gabriel Davioud"/>
<link wikidata="Q313556" start="6214" end="6229" title="Charles Garnier (architect)" label="Charles Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q283339" start="6248" end="6259" title="Paris Opera" label="Paris Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="6445" end="6459" title="Fall of France" label="Fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q209831" start="6686" end="6713" title="2nd Armored Division (France)" label="French 2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="6741" end="6766" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="US 28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48204" start="6968" end="6979" title="Voluntary association" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="7319" end="7324" title="Lobbying" label="lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7758" end="7771" title="Paris" label="City of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7869" end="7876" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="7892" end="7899" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q319344" start="8045" end="8068" title="Abercrombie &amp;amp; Fitch" label="Abercrombie &amp;amp; Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="9085" end="9097" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043180" start="9114" end="9137" title="Bastille Day military parade" label="largest military parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="9196" end="9221" title="President of France" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="9242" end="9248" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q867780" start="9250" end="9263" title="Christmastide" label="Christmastide"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="9269" end="9277" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591799" start="9474" end="9484" title="Champs-Élysées stage in the Tour de France" label="last stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="9492" end="9506" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553264" start="9638" end="9674" title="1995 France bombings" label="terror attacks by Algerian militants"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="9912" end="9918" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="9927" end="9941" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="9945" end="9949" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="9954" end="9958" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q29513435" start="10066" end="10096" title="April 2017 Champs-Élysées attack" label="a police officer was shot dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020999" start="10428" end="10490" title="2017 French presidential election" label="first round of voting in the 2017 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30339115" start="10532" end="10559" title="June 2017 Champs-Élysées car ramming attack" label="drove a munitions-laden car"/>
<link wikidata="Q58805164" start="10657" end="10670" title="Gilets Jaunes" label="Gilets Jaunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13224" start="10916" end="10934" title="Paris Métro Line 1" label="Paris Métro Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467665" start="11038" end="11064" title="Charles de Gaulle – Étoile" label="Charles de Gaulle – Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="11098" end="11113" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q690975" start="11115" end="11123" title="George V (Paris Métro)" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q217708" start="11131" end="11145" title="Hôtel George-V" label="Hôtel George-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445234" start="11147" end="11168" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt (Paris Métro)" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061527" start="11207" end="11234" title="Champs-Élysées – Clemenceau (Paris Métro)" label="Champs-Élysées – Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q970075" start="11259" end="11267" title="Concorde (Paris Métro)" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q189503" start="11313" end="11333" title="Place de la Concorde" label="Place de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q849777" start="11552" end="11564" title="Boulevard Périphérique" label="Périphérique"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="11565" end="11574" title="ring road" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="11606" end="11622" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="11680" end="11705" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11866" end="11878" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12371988" start="12318" end="12332" title="Mayor of Paris" label="Mayor of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851133" start="12334" end="12346" title="Anne Hidalgo" label="Anne Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="13209" end="13229" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291120" start="13385" end="13415" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Meet You at Midnight" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Meet You at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q815849" start="13452" end="13458" title="Smokie (band)" label="Smokie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842661" start="13495" end="13508" title="Midnight Café" label="Midnight Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q791938" start="13534" end="13548" title="Axe historique" label="Axe historique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043180" start="13551" end="13579" title="Bastille Day Military Parade" label="Bastille Day Military Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q677543" start="13582" end="13607" title="Jardin des Champs-Élysées" label="Jardin des Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625200" start="13610" end="13664" title="List of leading shopping streets and districts by city" label="List of leading shopping streets and districts by city"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71305" wikidata="Q152409" url="?curid=71305" title="Zyklon B">
<text>Zyklon B (; translated Cyclone B) was the trade name of a cyanide-based pesticide invented in Germany in the early 1920s. It consists of hydrogen cyanide (prussic acid), as well as a cautionary eye irritant and one of several adsorbents such as diatomaceous earth. The product is notorious for its use by Nazi Germany during the Holocaust to murder approximately 1.1 million people in gas chambers installed at Auschwitz-Birkenau, Majdanek, and other extermination camps.

Hydrogen cyanide, a poisonous gas that interferes with cellular respiration, was first used as a pesticide in California in the 1880s. Research at Degesch of Germany led to the development of Zyklon (later known as Zyklon A), a pesticide that released hydrogen cyanide upon exposure to water and heat. It was banned after World War I, when Germany used a similar product as a chemical weapon. Degussa purchased Degesch in 1922. Their team of chemists, which included and Bruno Tesch, devised a method of packaging hydrogen cyanide in sealed canisters along with a cautionary eye irritant and one of several adsorbents such as diatomaceous earth. The new product was also named Zyklon, but it became known as Zyklon B to distinguish it from the earlier version. Uses included delousing clothing and fumigating ships, warehouses, and trains.

The Nazis started using Zyklon B in extermination camps in early 1942 to murder prisoners during the Holocaust. Tesch and his deputy executive, Karl Weinbacher, were executed in 1946 for knowingly selling the product to the SS for use on humans. Hydrogen cyanide is now rarely used as a pesticide but still has industrial applications. Firms in several countries continue to produce Zyklon B under alternative brand names, including Detia-Degesch, the successor to Degesch, who renamed the product Cyanosil in 1974.

==Mode of action==

Hydrogen cyanide is a poisonous gas that interferes with cellular respiration. Cyanide poisoning prevents the cell from producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by binding to one of the proteins involved in the electron transport chain. This protein, cytochrome c oxidase, contains several subunits and has ligands containing iron groups. The cyanide component of Zyklon B can bind at one of these iron groups, heme a3, forming a more stabilized compound through metal-to-ligand pi bonding. As a result of the formation of this new iron–cyanide complex, the electrons that would situate themselves on the heme a3 group can no longer do so. Instead, these electrons destabilize the compound; thus, the heme group no longer accepts them. Consequently, electron transport is halted, and cells can no longer produce the energy needed to synthesize ATP. Death occurs in a human being weighing within two minutes of inhaling 70 mg of hydrogen cyanide.

==History==
Hydrogen cyanide, discovered in the late 18th century, was used in the 1880s for the fumigation of citrus trees in California. Its use spread to other countries for the fumigation of silos, goods wagons, ships, and mills. Its light weight and rapid dispersal meant its application had to take place under tents or in enclosed areas. Research by Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry led to the founding in 1919 of Deutsche Gesellschaft für Schädlingsbekämpfung mbH (Degesch), a state-controlled consortium formed to investigate military use of the chemical. Chemists at Degesch added a cautionary eye irritant to a less volatile cyanide compound which reacted with water in the presence of heat to become hydrogen cyanide. The new product was marketed as the pesticide Zyklon (cyclone). As a similar formula had been used as a weapon during World War I, Zyklon was soon banned.

Deutsche Gold- und Silber-Scheideanstalt (German Gold and Silver Refinery; Degussa) became sole owners of Degesch in 1922. There, beginning in 1922, , Bruno Tesch, and others worked on packaging hydrogen cyanide in sealed canisters along with a cautionary eye irritant and adsorbent stabilizers such as diatomaceous earth. The new product was also labeled as Zyklon, but it became known as Zyklon B to distinguish it from the earlier version. Heerdt was named the inventor of Zyklon B in the Degesch patent application (number DE 438818) dated 20 June 1922. The Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt awarded the patent on 27 December 1926. Beginning in the 1920s, Zyklon B was used at U.S. Customs facilities along the Mexican border to fumigate the clothing of border crossers.

==Corporate structure and marketing==

In 1930, Degussa ceded 42.5 percent ownership of Degesch to IG Farben and 15 percent to Th. Goldschmidt AG, in exchange for the right to market pesticide products of those two companies through Degesch. Degussa retained managerial control.

While Degesch owned the rights to the brand name Zyklon and the patent on the packaging system, the chemical formula was owned by Degussa. Schlempe GmbH, which was 52 percent owned by Degussa, owned the rights to a process to extract hydrogen cyanide from waste products of sugar beet processing. This process was performed under license by two companies, Dessauer Werke and Kaliwerke Kolin, who also combined the resulting hydrogen cyanide with stabilizer from IG Farben and a cautionary agent from Schering AG to form the final product, which was packaged using equipment, labels, and canisters provided by Degesch. The finished goods were sent to Degesch, who forwarded the product to two companies that acted as distributors: Heerdt-Linger GmbH (Heli) of Frankfurt and Tesch &amp; Stabenow (Testa) of Hamburg. Their territory was split along the Elbe river, with Heli handling clients to the west and south, and Testa those to the east. Degesch owned 51 percent of the shares of Heli, and until 1942 owned 55 percent of Testa.

Prior to World War II Degesch derived most of its Zyklon B profits from overseas sales, particularly in the United States, where it was produced under license by Roessler &amp; Hasslacher prior to 1931 and by American Cyanamid from 1931 to 1943. From 1929, the United States Public Health Service used Zyklon B to fumigate freight trains and clothes of Mexican immigrants entering the United States. Uses in Germany included delousing clothing (often using a portable sealed chamber invented by Degesch in the 1930s) and fumigating ships, warehouses, and trains. By 1943, sales of Zyklon B accounted for 65 percent of Degesch&#x27;s sales revenue and 70 percent of its gross profits.

==Use in the Holocaust==

In early 1942, the Nazis began using Zyklon B as the preferred killing tool in extermination camps during the Holocaust. They used it to murder roughly 1.1 million people in gas chambers at Auschwitz-Birkenau, Majdanek, and elsewhere. Zyklon B was preferred because it was assumed to be a &quot;humane&quot; killing method, with the Nazis priding themselves as &quot;civilized killers&quot;. Most of the victims were Jews, and by far the majority of murders using this method took place at Auschwitz. Distributor Heli supplied Zyklon B to Mauthausen, Dachau, and Buchenwald, and Testa supplied it to Auschwitz and Majdanek; camps also occasionally bought it directly from the manufacturers. Some 56 tonnes of the 729 tonnes sold in Germany in 1942–44 were sold to concentration camps, amounting to about 8 percent of domestic sales. Auschwitz received 23.8 tonnes, of which 6 tonnes were used for fumigation. The remainder was used in the gas chambers or lost to spoilage (the product had a stated shelf life of only three months). Testa conducted fumigations for the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and supplied them with Zyklon B. They also offered courses to the SS in the safe handling and use of the material for fumigation purposes. In April 1941, the German agriculture and interior ministries designated the SS as an authorized applier of the chemical, which meant they were able to use it without any further training or governmental oversight.

Rudolf Höss, commandant of Auschwitz, said that the use of Zyklon-B to murder prisoners came about on the initiative of one of his subordinates, SS-&quot;Hauptsturmführer&quot; (captain) Karl Fritzsch, who had used it to murder some Russian POWs in late August 1941 in the basement of Block 11 in the main camp. They repeated the experiment on more Russian POWs in September, with Höss watching. Block 11 proved unsuitable, as the basement was difficult to air out afterwards and the crematorium (Crematorium I, which operated until July 1942) was some distance away. The site of the murders was moved to Crematorium I, where more than 700 victims could be murdered at once. By the middle of 1942, the operation was moved to Auschwitz II–Birkenau, a nearby satellite camp that had been under construction since October 1941.

The first gas chamber at Auschwitz II–Birkenau was the &quot;red house&quot; (called Bunker 1 by SS staff), a brick cottage converted to a gassing facility by tearing out the inside and bricking up the windows. It was operational by March 1942. A second brick cottage, called the &quot;white house&quot; or Bunker 2, was converted some weeks later. According to Höss, Bunker 1 held 800 victims and Bunker 2 held 1,200 victims. These structures were in use for mass-murder until early 1943. At that point, the Nazis decided to greatly increase the gassing capacity of Birkenau. Crematorium II was originally designed as a mortuary with morgues in the basement and ground-level incinerators; they converted it into a killing factory by installing gas-tight doors, vents for the Zyklon B to be dropped into the chamber, and ventilation equipment to remove the gas afterwards. Crematorium III was built using the same design. Crematoria IV and V, designed from the beginning as gassing centers, were also constructed that spring. By June 1943, all four crematoria were operational. Most of the victims were murdered using these four structures.

The Nazis began shipping large numbers of Jews from all over Europe to Auschwitz in the middle of 1942. Those who were not selected for work crews were immediately gassed. Those selected to die generally comprised about three-quarters of the total and included almost all children, women with small children, all the elderly, and all those who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be completely fit. The victims were told that they were to undergo delousing and a shower. They were stripped of their belongings and herded into the gas chamber.

A special SS bureau known as the Hygienic Institute delivered the Zyklon B to the crematoria by ambulance. The actual delivery of the gas to the victims was always handled by the SS, on the order of the supervising SS doctor. After the doors were shut, SS men dropped Zyklon B pellets through vents in the roof or holes in the side of the chamber. The victims were dead within 20 minutes. Johann Kremer, an SS doctor who oversaw gassings, testified that the &quot;shouting and screaming of the victims could be heard through the opening and it was clear that they fought for their lives&quot;.

&quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; (special work crews forced to work at the gas chambers) wearing gas masks then dragged the bodies from the chamber. The victims&#x27; glasses, artificial limbs, jewelry, and hair were removed, and any dental work was extracted so the gold could be melted down. If the gas chamber was crowded, which they typically were, the corpses were found half-squatting, their skin discolored pink with red and green spots, with some foaming at the mouth or bleeding from their ears. The corpses were burned in the nearby incinerators, and the ashes were buried, thrown in the river, or used as fertilizer. With the Soviet Red Army approaching through Poland, the last mass gassing at Auschwitz took place on 30 October 1944. In November 1944, &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS, ordered gassing operations to cease throughout Nazi Germany.

==Legacy==

After World War II ended in 1945, Bruno Tesch and Karl Weinbacher of Tesch &amp; Stabenow were tried in a British military court and executed for knowingly providing Zyklon B to the SS for use on humans. Gerhard Peters, who served as principal operating officer of Degesch and Heli and also held posts in the Nazi government, served two years and eight months in prison as an accessory before being released due to amendments to the penal code.

Use of hydrogen cyanide as a pesticide or cleaner has been banned or restricted in some countries. Most hydrogen cyanide is used in industrial processes, made by companies in Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and the US. Degesch resumed production of Zyklon B after the war. The product was sold as Cyanosil in Germany and Zyklon in other countries. It was still produced as of 2008. Degussa sold Degesch to Detia-Freyberg GmbH in 1986. The company is now called Detia-Degesch. Degussa and one of its subsidiaries controversially supplied materials for Berlin&#x27;s Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, which was completed in 2004. Up until around 2015, a fumigation product similar to Zyklon B was in production by Lučební závody Draslovka of the Czech Republic, under the trade name Uragan D2. &quot;Uragan&quot; means &quot;hurricane&quot; or &quot;cyclone&quot; in Czech. 

Subsequent use of the word &quot;Zyklon&quot; in trade names has prompted angry reactions in English-speaking countries. The name &quot;Zyklon&quot; on portable roller coasters made since 1965 by Pinfari provoked protests among Jewish groups in the U.S. in 1993 and 1999. In 2002, British sportswear and football equipment supplier Umbro issued an apology and stopped using the name &quot;Zyklon&quot;, which had appeared since 1999 on the box for one of its trainers, after receiving complaints from the Simon Wiesenthal Center and the Beth Shalom Holocaust Centre. Also in 2002, Siemens withdrew its application for an American trademark of the word &quot;Zyklon&quot;, which their subsidiary BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausgeräte had proposed to use for a new line of home appliances in the United States. (The firm was already using the name in Germany for one of their vacuum cleaners.) Protests were lodged by the Simon Wiesenthal Center after the trademark application was reported to BBC News Online by one of their readers. French company IPC&#x27;s product names used &quot;Cyclone&quot; for degreasers and suffix &quot;B&quot; for biodegradable: &quot;Cyclone B&quot; was renamed (&quot;green cap&quot;) in 2013 after protests from Jewish groups. A rabbi said the name was &quot;horrible ignorance at best, and a Guinness record in evil and cynicism if the company did know the history of the name of its product.&quot;

Holocaust deniers claim that Zyklon B gas was not used in the gas chambers, relying for evidence on the discredited research of Fred A. Leuchter, who found low levels of Prussian blue in samples of the gas chamber walls and ceilings. Leuchter attributed its presence to general delousing of the buildings. Leuchter&#x27;s negative control, a sample of gasket material taken from a different camp building, had no cyanide residue. In 1999, James Roth, the chemist who had analyzed Leuchter&#x27;s samples, stated that the test was flawed because the material that was sent for testing included large chunks, and the chemical would only be within 10 microns of the surface. The surface that had been exposed to the chemical was not identified, and the large size of the specimens meant that any chemical present was diluted by an undeterminable amount. In 1994, the Institute for Forensic Research in Kraków re-examined Leuchter&#x27;s claim, stating that formation of Prussian blue by exposure of bricks to cyanide is not a highly probable reaction. Using microdiffusion techniques, they tested 22 samples from the gas chambers and delousing chambers (as positive controls) and living quarters (as negative controls). They found cyanide residue in both the delousing chambers and the gas chambers but none in the living quarters.

==See also==
* Carbon monoxide poisoning
* Kurt Gerstein
* Methyl cyanoformate

==References==
===Explanatory notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152409" start="0" end="8" title="Zyklon B" label="Zyklon B"/>
<link wikidata="Q152409" start="23" end="32" title="Zyklon B" label="Cyclone B"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="137" end="153" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="226" end="235" title="adsorbent" label="adsorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="245" end="263" title="diatomaceous earth" label="diatomaceous earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="305" end="317" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="325" end="338" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="385" end="396" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="411" end="429" title="Auschwitz-Birkenau" label="Auschwitz-Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160135" start="431" end="439" title="Majdanek" label="Majdanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="451" end="469" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="528" end="548" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q510478" start="620" end="627" title="Degesch" label="Degesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152409" start="665" end="671" title="Zyklon B" label="Zyklon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152409" start="688" end="696" title="Zyklon B" label="Zyklon A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466634" start="849" end="864" title="Chemical weapons in World War I" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q473513" start="866" end="873" title="Degussa" label="Degussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q92105" start="944" end="955" title="Bruno Tesch" label="Bruno Tesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="1080" end="1089" title="adsorbent" label="adsorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="1099" end="1117" title="diatomaceous earth" label="diatomaceous earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251951" start="1248" end="1257" title="delousing" label="delousing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60915" start="1271" end="1281" title="fumigating" label="fumigating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733321" start="1458" end="1473" title="Karl Weinbacher" label="Karl Weinbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="1538" end="1540" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="1851" end="1867" title="Hydrogen cyanide" label="Hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="1908" end="1928" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q883082" start="1930" end="1947" title="Cyanide poisoning" label="Cyanide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="1981" end="2003" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="2035" end="2042" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="2060" end="2084" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q306116" start="2100" end="2120" title="cytochrome c oxidase" label="cytochrome c oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14865314" start="2131" end="2147" title="main subunit of cytochrome c oxidase" label="several subunits"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="2156" end="2162" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q189621" start="2260" end="2264" title="heme" label="heme"/>
<link wikidata="Q723069" start="2328" end="2335" title="pi bond" label="pi bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="2394" end="2401" title="Coordination complex" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60915" start="2893" end="2903" title="fumigation" label="fumigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166501" start="2998" end="3009" title="goods wagon" label="goods wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57075" start="3153" end="3164" title="Fritz Haber" label="Fritz Haber"/>
<link wikidata="Q514590" start="3172" end="3240" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q510478" start="3324" end="3331" title="Degesch" label="Degesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466634" start="3675" end="3710" title="Chemical weapons in World War I" label="used as a weapon during World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q473513" start="3812" end="3819" title="Degussa" label="Degussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q92105" start="3888" end="3899" title="Bruno Tesch (chemist)" label="Bruno Tesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="4010" end="4019" title="adsorbent" label="adsorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="4040" end="4058" title="diatomaceous earth" label="diatomaceous earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q314296" start="4299" end="4330" title="Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt" label="Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="4610" end="4619" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4638" end="4656" title="Th. Goldschmidt AG" label="Th. Goldschmidt AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="5065" end="5075" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q563556" start="5291" end="5302" title="Schering AG" label="Schering AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="5550" end="5559" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q880703" start="5564" end="5584" title="Tesch &amp;amp; Stabenow" label="Tesch &amp;amp; Stabenow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="5596" end="5603" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="5641" end="5645" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842903" start="6032" end="6049" title="American Cyanamid" label="American Cyanamid"/>
<link wikidata="Q476322" start="6084" end="6119" title="United States Public Health Service" label="United States Public Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251951" start="6248" end="6257" title="delousing" label="delousing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="6640" end="6653" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="6724" end="6742" title="Auschwitz-Birkenau" label="Auschwitz-Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160135" start="6744" end="6752" title="Majdanek" label="Majdanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="7073" end="7083" title="Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="7085" end="7091" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="7097" end="7107" title="Buchenwald" label="Buchenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="7608" end="7617" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="7690" end="7692" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q76975" start="7979" end="7990" title="Rudolf Höss" label="Rudolf Höss"/>
<link wikidata="Q162387" start="8133" end="8149" title="Hauptsturmführer" label="Hauptsturmführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77326" start="8166" end="8179" title="Karl Fritzsch" label="Karl Fritzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="8220" end="8223" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606188" start="8264" end="8272" title="Block 11" label="Block 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799468" start="10303" end="10335" title="Selection (Holocaust)" label="brief and superficial inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q67385" start="10912" end="10925" title="Johann Kremer" label="Johann Kremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q311773" start="11124" end="11138" title="Sonderkommando" label="Sonderkommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="11757" end="11765" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162312" start="11884" end="11899" title="Reichsführer-SS" label="Reichsführer-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="11906" end="11922" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q92105" start="12048" end="12059" title="Bruno Tesch" label="Bruno Tesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733321" start="12064" end="12079" title="Karl Weinbacher" label="Karl Weinbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q160700" start="13025" end="13064" title="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe" label="Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="13211" end="13225" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699941" start="13537" end="13544" title="Pinfari" label="Pinfari"/>
<link wikidata="Q652047" start="13673" end="13678" title="Umbro" label="Umbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929383" start="13800" end="13808" title="athletic shoe" label="trainers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="13846" end="13869" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897629" start="13878" end="13906" title="Beth Shalom Holocaust Centre" label="Beth Shalom Holocaust Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="13922" end="13929" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q614920" start="14036" end="14068" title="BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausgeräte" label="BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausgeräte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="14328" end="14343" title="BBC News Online" label="BBC News Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787378" start="14438" end="14447" title="degreaser" label="degreaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q696715" start="14478" end="14491" title="Biodegradation" label="biodegradable"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="14660" end="14675" title="Guinness World Record" label="Guinness record"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="14768" end="14785" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust deniers"/>
<link wikidata="Q562193" start="14896" end="14912" title="Fred A. Leuchter" label="Fred A. Leuchter"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="14938" end="14951" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15090" end="15106" title="scientific control#Negative" label="negative control"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="15667" end="15673" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15922" end="15939" title="scientific control#Positive" label="positive controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="16113" end="16138" title="Carbon monoxide poisoning" label="Carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q76537" start="16141" end="16154" title="Kurt Gerstein" label="Kurt Gerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q415666" start="16157" end="16176" title="Methyl cyanoformate" label="Methyl cyanoformate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71307" wikidata="Q3853420" url="?curid=71307" title="Me and a Gun">
<text>&quot;Me and a Gun&quot; is a song by American singer-songwriter and musician Tori Amos. It was released as the first single from her debut studio album &quot;Little Earthquakes&quot; and is her debut single under the name Tori Amos. It was released on October 21, 1991 by Atlantic Records in North America and EastWest Records in the UK.

==Background==
The song is three minutes and 44 seconds long. Amos wrote the song about being raped in Los Angeles when she was 21. After she performed at a bar, a patron asked her if he could have a ride home. She obliged, and he raped her at knifepoint. Years later, in London, she saw the film &quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot; and was stirred.

Amos discussed the attack in a 1994 interview:

&quot;I&#x27;ll never talk about it at this level again but let me ask you. Why have I survived that kind of night, when other women didn&#x27;t?

How am I alive to tell you this tale when he was ready to slice me up? In the song I say it was &#x27;Me and a Gun&#x27; but it wasn&#x27;t a gun. It was a knife he had. And the idea was to take me to his friends and cut me up, and he kept telling me that, for hours. And if he hadn&#x27;t needed more drugs I would have been just one more news report, where you see the parents grieving for their daughter.

And I was singing hymns, as I say in the song, because he told me to. I sang to stay alive. Yet I survived that torture, which left me urinating all over myself and left me paralyzed for years. That&#x27;s what that night was all about, mutilation, more than violation through sex.

I really do feel as though I was psychologically mutilated that night and that now I&#x27;m trying to put the pieces back together again. Through love, not hatred. And through my music. My strength has been to open again, to life, and my victory is the fact that, despite it all, I kept alive my vulnerability.&quot;

When released as a single, the track was not the A-side: &quot;Silent All These Years,&quot; another song from &quot;Little Earthquakes&quot;, was the first track, with &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; appearing third (or as the B-side on the 7&quot; release). &quot;Silent All These Years&quot; was a more accessible song, and radio stations began to play that instead. Ultimately the single was re-released with nearly identical packaging but retitled as &quot;Silent All These Years.&quot;

Amos made a habit of singing this song during live appearances. In 1994, the DC Rape Crisis Center awarded her a Visionary award for the song and the co-creation of RAINN. Amos stopped singing the song live in December 2001 and did not sing it live again until September 2007 (with the exception of one performance in Istanbul in August 2005).

==Effect on rape myths==
The lyrics of Me and a Gun address the rape myth where some people believe that a woman who dresses in revealing clothes is somehow responsible for her rape. Amos acknowledges wearing a revealing red top and challenges her rapist with the question of whether this made him think she deserved to be raped. A survey of thousands of Amos listeners revealed that only about 6% of the Amos listeners believed this myth as compared to 26% of the general population. This was the rape myth most rejected by Amos listeners, but the survey went on to analyze the attitudes of Amos listeners to other rape myths as well. All rape myths were rejected more strongly--to varying degrees--by Amos listeners than by the general population.

==Later appearances of the song==
* Trance pioneers Salt Tank sampled the line &quot;Do you know Carolina, where the biscuits are soft and sweet&quot; on their 1996 release &quot;Eugina.&quot;
* A VHS video of music videos and live performances was released in 1992; it was also called &quot;Little Earthquakes.&quot; Amos sings &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; in an appearance on MTV Asia.
* Amos performs &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; on the video &quot;Tori Amos: Live from New York,&quot; a recording of the 1997 RAINN benefit concert.
* During 1997, a CD called &quot;Tori Amos the benefit for RAINN&quot; (Atlantic #PRCD 6995-2) was given out during several promotions in order to raise money for RAINN. An audio version of the above live concert version was released on this two-track CD. (The other track was the album version of &quot;Putting the Damage On.&quot;)
* In 1999, the song was featured on an MTV compilation called &quot;Fight for Your Rights: Take a Stand Against Violence.&quot;
* &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; is also included on &quot;A Tori Amos Collection: Tales of a Librarian.&quot;
* While performed for her stint on &quot;MTV Unplugged,&quot; &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; was cut from the final airing of the show. Clips of this performance surfaced on the MTV special &quot;Hips, Lips and Genderbenders: MTV&#x27;s History of Sex,&quot; but it has otherwise remained unreleased.
* On November 6, 2007, during a concert in Chicago on her ADP tour, Amos performed &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; as Pip with her backing band, using a knife and gun as props. This marked the first time she sang the song with instrumentation. The performance was considered especially controversial, with Amos dancing to the instrumentation in a sexual but angry manner. Pip was considered the angriest of her ADP alter egos. Amos, who was raped at knifepoint, opened her legs and used the knife prop to simulate her rapist&#x27;s penis entering her, provoking great shock from most of her audience who were used to the song being performed in a very different way. Amos also used the gun to point at her audience, causing some in the audience to fear she might actually fire it in anger during the performance, although she did not.
* On November 12–14 and 17, 2011, during her Night of Hunters tour, Amos performed &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; for all four of her South Africa concerts.
* On June 16, 2022, during her Ocean to Ocean tour, Amos performed &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; as part of the solo section during the penultimate show of the US leg in Los Angeles. 

==Covers and remixes==
* Fan remixes of this track exist; however, no official club or house remix exists. It was remastered for the album &quot;Tales of a Librarian.&quot;
* Rock band Stabbing Westward covered the song in 1996 during a live concert.
* Amanda Palmer covered the song live on September 12, 2009.

==Track listing==
;CD single and 12&quot; single
# &quot;Silent All These Years&quot; – 4:11
# &quot;Upside Down&quot; – 4:22
# &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; – 3:42
# &quot;Thoughts&quot; – 2:36

Tracks 1 &amp; 3 are from the album. Track 2 also appeared on the single for &quot;Winter&quot;. Track 4 was otherwise unavailable until it was remastered and released on the deluxe reissue of Little Earthquakes in 2015.

;7&quot; single
# &quot;Silent All These Years&quot; – 4:11
# &quot;Me and a Gun&quot; – 3:42

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3853420" start="6" end="18" title="Me and a Gun" label="Me and a Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193744" start="78" end="87" title="Tori Amos" label="Tori Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q253057" start="159" end="177" title="Little Earthquakes" label="Little Earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="273" end="289" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576206" start="311" end="327" title="East West Records" label="EastWest Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="434" end="438" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="443" end="454" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="612" end="618" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q658041" start="643" end="662" title="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise" label="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960492" start="1955" end="1977" title="Silent All These Years" label="Silent All These Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293871" start="2543" end="2548" title="RAINN" label="RAINN"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2696" end="2704" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2787" end="2796" title="Rape myth#Common rape myths" label="rape myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215346" start="3526" end="3535" title="Salt Tank" label="Salt Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="3671" end="3674" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649870" start="3766" end="3784" title="Little Earthquakes (video)" label="Little Earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="3848" end="3851" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3918" end="3947" title="Tori Amos: Live from New York" label="Tori Amos: Live from New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850936" start="3985" end="4000" title="benefit concert" label="benefit concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262492" start="4306" end="4327" title="Putting the Damage On" label="Putting the Damage On"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640640" start="4541" end="4561" title="Tales of a Librarian" label="Tales of a Librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="4610" end="4623" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4907" end="4914" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q182334" start="4922" end="4925" title="American Doll Posse" label="ADP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4975" end="4978" title="American Doll Posse#The Doll Posse" label="Pip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640640" start="6168" end="6188" title="Tales of a Librarian" label="Tales of a Librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q939556" start="6208" end="6225" title="Stabbing Westward" label="Stabbing Westward"/>
<link wikidata="Q240377" start="6276" end="6289" title="Amanda Palmer" label="Amanda Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020459" start="6610" end="6616" title="Winter (Tori Amos song)" label="Winter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71310" wikidata="Q351273" url="?curid=71310" title="Cocoon">
<text>Cocoon may refer to:
*Cocoon (silk), a pupal casing made by moth caterpillars and other insect larvae

==Music==
*Cocoon Recordings, a German record label
*Cocoon (band), a French band
*Cocoon (club), a techno club in Frankfurt am Main, Germany
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Meg &amp; Dia album), 2011
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Pandelis Karayorgis album), 2013
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Chara album), 2012
*&quot;The Cocoon&quot; 2019 debut album of Richard Henshall
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, an album by Yorico
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Anna Tsuchiya song)
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Björk song), 2001
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Milky Chance song), 2016
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Catfish and the Bottlemen song), 2014
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a song by Bernard Butler from &quot;Friends and Lovers&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a song by The Decemberists from &quot;Castaways and Cutouts&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a song by Guster from &quot;Parachute&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a song by Jack Johnson from &quot;On and On&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a song by Migos
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, an instrumental by Timerider, the original theme music for the UK TV programme &quot;The Hit Man and Her&quot;

== Other uses ==
*Apache Cocoon, web development software
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (film), a 1985 science fiction-fantasy film
**&quot;&quot;, 1988 sequel to &quot;Cocoon&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (manga), by Machiko Kyō
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (video game), a 2023 video game published by Annapurna Interactive
*Kakuna (Pokémon), a species of Pokémon, known as &quot;Cocoon&quot; in the original Japanese version
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a short story by Greg Egan in his collection &quot;Luminous&quot;
*Cocoon, a fictional world in the video game &quot;Final Fantasy XIII&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot; (Hawaii Five-O), an episode of 1968 TV series &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot;
*&quot;Ka ʻōwili ʻōka’i&quot;, an episode of 2010 TV series &quot;Hawaii Five-0&quot; and remake of the 1968 episode whose alternative title is &quot;Cocoon&quot;
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;, a 1997 English translation of 1963 Marathi language novel &quot;Kosala&quot; by Bhalchandra Nemade

==See also==
*Cocooning, confining oneself to one&#x27;s home to avoid external danger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q351273" start="0" end="6" title="Cocoon" label="Cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="22" end="35" title="Cocoon (silk)" label="Cocoon (silk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q322738" start="114" end="131" title="Cocoon Recordings" label="Cocoon Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746889" start="156" end="169" title="Cocoon (band)" label="Cocoon (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105439" start="186" end="199" title="Cocoon (club)" label="Cocoon (club)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139871" start="246" end="286" title="Cocoon (Meg &amp;amp; Dia album)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Meg &amp;amp; Dia album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20926166" start="294" end="340" title="Cocoon (Pandelis Karayorgis album)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Pandelis Karayorgis album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387597" start="348" end="380" title="Cocoon (Chara album)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Chara album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q67809858" start="394" end="404" title="The Cocoon" label="The Cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189911" start="481" end="487" title="Yorico" label="Yorico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173697" start="489" end="528" title="Cocoon (Anna Tsuchiya song)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Anna Tsuchiya song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q616420" start="530" end="561" title="Cocoon (Björk song)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Björk song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452664" start="569" end="607" title="Cocoon (Milky Chance song)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Milky Chance song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070990" start="615" end="666" title="Cocoon (Catfish and the Bottlemen song)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Catfish and the Bottlemen song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504222" start="730" end="748" title="Friends and Lovers (album)" label="Friends and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048578" start="814" end="835" title="Castaways and Cutouts" label="Castaways and Cutouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133913" start="891" end="900" title="Parachute (Guster album)" label="Parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q527570" start="962" end="971" title="On and On (Jack Johnson album)" label="On and On"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777045" start="1009" end="1014" title="Migos" label="Migos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739840" start="1121" end="1140" title="The Hit Man and Her" label="The Hit Man and Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q616663" start="1166" end="1179" title="Apache Cocoon" label="Apache Cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105463" start="1207" end="1232" title="Cocoon (film)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119985670" start="1321" end="1347" title="Cocoon (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112618750" start="1365" end="1396" title="Cocoon (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q857976" start="1452" end="1468" title="Kakuna (Pokémon)" label="Kakuna (Pokémon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757054" start="1625" end="1633" title="Luminous (story collection)" label="Luminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q390595" start="1691" end="1709" title="Final Fantasy XIII" label="Final Fantasy XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728622" start="1717" end="1751" title="Cocoon (Hawaii Five-O)" label="&amp;quot;Cocoon&amp;quot; (Hawaii Five-O)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59156336" start="1815" end="1831" title="Ka ʻōwili ʻōka’i" label="Ka ʻōwili ʻōka’i"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432970" start="2050" end="2068" title="Kosala (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Kosala&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q600418" start="2106" end="2115" title="Cocooning" label="Cocooning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71318" wikidata="Q336797" url="?curid=71318" title="100-year flood">
<text>A 100-year flood is a flood event that has on average a 1 in 100 chance (1% probability) of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

A 100-year flood is also referred to as a 1% flood. For coastal or lake flooding, a 100-year flood is generally expressed as a flood elevation or depth, and may include wave effects. For river systems, a 100-year flood is generally expressed as a flowrate. Based on the expected 100-year flood flow rate, the flood water level can be mapped as an area of inundation. The resulting floodplain map is referred to as the 100-year floodplain. Estimates of the 100-year flood flowrate and other streamflow statistics for any stream in the United States are available. In the UK, the Environment Agency publishes a comprehensive map of all areas at risk of a 1 in 100 year flood. Areas near the coast of an ocean or large lake also can be flooded by combinations of tide, storm surge, and waves. Maps of the riverine or coastal 100-year floodplain may figure importantly in building permits, environmental regulations, and flood insurance. These analyses generally represent 20th-century climate.

==Probability==
A common misunderstanding is that a 100-year flood is likely to occur only once in a 100-year period. In fact, there is approximately a 63.4% chance of one or more 100-year floods occurring in any 100-year period. On the Danube River at Passau, Germany, the actual intervals between 100-year floods during 1501 to 2013 ranged from 37 to 192 years. The probability Pe that one or more floods occurring during any period will exceed a given flood threshold can be expressed, using the binomial distribution, as

formula_1

where T is the threshold return period (e.g. 100-yr, 50-yr, 25-yr, and so forth), and n is the number of years in the period. The probability of exceedance Pe is also described as the natural, inherent, or hydrologic risk of failure. However, the expected value of the number of 100-year floods occurring in any 100-year period is 1.

Ten-year floods have a 10% chance of occurring in any given year (Pe =0.10); 500-year have a 0.2% chance of occurring in any given year (Pe =0.002); etc. The percent chance of an X-year flood occurring in a single year is 100/X. A similar analysis is commonly applied to coastal flooding or rainfall data. The recurrence interval of a storm is rarely identical to that of an associated riverine flood, because of rainfall timing and location variations among different drainage basins.

The field of extreme value theory was created to model rare events such as 100-year floods for the purposes of civil engineering. This theory is most commonly applied to the maximum or minimum observed stream flows of a given river. In desert areas where there are only ephemeral washes, this method is applied to the maximum observed rainfall over a given period of time (24-hours, 6-hours, or 3-hours). The extreme value analysis only considers the most extreme event observed in a given year. So, between the large spring runoff and a heavy summer rain storm, whichever resulted in more runoff would be considered the extreme event, while the smaller event would be ignored in the analysis (even though both may have been capable of causing terrible flooding in their own right).

==Statistical assumptions==

There are a number of assumptions that are made to complete the analysis that determines the 100-year flood. First, the extreme events observed in each year must be independent from year to year. In other words, the maximum river flow rate from 1984 cannot be found to be significantly correlated with the observed flow rate in 1985, which cannot be correlated with 1986, and so forth. The second assumption is that the observed extreme events must come from the same probability density function. The third assumption is that the probability distribution relates to the largest storm (rainfall or river flow rate measurement) that occurs in any one year. The fourth assumption is that the probability distribution function is stationary, meaning that the mean (average), standard deviation and maximum and minimum values are not increasing or decreasing over time. This concept is referred to as stationarity.

The first assumption is often but not always valid and should be tested on a case-by-case basis. The second assumption is often valid if the extreme events are observed under similar climate conditions. For example, if the extreme events on record all come from late summer thunderstorms (as is the case in the southwest U.S.), or from snow pack melting (as is the case in north-central U.S.), then this assumption should be valid. If, however, there are some extreme events taken from thunder storms, others from snow pack melting, and others from hurricanes, then this assumption is most likely not valid. The third assumption is only a problem when trying to forecast a low, but maximum flow event (for example, an event smaller than a 2-year flood). Since this is not typically a goal in extreme analysis, or in civil engineering design, then the situation rarely presents itself.

The final assumption about stationarity is difficult to test from data for a single site because of the large uncertainties in even the longest flood records (see next section). More broadly, substantial evidence of climate change strongly suggests that the probability distribution is also changing and that managing flood risks in the future will become even more difficult. The simplest implication of this is that most of the historical data represent 20th-century climate and might not be valid for extreme event analysis in the 21st century.

==Probability uncertainty==

When these assumptions are violated, there is an &quot;unknown&quot; amount of uncertainty introduced into the reported value of what the 100-year flood means in terms of rainfall intensity, or flood depth. When all of the inputs are known, the uncertainty can be measured in the form of a confidence interval. For example, one might say there is a 95% chance that the 100-year flood is greater than X, but less than Y.

Direct statistical analysis to estimate the 100-year riverine flood is possible only at the relatively few locations where an annual series of maximum instantaneous flood discharges has been recorded. In the United States as of 2014, taxpayers have supported such records for at least 60 years at fewer than 2,600 locations, for at least 90 years at fewer than 500, and for at least 120 years at only 11. For comparison, the total area of the nation is about , so there are perhaps 3,000 stream reaches that drain watersheds of and 300,000 reaches that drain . In urban areas, 100-year flood estimates are needed for watersheds as small as . For reaches without sufficient data for direct analysis, 100-year flood estimates are derived from indirect statistical analysis of flood records at other locations in a hydrologically similar region or from other hydrologic models. Similarly for coastal floods, tide gauge data exist for only about 1,450 sites worldwide, of which only about 950 added information to the global data center between January 2010 and March 2016.
Much longer records of flood elevations exist at a few locations around the world, such as the Danube River at Passau, Germany, but they must be evaluated carefully for accuracy and completeness before any statistical interpretation.

For an individual stream reach, the uncertainties in any analysis can be large, so 100-year flood estimates have large individual uncertainties for most stream reaches. For the largest recorded flood at any specific location, or any potentially larger event, the recurrence interval always is poorly known. Spatial variability adds more uncertainty, because a flood peak observed at different locations on the same stream during the same event commonly represents a different recurrence interval at each location. If an extreme storm drops enough rain on one branch of a river to cause a 100-year flood, but no rain falls over another branch, the flood wave downstream from their junction might have a recurrence interval of only 10 years. Conversely, a storm that produces a 25-year flood simultaneously in each branch might form a 100-year flood downstream. During a time of flooding, news accounts necessarily simplify the story by reporting the greatest damage and largest recurrence interval estimated at any location. The public can easily and incorrectly conclude that the recurrence interval applies to all stream reaches in the flood area.

==Observed intervals between floods==
Peak elevations of 14 floods as early as 1501 on the Danube River at Passau, Germany, reveal great variability in the actual intervals between floods. Flood events greater than the 50-year flood occurred at intervals of 4 to 192 years since 1501, and the 50-year flood of 2002 was followed only 11 years later by a 500-year flood. Only half of the intervals between 50- and 100-year floods were within 50 percent of the nominal average interval. Similarly, the intervals between 5-year floods during 1955 to 2007 ranged from 5 months to 16 years, and only half were within 2.5 to 7.5 years.

==Regulatory use==
In the United States, the 100-year flood provides the risk basis for flood insurance rates. A &quot;regulatory flood&quot; or &quot;base flood&quot; is routinely established for river reaches through a science-based rule-making process targeted to a 100-year flood at the historical average recurrence interval. In addition to historical flood data, the process accounts for previously established regulatory values, the effects of flood-control reservoirs, and changes in land use in the watershed. Coastal flood hazards have been mapped by a similar approach that includes the relevant physical processes. Most areas where serious floods can occur in the United States have been mapped consistently in this manner. On average nationwide, those 100-year flood estimates are well sufficient for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and offer reasonable estimates of future flood risk, if the future is like the past. Approximately 3% of the U.S. population lives in areas subject to the 1% annual chance coastal flood hazard.

In theory, removing homes and businesses from areas that flood repeatedly can protect people and reduce insurance losses, but in practice it is difficult for people to retreat from established neighborhoods.

==See also==
* Extreme value theory
*Extreme weather
* Flood forecasting
* Frequency of exceedance
* List of floods
* Lists of floods in the United States

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;What is a 100 year flood?&quot;. Boulder Area Sustainability Information Network (BASIN). URL accessed 2006-06-16.

*&quot;Flood Extreme Anaysis&quot;. GeoTide Extreme Analysis Software. URL accessed 2023-11-28.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336797" start="2" end="16" title="100-year flood" label="100-year flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="22" end="27" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q336797" start="180" end="188" title="100-year flood" label="1% flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="307" end="311" title="wind wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="453" end="458" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="519" end="529" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="716" end="734" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="898" end="902" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="904" end="915" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="921" end="926" title="wind wave" label="waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="1055" end="1070" title="flood insurance" label="flood insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1367" end="1373" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190" start="1383" end="1389" title="Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="1629" end="1650" title="binomial distribution" label="binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627230" start="1692" end="1705" title="return period" label="return period"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305240" start="1797" end="1822" title="probability of exceedance" label="probability of exceedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="1914" end="1928" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="2273" end="2289" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627230" start="2312" end="2331" title="return period" label="recurrence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="2471" end="2485" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q729429" start="2502" end="2522" title="extreme value theory" label="extreme value theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604383" start="3324" end="3335" title="statistical assumption" label="assumptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="3467" end="3478" title="statistical independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="3574" end="3587" title="Statistical significance" label="significantly"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="3588" end="3598" title="correlation and dependence" label="correlated"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="3770" end="3798" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="3833" end="3857" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="4058" end="4062" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="4074" end="4092" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192209" start="4199" end="4211" title="Stationary process" label="stationarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5316" end="5330" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="5358" end="5382" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="6840" end="6869" title="regression analysis" label="indirect statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6955" end="6972" title="Hydrology#Modeling" label="hydrologic models"/>
<link wikidata="Q686697" start="7004" end="7014" title="tide gauge" label="tide gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="7264" end="7270" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190" start="7280" end="7286" title="Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="8645" end="8651" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190" start="8661" end="8667" title="Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="9272" end="9287" title="flood insurance" label="flood insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="9703" end="9716" title="Coastal flood" label="Coastal flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972708" start="10018" end="10050" title="National Flood Insurance Program" label="National Flood Insurance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q729429" start="10477" end="10497" title="Extreme value theory" label="Extreme value theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="10499" end="10514" title="Extreme weather" label="Extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409303" start="10517" end="10534" title="Flood forecasting" label="Flood forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305240" start="10537" end="10560" title="Frequency of exceedance" label="Frequency of exceedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620530" start="10563" end="10577" title="List of floods" label="List of floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149589" start="10580" end="10616" title="Lists of floods in the United States" label="Lists of floods in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71320" wikidata="Q794428" url="?curid=71320" title="Entrenched river">
<text>An entrenched river, or entrenched stream is a river or stream that flows in a narrow trench or valley cut into a plain or relatively level upland. 
Because of lateral erosion streams flowing over gentle slopes over a time develops meandering (snake like pattern) course. 
Meanders form where gradient is very gentle, for example in floodplain and delta. Meandering is the feature of the middle and final course of the river. 
But very deep and wide meanders can also be found cutting hard rocks. Such meanders are called incised or entrenched meanders. 
The exception is that entrenched meanders are formed during the upliftment of land where river is young.
They widen and deepen over time and can be found as deep gorges or canyons in hard rock. In the case of an entrenched stream or river, it is often presumed that the watercourse has inherited its course by cutting down into bedrock from a pre-existing plain with little modification of the original course. The down-cutting of the river system could be the result not only of tectonic uplift but also of other factors such as river piracy, decrease of load, increase of runoff, extension of the drainage basin, or change in base level such as a fall in sea level. General, nongeneric terminology for either a river or stream that flows in a narrow trench or valley, for which evidence of a preexisting plain or relatively level upland can be either absent or present is either valley meander or meander valley with the latter term being preferred in literature.

The meanders that form part of either an entrenched river or meander valley are most commonly known as &quot;incised meanders&quot;. They are commonly classified as either an &quot;ingrown meander&quot; or an &quot;entrenched meander&quot;. For a long time, it was argued that ingrown meander occurs when downcutting process is slow and the river can cause lateral erosion, leading to an asymmetric valley. In addition, it was also argued for a long time that an entrenched meander forms when there is a rapid incision of the river bed such that the river does not have the opportunity to erode the lateral side. This leads to symmetrical valleys with a gorge-like appearance. However, more detailed studies have shown the development of ingrown meanders versus entrenched meanders depends on a complex mixture of factors such as bedrock lithology, tectonic activity, and climate.

== Causes ==
As observed above, an entrenched river can be caused by either tectonic uplift in the area or when the lowering of the sea level occurs. It can also be caused by increased level of downcutting or a collapse of moraine-dammed lake downstream, or capture of the river by another river. Moreover, the process of river rejuvenation can also be the cause of river entrenchment, especially when the process has occurred due to tectonic uplift. River rejuvenation increases the power of the flowing water and, therefore, the process of erosion is accelerated.

Studies show that tectonic movement, particularly movement associated with uplift, can influence spatial patterns of erosion and sedimentation. Although it is very difficult to offer detailed information of past tectonic activity, the basic temporal and spatial scale can show evidence of how this movement leads to the formation of an entrenched river. Various authors have used an entrenched river as evidence of tectonic movement in the past, and in this way they have proven the significant role of tectonic uplifts in the formation of an entrenched river.

Several studies have cited incised meander a major feature of river entrenchment, as an impact of river rejuvenation. On the other hand, scholars argue that incised meanders and entrenched meanders are features formed before river rejuvenation. Incised meanders occur at the base of the river and they occur when the river base level has reduced, thus giving the river enough power for vertical erosion to take place. Some studies also indicate that anthropogenic factors such as clearing of vegetation, development of dams, and reservoir and urbanization are also causes of river entrenchment. For example, gravel mining along the Russian River developed the Middle Reach pit, which in turn led to the creation of the entrenched river. According to Posamentier, in the 1950s and 1980s, the Russian River had gravel pits and dry creek. However, over time the river has become entrenched due to mining (p. 1777).

Urbanization and clearing of vegetation increase runoff water, which in turn increases water volume, especially during rainy seasons. Therefore, the increased level of vertical erosion of the river increases the power of the water, leading to erosion of the river. A study of San Pedro River and another river in the southwest have indicated that floods were the main cause of river entrenchment in the 18th century. The study shows that increased population and human activities in these places increased floods and, consequently, the volume of runoff water (Hereford 43).

== Consequences ==
Rosgen indicates that the consequences of incised meander are associated with accelerated stream bank erosion, land loss, aquatic habitat loss, as well as lowering the water table. Additionally, the study also found that incised meanders also cause loss of land productivity and downstream sedimentation (p. 2). The factors are likely to affect not only the economic development on the land where it passes but it is also very costly when restoration is to be initiated. 
river entrenchment happens because of the water having the power to cause erosion on the river bed. This increased velocity has shown a negative effect on the riparian habitat, because of increased erosion of the area. For example, a study by Simon revealed that channel incision is a major characteristic of entrenched rivers, and it affects variables in riparian vegetation and growth of fish in the areas (p. 528). Lowering of the channels means that the ground water level has also reduced. Specifically, the development of the entrenched river reduces the amount of ground water due to water loss through infiltration. The movement of the base level changes tributaries and the entrenchment of a tributary channel. Studies of various rivers have revealed that the process of river entrenchment has been associated with adjustment of river positions through bank erosion, as well as widening.

== River restoration ==
River entrenchment causes negative impacts, such as accelerated stream bank erosion, land loss, loss of aquatic habitat, loss of land productivity, lowering of water table and sedimentation of the river downstream. However, in order to offset these problems, channel restoration measures focusing on restoration of the river in its original or to its previous characteristics are available. Though to achieve good results, a good understanding of the river patterns and profile of stable channels is a critical requirement. The process also needs an elaborate procedure to be followed to ensure all important factors and actions are followed. Numerous projects across the globe involving river restoration have been conducted, and a good example of such projects is Maggie Creek, Nevada. The project was completed in 1990 on upper Maggie Creek in Nevada. It was a partnership between the government and a private ranch, and the project entailed straightening of many miles of unstable gravel bed regarded as the C4/D4 type.

== See also ==
*River rejuvenation
*River Terrace
*Water Table

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="3" end="19" title="Entrenched river" label="entrenched river"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="24" end="41" title="Entrenched river" label="entrenched stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582839" start="103" end="111" title="River incision" label="cut into"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="355" end="365" title="Entrenched river" label="Meandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="522" end="529" title="Entrenched river" label="incised"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="533" end="543" title="Entrenched river" label="entrenched"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="717" end="723" title="Entrenched river" label="gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="727" end="734" title="Entrenched river" label="canyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="1436" end="1450" title="Entrenched river" label="valley meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q794428" start="1454" end="1468" title="Entrenched river" label="meander valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="1526" end="1534" title="meanders" label="meanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="1639" end="1647" title="meanders" label="meanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="1711" end="1718" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="1748" end="1755" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="1807" end="1814" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303078" start="1827" end="1838" title="downcutting" label="downcutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1887" end="1894" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231722" start="1910" end="1927" title="asymmetric valley" label="asymmetric valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="1996" end="2003" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="2161" end="2168" title="valleys" label="valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="2176" end="2181" title="gorge" label="gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="2480" end="2495" title="tectonic uplift" label="tectonic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="2536" end="2545" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303078" start="2598" end="2609" title="downcutting" label="downcutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="2627" end="2634" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="2642" end="2646" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852785" start="2776" end="2788" title="Trench" label="entrenchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="2838" end="2853" title="tectonic uplift" label="tectonic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="2946" end="2953" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="2989" end="3006" title="tectonic movement" label="tectonic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="3046" end="3052" title="Tectonic uplift" label="uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="3088" end="3095" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="3100" end="3113" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="3183" end="3191" title="tectonic" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="3386" end="3403" title="tectonic movement" label="tectonic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="3474" end="3482" title="tectonic" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="3560" end="3575" title="incised meander" label="incised meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="3698" end="3706" title="meanders" label="meanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="3722" end="3730" title="meanders" label="meanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="3786" end="3794" title="meanders" label="meanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="3928" end="3935" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="3983" end="3996" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="4025" end="4035" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="4052" end="4056" title="dams" label="dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="4062" end="4071" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="4076" end="4088" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="4141" end="4147" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030974" start="4165" end="4178" title="Russian River (California)" label="Russian River"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="4342" end="4348" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="4362" end="4367" title="creek (stream)" label="creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="4427" end="4433" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="4446" end="4458" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="4475" end="4485" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="4539" end="4545" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="4623" end="4630" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="4689" end="4696" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451378" start="4722" end="4737" title="San Pedro River (Arizona)" label="San Pedro River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="4952" end="4958" title="floods" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="4982" end="4988" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="5090" end="5097" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="5142" end="5149" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q56114960" start="5151" end="5160" title="land loss" label="land loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="5170" end="5177" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="5269" end="5277" title="meanders" label="meanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="5330" end="5343" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428433" start="5479" end="5490" title="Environmental restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="5586" end="5593" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="5627" end="5635" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="5680" end="5687" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="5710" end="5717" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="5832" end="5837" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="5877" end="5887" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="6122" end="6134" title="infiltration (hydrology)" label="infiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="6175" end="6186" title="tributaries" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="6213" end="6222" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="6251" end="6256" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="6379" end="6386" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="6498" end="6504" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="6510" end="6517" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="6546" end="6553" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="6610" end="6623" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="7214" end="7220" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="7281" end="7287" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="7419" end="7425" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310579" start="7475" end="7493" title="River rejuvenation" label="River rejuvenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069618" start="7495" end="7508" title="River Terrace" label="River Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="7510" end="7521" title="Water Table" label="Water Table"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71322" wikidata="Q2396962" url="?curid=71322" title="Ron Turcotte">
<text>Ronald Joseph Morel Turcotte, (born July 22, 1941) is a retired Canadian thoroughbred race horse jockey best known as the rider of Secretariat, winner of the U.S. Triple Crown in 1973.

==Career==
Turcotte began his career in Toronto as a hot walker for E. P. Taylor&#x27;s Windfields Farm in 1960, but he was soon wearing the silks and winning races. As an apprentice jockey he rode Windfields&#x27; Northern Dancer to his first victory. He gained prominence with his victory aboard Tom Rolfe in the 1965 Preakness Stakes.

Turcotte soon started working with Canadian trainer Lucien Laurin at the racetrack in Laurel, Maryland.

In 1972 he rode Riva Ridge to victory in the Kentucky Derby and the Belmont Stakes.

Turcotte became internationally famous in 1973 when he rode Secretariat to win the first Triple Crown in 25 years, with records for each race, and the phenomenal finish of Secretariat 31 lengths ahead of the field in the Belmont. A photograph of Secretariat winning the race, with Turcotte looking over his shoulder at the pack, far behind, became famous. Turcotte was North America&#x27;s leading stakes-winning jockey in 1972 and 1973. He became the first jockey to win back-to-back Kentucky Derbies since Jimmy Winkfield in 1902 and was the first jockey to ever have won five of six consecutive Triple Crown races (matched in 2015 by Victor Espinoza).

He was voted the prestigious George Woolf Memorial Jockey Award that honors a rider whose career and personal conduct exemplifies the very best example of participants in the sport of thoroughbred racing. He is the first person from Thoroughbred racing ever to be appointed a member of the Order of Canada.

Turcotte&#x27;s career ended on July 13, 1978. He fell from his horse, Flag of Leyte Gulf, during the 8th race at Belmont Park. He suffered injuries that resulted in his being a paraplegic.

He was inducted into the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in 1979. He was voted into the New Brunswick Sports Hall of Fame and in 1980 was inducted into Canada&#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame. In 1984 he became the first ever recipient of the Avelino Gomez Memorial Award given annually to the jockey who is Canadian-born, Canadian-raised, or a regular in the country, who has made significant contributions to the sport.

In 2015, a statue of Secretariat and Turcotte crossing the finish line at the Belmont Stakes was unveiled in Turcotte&#x27;s hometown of Grand Falls, New Brunswick.

==Personal life==
Born in Drummond, New Brunswick, Turcotte was one of 12 children. He left school at age 14 to work with his father as a lumberjack, then at age 18, headed to Toronto looking for construction work.

Turcotte now lives in his home town of Grand Falls, New Brunswick, Canada, with his wife Gaëtane and their four daughters. He is an advocate for those with disabilities and helps to raise funds for disability programs.

A well-known survivor of an on-track accident, Turcotte makes appearances at racetracks to raise funds and awareness of the assistance that the Permanently Disabled Jockeys Fund (PDJF) provides to fellow injured riders.

Turcotte was hospitalized on March 9, 2015, following a single-vehicle accident in New Brunswick. The van he was driving flipped after hitting a snowbank. Turcotte and a friend were both injured in the accident. Turcotte sustained fractures to both legs, while his friend suffered minor injuries.

==Media==
In the 2010 Disney movie &quot;Secretariat&quot;, Ron Turcotte&#x27;s role as Secretariat&#x27;s jockey is played by Otto Thorwarth, a real life jockey himself.

Directed by Phil Comeau, a National Film Board of Canada documentary feature film on Ron Turcotte&#x27;s life and career, &quot;Secretariat&#x27;s Jockey, Ron Turcotte&quot;, had its world premiere in Louisville, Kentucky, in May 2013.

==Notes==
==References==
* Heller, Bill. &quot;The Will to Win: Ron Turcotte&#x27;s Ride to Glory&quot; (1992) Fifth House Publishers 
* Ron Turcotte profile at Penny Chenery&#x27;s Secretariat.com
* Ron Turcotte at the Canadian Horse Racing Hall of Fame
* Ron Turcotte at the United States &#x27; National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame

==External links==
* &quot;Secretariat&#x27;s Jockey - Ron Turcotte&quot; at the National Film Board of Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2396962" start="0" end="28" title="Ron Turcotte" label="Ronald Joseph Morel Turcotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="73" end="85" title="thoroughbred" label="thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="86" end="96" title="race horse" label="race horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q846750" start="97" end="103" title="jockey" label="jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151926" start="131" end="142" title="Secretariat (horse)" label="Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892243" start="158" end="175" title="United States Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing" label="U.S. Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="226" end="233" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17115945" start="239" end="249" title="hot walker" label="hot walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322084" start="254" end="266" title="E. P. Taylor" label="E. P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024162" start="274" end="289" title="Windfields Farm" label="Windfields Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969034" start="401" end="416" title="Northern Dancer" label="Northern Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817407" start="484" end="493" title="Tom Rolfe" label="Tom Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856617" start="506" end="522" title="Preakness Stakes" label="Preakness Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="560" end="568" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697100" start="577" end="590" title="Lucien Laurin" label="Lucien Laurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q755275" start="611" end="627" title="Laurel, Maryland" label="Laurel, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336945" start="646" end="656" title="Riva Ridge" label="Riva Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141795" start="675" end="689" title="Kentucky Derby" label="Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q612758" start="698" end="712" title="Belmont Stakes" label="Belmont Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151926" start="775" end="786" title="Secretariat (horse)" label="Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1084" end="1097" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161494" start="1223" end="1238" title="Jimmy Winkfield" label="Jimmy Winkfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925891" start="1352" end="1367" title="Victor Espinoza" label="Victor Espinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546518" start="1400" end="1434" title="George Woolf Memorial Jockey Award" label="George Woolf Memorial Jockey Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214425" start="1604" end="1623" title="Thoroughbred racing" label="Thoroughbred racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="1661" end="1676" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894449" start="1793" end="1805" title="Belmont Park" label="Belmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049655" start="1857" end="1867" title="paraplegic" label="paraplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974502" start="1895" end="1937" title="National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame" label="National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006111" start="1969" end="2002" title="New Brunswick Sports Hall of Fame" label="New Brunswick Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330014" start="2033" end="2066" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828007" start="2118" end="2146" title="Avelino Gomez Memorial Award" label="Avelino Gomez Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q644273" start="2435" end="2461" title="Grand Falls, New Brunswick" label="Grand Falls, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124183" start="2602" end="2612" title="lumberjack" label="lumberjack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3044" end="3077" title="Permanently Disabled Jockeys Fund" label="Permanently Disabled Jockeys Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q470665" start="3454" end="3477" title="Secretariat (film)" label="&amp;quot;Secretariat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151926" start="3507" end="3518" title="Secretariat (horse)" label="Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378752" start="3603" end="3614" title="Phil Comeau" label="Phil Comeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="3618" end="3647" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="3792" end="3812" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909383" start="3855" end="3867" title="Bill Heller" label="Heller, Bill"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3875" end="3925" title="The Will to Win: Ron Turcotte&amp;#x27;s Ride to Glory" label="The Will to Win: Ron Turcotte&amp;#x27;s Ride to Glory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71325" wikidata="Q80935" url="?curid=71325" title="Lindisfarne Gospels">
<text>The Lindisfarne Gospels (London, British Library Cotton MS Nero D.IV) is an illuminated manuscript gospel book probably produced around the years 715–720 in the monastery at Lindisfarne, off the coast of Northumberland, which is now in the British Library in London. The manuscript is considered one of the finest works in the unique style of Hiberno-Saxon or Insular art, combining Mediterranean, Anglo-Saxon and Celtic elements.

The Lindisfarne Gospels are presumed to be the work of a monk named Eadfrith, who became Bishop of Lindisfarne in 698 and died in 721. Current scholarship indicates a date around 715, and it is believed they were produced in honour of St. Cuthbert. However, some parts of the manuscript were left unfinished so it is likely that Eadfrith was still working on it when he died. It is also possible that he produced them prior to 698, in order to commemorate the elevation of Cuthbert&#x27;s relics in that year, which is also thought to have been the occasion for which the St Cuthbert Gospel (also in the British Library) was produced. The Gospels are richly illustrated in the insular style and were originally encased in a fine leather treasure binding covered with jewels and metals made by Billfrith the Anchorite in the 8th century. During the Viking raids on Lindisfarne this jewelled cover was lost and a replacement was made in 1852. The text is written in insular script, and is the best documented and most complete insular manuscript of the period.

An Old English translation of the Gospels was made in the 10th century: a word-for-word gloss of the Latin Vulgate text, inserted between the lines by Aldred, Provost of Chester-le-Street. This is the oldest extant translation of the Gospels into the English language. The Gospels may have been taken from Durham Cathedral during the Dissolution of the Monasteries ordered by Henry VIII and were acquired in the early 17th century by Sir Robert Cotton from Robert Bowyer, Clerk of the Parliaments. Cotton&#x27;s library came to the British Museum in the 18th century and went to the British Library in London when this was separated from the British Museum.

== History ==

Lindisfarne, also known as &quot;Holy Island&quot;, is located off the coast of Northumberland in northern England (Chilvers 2004). In around 635 AD, the Irish missionary Aidan founded the Lindisfarne monastery on &quot;a small outcrop of the land&quot; on Lindisfarne. King Oswald of Northumbria sent Aidan from Iona to preach to and baptise the pagan Anglo-Saxons, following the conversion to Christianity of the Northumbrian monarchy in 627. By the time of Aidan&#x27;s death in 651, the Christian faith was becoming well-established in the area. The Lindisfarne gospel book is associated with the Cult of St. Cuthbert. Cuthbert was an ascetic member of a monastic community in Lindisfarne, before his death in 687. The book was made as part of the preparations to translate Cuthbert&#x27;s relics to a shrine in 698. Lindisfarne has a reputation as the probable place of genesis according to the Lindisfarne Gospels. Around 705 an anonymous monk of Lindisfarne wrote the &quot;Life of St Cuthbert&quot;. His bishop, Eadfrith, swiftly commissioned the most famous scholar of the age, Bede, to help shape the cult to a new purpose.

In the 10th century, about 250 years after the production of the book, Aldred, a priest of the monastery at Chester-le-Street, added an Old English translation between the lines of the Latin text. In his colophon he recorded the names of the four men who produced the Lindisfarne Gospels: Eadfrith, Bishop of Lindisfarne, was credited with writing the manuscript; Ethelwald, Bishop of the Lindisfarne islanders, was credited with binding it; Billfrith, an anchorite, was credited with ornamenting the manuscript; and finally, Aldred lists himself as the person who glossed it in Anglo-Saxon (Old English).

Some scholars have argued that Eadfrith and Ethelwald did not produce the manuscript but commissioned someone else to do so. However, Janet Backhouse argues for the validity of the statement by pointing out that &quot;there is no reason to doubt [Aldred&#x27;s] statement&quot; because he was &quot;recording a well-established tradition&quot;. Eadfrith and Ethelwald were both bishops at the monastery of Lindisfarne where the manuscript was produced. As Alan Thacker notes, the Lindisfarne Gospels are &quot;undoubtedly the work of a single hand&quot;, and Eadfrith remains regarded as &quot;the scribe and painter of the Lindisfarne Gospels&quot;.

== Commission ==
The Lindisfarne Gospels is a Christian manuscript, containing the four gospels recounting the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. The manuscript was used for ceremonial purposes to promote and celebrate the Christian religion and the word of God. Because the body of Cuthbert was buried there, Lindisfarne became an important pilgrimage destination in the 7th and 8th centuries, and the Lindisfarne Gospels would have contributed to the cult of St Cuthbert. The gospels used techniques reminiscent of elite metalwork to impress a Northumbrian audience, most of whom could not read, and certainly not understand the Latin text.

According to Aldred&#x27;s colophon, the Lindisfarne Gospels were made in honour of God and Saint Cuthbert, a Bishop of the Lindisfarne monastery who was becoming &quot;Northern England&#x27;s most popular Saint&quot;. Scholars think that the manuscript was written sometime between Cuthbert&#x27;s death in 687 and Eadfrith&#x27;s death in 721. There is a significant amount of information known about Cuthbert thanks to two accounts of his life that were written shortly after his death, the first by an anonymous monk from Lindisfarne, and the second by Bede, a famous monk, historian, and theologian.

Cuthbert entered into the monastery of Melrose, now in lowland Scotland but then in Northumbria, in the late 7th century, and after being ordained a priest he began to travel throughout Northumbria, &quot;rapidly acquiring a reputation for holiness and for the possession of miraculous powers&quot;. The Synod of Whitby in 664 pitted the Hiberno-Celtic church against the Roman church regarding the calculation of the date of Easter. The dispute was adjudged by King Oswiu of Northumbria in favour of the Roman church, but many of the leading monks at Lindisfarne then returned to Iona and Ireland, leaving only a residue of monks affiliated to the Roman church at Lindisfarne. Due to increasingly slack religious practice in Lindisfarne, Cuthbert was sent to Lindisfarne to reform the religious community. In Lindisfarne Cuthbert began to adopt a solitary lifestyle, eventually moving to Inner Farne Island, where he built a hermitage. Cuthbert agreed to become bishop at the request of King Ecgfrith in 684, but within about two years he returned to his hermitage in Farne as he felt death approaching. Cuthbert died on 20 March 687 and was buried in Lindisfarne. As a venerated saint, his tomb attracted many pilgrims to Lindisfarne.

== Techniques ==

The Lindisfarne Gospels manuscript was produced in a scriptorium in the monastery of Lindisfarne. It took approximately 10 years to create. Its pages are vellum, and evidence from the manuscript reveals that the vellum was made using roughly 150 calf skins. The book is 516 pages long. The text is written &quot;in a dense, dark brown ink, often almost black, which contains particles of carbon from soot or lamp black&quot;. The pens used for the manuscript could have been cut from either quills or reeds, and there is also evidence to suggest that the trace marks (seen under oblique light) were made by an early equivalent of a modern pencil. Lavish jewellery, now lost, was added to the binding of the manuscript later in the 8th century. Eadfrith manufactured 90 of his own colours with &quot;only six local minerals and vegetable extracts&quot;.

There is a huge range of individual pigments used in the manuscript. The colours are derived from animal, vegetable and mineral sources. Gold is used in only a couple of small details. While some colours were obtained from local sources, others were imported from the Mediterranean. The blue was long thought to be ultramarine from Afghanistan, but analysis with Raman microscopy in the 2000s revealed it to be indigo. The medium used to bind the colours was primarily egg white, with fish glue perhaps used in a few places. Backhouse emphasizes that &quot;all Eadfrith&#x27;s colours are applied with great skill and accuracy, but ... we have no means of knowing exactly what implements he used&quot;. 

Professor Brown added that Eadfrith &quot;knew about lapis lazuli [a semi-precious stone with a blue tint] from the Himalayas but could not get hold of it, so made his own [substitute]&quot;.

The pages were arranged into gatherings of eight. Once the sheets had been folded together, the highest-numbered page was carefully marked out by pricking with a stylus or a small knife. Holes were pricked through each gathering of eight leaves, and then individual pages were separately ruled for writing with a sharp, dry, and discrete point.

The Lindisfarne Gospels are impeccably designed, and as Backhouse points out, vellum would have been too expensive for &quot;practice runs&quot; for the pages, and so preliminary designs may have been done on wax tablets (hollowed-out wood or bone with a layer of wax). These would have been an inexpensive medium for a first draft; once a sketch had been transferred to the manuscript, the wax could be remelted and a new design or outline inscribed.

==History==
As a result of Viking raids, the monastic community left Lindisfarne around 875, taking with them Cuthbert&#x27;s body, relics, and books, including the Lindisfarne Gospels and the St Cuthbert Gospel. It is estimated that after around seven years the Lindisfarne community settled in the Priory at Chester-le-Street in Durham, where they stayed until 995 (and where Aldred would have done his interlinear translation of the text). After Henry VIII ordered the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1539, the manuscript was separated from the priory. In the early 17th century the Gospels were owned by Sir Robert Cotton (1571–1631), and in 1753 they became part of the founding collections of the British Museum.

===Condition===
The Lindisfarne Gospels are in remarkable condition and the text is complete and undamaged. However, the original binding of the manuscript was destroyed. In March 1852 a new binding was commissioned by bishop Edward Maltby; Smith, Nicholson and Co. (silversmiths) made the binding with the intention of recreating motifs in Eadfrith&#x27;s work.

==Formal and stylistic elements of the manuscript==

In &quot;The Illuminated Manuscript&quot;, Backhouse states that &quot;The Lindisfarne Gospels is one of the first and greatest masterpieces of medieval European book painting&quot;. The Lindisfarne Gospels is described as Insular or Hiberno-Saxon art, a general term for manuscripts produced in the British Isles between 500 and 900 AD.

As a part of Anglo-Saxon art the manuscript reveals a love of riddles and surprise, shown through the pattern and interlace in the meticulously designed pages. Many of the patterns used for the Lindisfarne Gospels date back before the Christian period. There is a strong presence of Celtic, Germanic, and Irish art styles. The spiral style and &quot;knot work&quot; evident in the formation of the designed pages are influenced by Celtic art.

One of the most characteristic styles in the manuscript is the zoomorphic style (adopted from Germanic art) and is revealed through the extensive use of interlaced animal and bird patterns throughout the book. The birds that appear in the manuscript may also have been from Eadfrith&#x27;s own observations of wildlife in Lindisfarne. The geometric design motifs are also Germanic influence, and appear throughout the manuscript.

The carpet pages (pages of pure decoration) exemplify Eadfrith&#x27;s use of geometrical ornamentation. Another notable aspect of the Gospels is the tiny drops of red lead, which create backgrounds, outlines, and patterns, but never appear on the carpet pages. The red dots appear in early Irish manuscripts, revealing their influence in the design of the Lindisfarne Gospels. Thacker points out that Eadfrith acquired knowledge from, and was influenced by, other artistic styles, showing that he had &quot;eclectic taste&quot;. While there are many non-Christian artistic influences in the manuscript, the patterns were used to produce religious motifs and ideas.

Eadfrith was a highly trained calligrapher and he used insular majuscule script in the manuscript.

===Insular context===
The Lindisfarne Gospels are not an example of &quot;isolated genius... in an otherwise dark age&quot;: there were other Gospel books produced in the same time period and geographic area that have similar qualities to the Lindisfarne Gospels. The Lindisfarne monastery not only produced the Lindisfarne gospels, but also the Durham Gospels and Echternach Gospels. These gospel books were credited to &quot;the &#x27;Durnham-Echternach Calligrapher&#x27;, thought to be the oldest member of the Lindisfarne Scriptorium&quot;. The Echternach gospels might have been made during the creation of the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Durham Gospels came after, but in an old-fashioned style. The Lichfield Gospels (Lichfield Cathedral, Chapter Library) employ a very similar style to the Lindisfarne Gospels, and it is even speculated that the artist was attempting to emulate Eadfrith&#x27;s work. Surviving pages from the Lichfield Gospels also have a cross-carpet page and animal and bird interlace, but the designs do not achieve the same perfection, and are seen as looser and heavier than Eadfrith&#x27;s.

The design of the Lindisfarne Gospels has also been related to the Tara Brooch (National Museum of Ireland, Dublin), displaying animal interlace, curvilinear patterns, and borders of bird interlace, but unfortunately the origin of the brooch is unknown. The Durham Gospels (Durham Cathedral Library) are suspected as having been created slightly earlier than the Lindisfarne Gospels, and while they have the bird interlace, the birds are less natural and real than Eadfrith&#x27;s birds in the Lindisfarne Gospels. The Book of Durrow (Trinity College, Dublin) is also thought of as an earlier insular manuscript, as the style of the manuscript is simpler and less developed than that of the Lindisfarne Gospels. The Book of Kells (Trinity College, Dublin, MS A. I.6 (58)) employs decorative patterns that are similar to other insular art pieces of the period, but is thought to have been produced much later than the Lindisfarne Gospels.

==Iconography==

The Lindisfarne Gospels is a manuscript that contains the Gospels of the four Evangelists Mark, John, Luke, and Matthew. The Lindisfarne Gospels begins with a carpet page in the form of a cross and a major initial page, introducing the letter of St. Jerome and Pope Damasus I. There are sixteen pages of arcaded canon tables, where parallel passages of the four Evangelists are laid out. A portrait of the appropriate Evangelist, a carpet page and a decorated initial page precedes each Gospel. There is an additional major initial of the Christmas narrative of Matthew.

===The Evangelists===
Bede explains how each of the four Evangelists was represented by his own symbol: Matthew was the man, representing the human Christ; Mark was the lion, symbolising the triumphant Christ of the Resurrection; Luke was the calf, symbolising the sacrificial victim of the Crucifixion; and John was the eagle, symbolising Christ&#x27;s second coming. A collective term for the symbols of the four Evangelists is the Tetramorphs. Each of the four Evangelists is accompanied by his respective symbol in his miniature portrait in the manuscript. In these portraits, Matthew, Mark, and Luke are shown writing, while John looks straight ahead at the reader holding his scroll. The Evangelists also represent the dual nature of Christ. Mark and John are shown as young men, symbolising the divine nature of Christ, and Matthew and Luke appear older and bearded, representing Christ&#x27;s mortal nature.

===The decoration of the manuscript===
A manuscript so richly decorated reveals that the Lindisfarne Gospels not only had a practical ceremonial use but also attempted to symbolize the Word of God in missionary expeditions. Backhouse points out that the clergy was not unaware of the profound impression a book such as the Lindisfarne Gospels made on other congregations. The opening words of the Gospel (the incipits) are highly decorated, revealing Roman capitals, Greek and Germanic letters, filled with interlaced birds and beasts, representing the splendour of God&#x27;s creation. On one page alone, there are 10,600 decorative red dots. Different kinds of pigment are used throughout the manuscript. Red lead and gold were also used for decoration.

===The carpet pages===

Each carpet page contains a different image of a cross (called a cross-carpet page), emphasising the importance of the Christian religion and of ecumenical relationships between churches. The pages of ornamentation have motifs familiar from metalwork and jewellery that pair alongside bird and animal decoration.

==Campaign to relocate==
A campaign exists to have the gospels housed in the North East of England. Supporters include the Bishop of Durham, Viz creator Simon Donald, and the Northumbrian Association. The move is vigorously opposed by the British Library. Several possible locations have been mooted, including Durham Cathedral, Lindisfarne itself or one of the museums in Newcastle upon Tyne or Sunderland. In 1971 professor Suzanne Kaufman of Rockford, Illinois, presented a facsimile copy of the Gospels to the clergy of the Island.

==Exhibitions in the north of England==
Between September and 3 December 2022 the manuscript was being exhibited in the Laing Art Gallery in Newcastle upon Tyne.

From July to September 2013 the Lindisfarne Gospels were displayed in Palace Green Library, Durham. Nearly 100,000 visitors saw the exhibition. The manuscript exhibition also included items from the Staffordshire Hoard, the Yates Thompson 26 &quot;Life of Cuthbert&quot;, and the gold Taplow belt buckle. Also included was the closely related St Cuthbert Gospel, which was bought by the British Library in 2012. This returned to Durham in 2014 (1 March to 31 December) for an exhibition of bookbindings at the library. Alongside the Lindisfarne Gospels Exhibition was a festival of more than 500 events, exhibitions and performances across the North East and Cumbria.

==See also==
*List of Hiberno-Saxon illustrated manuscripts
*Old English Bible translations

==Notes==
==References==
*Backhouse, Janet. &quot;Lindisfarne Gospels.&quot; Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. Accessed 10 March 2012.
*Backhouse, Janet. The Illuminated Manuscript. Oxford: Phaidon Press Ltd., 1979.
*Backhouse, Janet. The Lindisfarne Gospels. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1981.
*BBC Tyne. &quot;The Lindisfarne Gospels.&quot; BBC Online, 2012. Accessed 10 March 2012.
*Calkins, Robert G. &quot;Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages&quot;. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1983.
*Chilvers, Ian. ed. &quot;Lindisfarne Gospels&quot; The Oxford Dictionary of Art. Oxford University Press, 2004. Oxford Reference Online. Accessed 9 March 2012.
*De Hamel, Christopher. &quot;A History of Illuminated Manuscripts&quot;. Boston: David R. Godine, 1986.
*Thacker, Alan. &quot;Eadfrith (d. 721?)&quot;. &quot;Oxford Dictionary of Natural Biography&quot;, 2004.
*Walther, Ingo F. and Norbert Wolf. &quot;Codices Illustres: The world&#x27;s most famous illuminated manuscripts, 400 to 1600&quot;. Köln, TASCHEN, 2005.
*Whitfield, Niamh. &quot;The “Tara” brooch: an Irish emblem of status in its European context&quot;, In: Hourihane, Colm (ed), &quot;From Ireland Coming: Irish art from the early Christian to the late Gothic period and its European context&quot;. Princeton (NJ): Princeton University Press, 2001. 
*&quot;Lindisfarne Gospels.&quot; The British Library, The British Library, 16 Jan. 2015.
*Brown, Michelle P., &quot;The Lindisfarne Gospels: Society, Spirituality &amp; the Scribe.&quot; London: The British Library, 2003.
*Consiglio, Flavia Di. &quot;Lindisfarne Gospels: Why Is This Book so Special?&quot; BBC News, BBC, 20 Mar. 2013.

==Further reading==
*Brown, Michelle P., &quot;The Lindisfarne Gospels: Society, Spirituality and the Scribe&quot;. London: The British Library, 2003
*Brown, Michelle P., &quot;The Lindisfarne Gospels and the Early Medieval World&quot;. London: The British Library, 2010

==External links==

*The Lindisfarne Gospels, a free online seminar from the British Library.
*More information at Earlier Latin Manuscripts
* &quot;The Lindisfarne Gospels&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Michelle Brown, Richard Gameson &amp; Clare Lees (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, Feb.20, 2003)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80935" start="4" end="23" title="Lindisfarne Gospels" label="Lindisfarne Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="76" end="98" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q690851" start="99" end="110" title="gospel book" label="gospel book"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="174" end="185" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="204" end="218" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="240" end="255" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="343" end="356" title="Hiberno-Saxon" label="Hiberno-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="360" end="371" title="Insular art" label="Insular art"/>
<link wikidata="Q958255" start="398" end="409" title="Anglo-Saxon art" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q914395" start="414" end="420" title="Celtic art" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276696" start="500" end="508" title="Eadfrith of Lindisfarne" label="Eadfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="521" end="542" title="Bishop of Lindisfarne" label="Bishop of Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q504518" start="667" end="679" title="Cuthbert of Lindisfarne" label="St. Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985561" start="1004" end="1022" title="St Cuthbert Gospel" label="St Cuthbert Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="1071" end="1077" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836733" start="1169" end="1185" title="treasure binding" label="treasure binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201394" start="1225" end="1234" title="Billfrith" label="Billfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146843" start="1239" end="1248" title="Anchorite" label="Anchorite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1280" end="1292" title="Lindisfarne#Vikings" label="Viking raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518866" start="1396" end="1410" title="insular script" label="insular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1495" end="1506" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571907" start="1580" end="1585" title="Bible gloss" label="gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="1599" end="1606" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713982" start="1643" end="1649" title="Aldred the Scribe" label="Aldred"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570025" start="1662" end="1679" title="Chester-le-Street" label="Chester-le-Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1743" end="1759" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="1798" end="1814" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1826" end="1856" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1868" end="1878" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q333098" start="1926" end="1943" title="Robert Bruce Cotton" label="Sir Robert Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342256" start="1949" end="1962" title="Robert Bowyer (diarist)" label="Robert Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131874" start="1964" end="1988" title="Clerk of the Parliaments" label="Clerk of the Parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q943336" start="1990" end="2011" title="Cotton library" label="Cotton&amp;#x27;s library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="2024" end="2038" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="2075" end="2090" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2094" end="2100" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="2166" end="2177" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="2246" end="2260" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132148" start="2337" end="2342" title="Aidan of Lindisfarne" label="Aidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="2441" end="2462" title="Oswald of Northumbria" label="Oswald of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="2479" end="2483" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="2519" end="2531" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="2972" end="2978" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570025" start="3409" end="3426" title="Chester-le-Street" label="Chester-le-Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3437" end="3448" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q372474" start="3505" end="3513" title="colophon (publishing)" label="colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276696" start="3590" end="3598" title="Eadfrith" label="Eadfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="3600" end="3621" title="Bishop of Lindisfarne" label="Bishop of Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201394" start="3743" end="3752" title="Billfrith" label="Billfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146843" start="3757" end="3766" title="anchorite" label="anchorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="4648" end="4654" title="gospel" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="5107" end="5118" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q504518" start="5303" end="5311" title="Cuthbert" label="Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="5762" end="5766" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919732" start="5850" end="5857" title="Old Melrose" label="Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="5895" end="5906" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265740" start="6115" end="6130" title="Synod of Whitby" label="Synod of Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q468847" start="6278" end="6298" title="Oswiu of Northumbria" label="Oswiu of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q666887" start="6700" end="6711" title="Inner Farne" label="Inner Farne"/>
<link wikidata="Q513550" start="6737" end="6746" title="Hermitage (religious retreat)" label="hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8771556" start="6804" end="6812" title="Ecgfrith" label="Ecgfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q655185" start="7120" end="7131" title="scriptorium" label="scriptorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q378274" start="7221" end="7227" title="vellum" label="vellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="7957" end="7964" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219660" start="8236" end="8247" title="ultramarine" label="ultramarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288894" start="8284" end="8300" title="Raman microscope" label="Raman microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="8332" end="8338" title="Indigo dye" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="8679" end="8691" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228599" start="8848" end="8858" title="Gathering (bookbinding)" label="gatherings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428312" start="9374" end="9384" title="wax tablet" label="wax tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985561" start="9811" end="9829" title="St Cuthbert Gospel" label="St Cuthbert Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="10090" end="10120" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q333098" start="10232" end="10245" title="Robert Bruce Cotton" label="Robert Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344312" start="10566" end="10579" title="Edward Maltby" label="Edward Maltby"/>
<link wikidata="Q576717" start="11603" end="11619" title="zoomorphic style" label="zoomorphic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044188" start="11975" end="11986" title="carpet page" label="carpet page"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="12700" end="12709" title="majuscule" label="majuscule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249776" start="13083" end="13097" title="Durham Gospels" label="Durham Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44082" start="13102" end="13120" title="Echternach Gospels" label="Echternach Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149480" start="13444" end="13461" title="Lichfield Gospels" label="Lichfield Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q510389" start="13463" end="13482" title="Lichfield Cathedral" label="Lichfield Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922572" start="13928" end="13939" title="Tara Brooch" label="Tara Brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316504" start="14135" end="14159" title="Durham Dean and Chapter Library" label="Durham Cathedral Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q892984" start="14380" end="14394" title="Book of Durrow" label="Book of Durrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="14577" end="14590" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044188" start="14976" end="14987" title="carpet page" label="carpet page"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="15063" end="15073" title="Jerome" label="St. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q130997" start="15078" end="15092" title="Pope Damasus I" label="Pope Damasus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q635112" start="15129" end="15141" title="canon tables" label="canon tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="15411" end="15415" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010254" start="15823" end="15833" title="Tetramorph" label="Tetramorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161138" start="16715" end="16722" title="incipit" label="incipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q419205" start="17013" end="17021" title="Red lead" label="Red lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="17524" end="17540" title="Bishop of Durham" label="Bishop of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q769541" start="17542" end="17545" title="Viz (comics)" label="Viz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518633" start="17554" end="17566" title="Simon Donald" label="Simon Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="17712" end="17728" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="17730" end="17741" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="17774" end="17793" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280897" start="17797" end="17807" title="City of Sunderland" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800739" start="18058" end="18075" title="Laing Art Gallery" label="Laing Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="18079" end="18098" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18171" end="18191" title="Durham University#Libraries" label="Palace Green Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135210" start="18300" end="18319" title="Staffordshire Hoard" label="Staffordshire Hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684716" start="18386" end="18404" title="Taplow burial" label="Taplow belt buckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985561" start="18444" end="18462" title="St Cuthbert Gospel" label="St Cuthbert Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q240471" start="18591" end="18602" title="bookbinding" label="bookbinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589814" start="18784" end="18829" title="List of Hiberno-Saxon illustrated manuscripts" label="List of Hiberno-Saxon illustrated manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083917" start="18831" end="18861" title="Old English Bible translations" label="Old English Bible translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153171" start="18889" end="18905" title="Janet Backhouse" label="Backhouse, Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837194" start="20570" end="20587" title="Michelle P. Brown" label="Brown, Michelle P"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="20898" end="20913" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="21085" end="21096" title="In Our Time (radio series)" label="In Our Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71331" wikidata="Q92746" url="?curid=71331" title="John Backus">
<text>John Warner Backus (December 3, 1924 – March 17, 2007) was an American computer scientist. He led the team that invented and implemented FORTRAN, the first widely used high-level programming language, and was the inventor of the Backus–Naur form (BNF), a widely used notation to define syntaxes of formal languages. He later did research into the function-level programming paradigm, presenting his findings in his influential 1977 Turing Award lecture &quot;Can Programming Be Liberated from the von Neumann Style?&quot;

The IEEE awarded Backus the W. W. McDowell Award in 1967 for the development of FORTRAN. He received the National Medal of Science in 1975 and the 1977 Turing Award &quot;for profound, influential, and lasting contributions to the design of practical high-level programming systems, notably through his work on FORTRAN, and for publication of formal procedures for the specification of programming languages&quot;.

John Backus retired in 1991. He died at his home in Ashland, Oregon on March 17, 2007.

==Early life==

Backus was born in Philadelphia and grew up in nearby Wilmington, Delaware. He studied at The Hill School in Pottstown, Pennsylvania, but he was apparently not a diligent student. He entered college at the University of Virginia to study chemistry, but struggled with his classes there, and he was expelled after less than a year for poor attendance. He was subsequently conscripted into the U.S. Army during World War II, and eventually came to hold the rank of corporal, being put in command of an anti-aircraft battery stationed at Fort Stewart, Georgia.

After receiving high scores on a military aptitude test, the Army sent him to study engineering at the University of Pittsburgh. He later transferred to a pre-medical program at Haverford College. During an internship at a hospital, he was diagnosed with a cranial bone tumor, which was successfully removed, and a plate was installed in his head. He then moved to the Flower and Fifth Avenue Medical School for medical school, but found it uninteresting and dropped out after nine months. He soon underwent a second operation to replace the metal plate in his head with one of his own design, and received an honorable medical discharge from the U.S. Army in 1946.

==Fortran==

After moving to New York City he trained initially as a radio technician and became interested in mathematics. He graduated from Columbia University with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1949 and a master&#x27;s degree in 1950, both in mathematics, and joined IBM in 1950. During his first three years, he worked on the Selective Sequence Electronic Calculator (SSEC); his first major project was to write a program to calculate positions of the Moon. In 1953, Backus developed the language Speedcoding, the first high-level language created for an IBM computer, to aid in software development for the IBM 701 computer.

Programming was very difficult at this time, and in 1954 Backus assembled a team to define and develop Fortran for the IBM 704 computer. Fortran was the first high-level programming language to be put to broad use. This widely used language made computers practical and accessible machines for scientists and others without requiring them to have deep knowledge of the machinery.

==Backus–Naur form==

Backus served on the international committees that developed ALGOL 58 and the very influential ALGOL 60, which quickly became the &quot;de facto&quot; worldwide standard for publishing algorithms. Backus developed the Backus–Naur form (BNF), published in the UNESCO report on ALGOL 58. It was a formal notation able to describe any context-free programming language, and was important in the development of compilers. A few deviations from this approach were tried (notably in Lisp and APL), but by the 1970s, Backus–Naur context-free specifications for computer languages had become quite standard, following the development of automated compiler generators such as yacc.

This contribution helped Backus win the Turing Award in 1977.

==Function-level programming==
Backus later worked on a function-level programming language known as FP, which was described in his Turing Award lecture &quot;Can Programming be Liberated from the von Neumann Style?&quot;. Sometimes viewed as Backus&#x27;s apology for creating Fortran, this paper did less to garner interest in the FP language than to spark research into functional programming in general. When Backus publicized the function-level style of programming, his message was mostly misunderstood as being the same as traditional functional programming style languages.

FP was strongly inspired by Kenneth E. Iverson&#x27;s APL, even using a non-standard character set. An FP interpreter was distributed with the 4.2BSD Unix operating system, but there were relatively few implementations of the language, most of which were used for educational purposes.

Backus spent the latter part of his career developing FL (from &quot;Function Level&quot;), a successor to FP. FL was an internal IBM research project, and development of the language stopped when the project was finished. Only a few papers documenting it remain, and the source code of the compiler described in them was not made public. FL was at odds with functional programming languages being developed in the 1980s, most of which were based on the lambda calculus and static typing systems instead of, as in APL, the concatenation of primitive operations. Many of the language&#x27;s ideas have now been implemented in versions of the J programming language, Iverson&#x27;s successor to APL.

==Awards and honors==
*Named an IBM Fellow (1963)
*W. W. McDowell Award (1967)
*National Medal of Science (1975)
*Turing Award (1977)
*Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1985)
*Doctor honoris causa Université Henri-Poincaré (1989)
*Draper Prize (1993)
*Computer History Museum Fellow Award &quot;for his development of FORTRAN, contributions to computer systems theory and software project management.&quot; (1997)
*Asteroid 6830 Johnbackus named in his honor (June 1, 2007) 

==See also==
* List of pioneers in computer science

==References==
==External links==

*Biography at School of Mathematics and Statistics University of St Andrews, Scotland
*Biography at The History of Computing Project
* The FL project (Postscript file)
* IBM Archives
* About BNF
* Hall of Fellows Computer History Museum
* Memorial delivered at the 2007 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92746" start="0" end="18" title="John Backus" label="John Warner Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="71" end="89" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="137" end="144" title="Fortran" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="168" end="199" title="high-level programming language" label="high-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="229" end="245" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="286" end="292" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="298" end="313" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496566" start="347" end="373" title="function-level programming" label="function-level programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="527" end="531" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536791" start="551" end="571" title="W. Wallace McDowell Award" label="W. W. McDowell Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="628" end="653" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="675" end="687" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q450100" start="991" end="1006" title="Ashland, Oregon" label="Ashland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1062" end="1074" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="1097" end="1117" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739685" start="1133" end="1148" title="The Hill School" label="The Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185890" start="1152" end="1175" title="Pottstown, Pennsylvania" label="Pottstown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="1249" end="1271" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="1281" end="1290" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1435" end="1444" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1452" end="1464" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438754" start="1578" end="1590" title="Fort Stewart" label="Fort Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="1592" end="1599" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="1705" end="1729" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q579611" start="1780" end="1797" title="Haverford College" label="Haverford College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="1867" end="1877" title="bone tumor" label="bone tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115972" start="1971" end="2009" title="New York Medical College" label="Flower and Fifth Avenue Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2298" end="2311" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="2338" end="2343" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2411" end="2430" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2537" end="2540" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q362849" start="2597" end="2644" title="IBM SSEC" label="Selective Sequence Electronic Calculator (SSEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2723" end="2727" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7475416" start="2768" end="2779" title="Speedcoding" label="Speedcoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653104" start="2879" end="2886" title="IBM 701" label="IBM 701"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="3001" end="3008" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="3017" end="3024" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="3035" end="3042" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094499" start="3362" end="3370" title="ALGOL 58" label="ALGOL 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209759" start="3396" end="3404" title="ALGOL 60" label="ALGOL 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="3486" end="3495" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="3519" end="3535" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3560" end="3566" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q729271" start="3633" end="3645" title="context-free language" label="context-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502371" start="3693" end="3717" title="History of compiler construction" label="development of compilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="3778" end="3782" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="3787" end="3790" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q305932" start="3968" end="3972" title="yacc" label="yacc"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="4015" end="4027" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496566" start="4094" end="4129" title="Function-level programming" label="function-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474061" start="4139" end="4141" title="FP (programming language)" label="FP"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="4170" end="4182" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941496" start="4235" end="4252" title="Von Neumann programming languages" label="von Neumann Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="4411" end="4433" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q92629" start="4649" end="4667" title="Kenneth E. Iverson" label="Kenneth E. Iverson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="4675" end="4678" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="4706" end="4719" title="Character encoding" label="character set"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="4727" end="4738" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="4764" end="4770" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="4.2BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="4771" end="4775" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426589" start="4962" end="4964" title="FL (programming language)" label="FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="5362" end="5377" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="5382" end="5395" title="static typing" label="static typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q383994" start="5549" end="5571" title="J (programming language)" label="J programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q45924" start="5639" end="5649" title="IBM Fellow" label="IBM Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536791" start="5658" end="5678" title="W. Wallace McDowell Award" label="W. W. McDowell Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="5687" end="5712" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="5721" end="5733" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="5756" end="5793" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="5809" end="5822" title="honoris causa" label="honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033673" start="5823" end="5848" title="Henri Poincaré University" label="Université Henri-Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="5857" end="5869" title="Charles Stark Draper Prize" label="Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="5878" end="5914" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum Fellow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="6041" end="6049" title="Asteroid" label="Asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q313483" start="6050" end="6065" title="6830 Johnbackus" label="6830 Johnbackus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82529" start="6117" end="6153" title="List of pioneers in computer science" label="List of pioneers in computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="6403" end="6426" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71349" wikidata="Q313303" url="?curid=71349" title="Grenadier">
<text>A grenadier ( , ; derived from the word &quot;grenade&quot;) was historically an assault-specialist soldier who threw hand grenades in siege operation battles. The distinct combat function of the grenadier was established in the mid-17th century, when grenadiers were recruited from among the strongest and largest soldiers. By the 18th century, the grenadier dedicated to throwing hand grenades had become a less necessary specialist, yet in battle, the grenadiers were the physically robust soldiers who led vanguard assaults, such as storming fortifications in the course of siege warfare.

Certain countries such as France (Grenadiers à Cheval de la Garde Impériale) and Argentina (Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers) established units of Horse Grenadiers, and for a time the British Army had Horse Grenadier Guards. Like their infantry grenadier counterparts, these horse-mounted soldiers were chosen for their size and strength (heavy cavalry).

In modern warfare, a grenadier is a specially trained soldier operating as part of a fireteam, proficient in the use of limited high-angle indirect fire over &quot;dead zones&quot;. This soldier is armed with a grenade launcher, a shoulder-fired, indirect-fire large-caliber weapon.

==Origins==
The concept of troops being equipped with grenades dates back to the military of the Ming dynasty, when Chinese soldiers stationed on the Great Wall used thunder crash bombs. The earliest references to soldiers using grenades in European armies dates back to the early modern era in the Austrian and Spanish armies. References to grenade-throwing troops also appear in England during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, and it was during the reign of King Louis XIV that companies of soldiers serving as grenadiers were first introduced into the French Royal Army. According to René Chartrand, Jean Martinet formed a grenadier company in the &quot;Régiment du Roi&quot; in 1667. By 1670 27 French infantry regiments were authorised to include elite companies trained to carry and hurl grenades

The infantry of the Dutch States Army, influenced by their French invaders, adopted grenadiers in 1672. By 1678 six men in each company were trained to throw hand grenades, developed by the Dutch master fireworker Johan van Haren.

In May 1677, the English Army ordered that two soldiers of every Guards Regiment were to be trained as grenadiers; in April 1678 it was ordered that a company of grenadiers be added to the senior eight regiments of foot of the army. On 29 June of that year the diarist John Evelyn saw them drilling at an encampment at Hounslow, near London:
===Grenades===
The first grenades were small iron spheres filled with gunpowder fused with a length of slow-match, and roughly the size of a tennis ball. The grenadiers had to be tall and strong enough to hurl these heavy objects far enough so as not to harm themselves or their comrades, and disciplined enough to stand at the forefront of the fight, light the fuse and throw at the appropriate moment to minimize the ability of an enemy to throw the grenade back. Understandably, such requirements led to grenadiers being regarded as an elite fighting force.

==Early distinctions of dress and equipment==
The wide hats with broad brims characteristic of infantry during the late 17th century were in some armies discarded and replaced with caps. This was originally to allow the grenadier to sling his musket over his back with greater ease while throwing grenades (initially, only these troops were provided with slings). It has been suggested that a brimless hat also permitted the grenadier greater ease in throwing the grenade overhand. Preben Kannik, former Curator of the Danish Army Museum, however, definitely states that grenades were thrown underhand and that it was the slinging of firearms that required the special headdresses typical of early grenadiers.

The grenadiers of the French infantry were by the 1690s distinguished from their musketeer colleagues by special issues of equipment. These included slings for their flintlocks, curved sabres instead of straight swords, large leather pouches for grenades and hatchets.

By 1700, grenadiers in the English and other armies had adopted a cap in the shape of a bishop&#x27;s mitre, usually decorated with the regimental insignia in embroidered cloth. In addition to grenades, they were equipped with Flintlock muskets. Attached to the shoulder belt was a brass &#x27;match case&#x27; that housed the slow match used to ignite the grenade fuse, a feature that was retained in later grenadier uniforms.

==Elite status in the 18th century==
Grenade usage declined in the 18th century, a fact that can be attributed to the improved effectiveness of infantry line tactics and flintlock technology. The need for elite assault troops remained, however, and the existing grenadier companies were used for this purpose. As noted, above average physical size had been considered important for the original grenadiers and, in principle, height and strength remained the basis of selection for these picked companies. In the British regiments of foot during the 18th century the preference was, however, to draw on steady veterans for appointment to individual vacancies in a grenadier company (one of the ten companies comprising each regiment). The traditional criterion of size was only resorted to when newly raised regiments required a quick sorting of a mass of new recruits. Prior to the Battle of Culloden in 1745 the Duke of Cumberland ordered that grenadier companies were &quot;to be completed out of the best men of their respective Regiments, and to be constantly kept so&quot;.

By contrast, French grenadier companies of the 18th century appear to have selected their new recruits according to the classic criteria of height. However with the outbreak of the Revolutionary Wars the urgency of mass mobilisation meant that the selection of grenadier and other special sub-units was done according to the preferences of individual officers. 
Transferral to a grenadier company generally meant both enhanced status and an increase in pay.

Whether for reasons of appearance or reputation, grenadiers tended to be the showpiece troops of their respective armies. In the Spanish Army of the early 19th century, for example, grenadier companies were excused routine duties such as town patrols but were expected to provide guards at the headquarters and residences of senior officers. When a regiment was in line formation the grenadier company always formed on the right flank. In the British Army, when Trooping the Colour, &quot;The British Grenadiers&quot; march is played no matter which regiment is on the parade ground, as the colour party stands at the right-hand end of the line, as every regiment formerly had a company of grenadiers at the right of their formation.

==Headgear==

As noted above, grenadiers were distinguished by their headgear from the ordinary musketeers (or &quot;Hatmen&quot;) in each regiment of foot. While there were some exceptions, the most typical grenadier headdress was either the mitre cap or the bearskin. Both began to appear in various armies during the second half of the 17th century because grenadiers were impeded by the wide brimmed infantry hats of the period when slinging their firearms while throwing grenades.

The cloth caps worn by the original grenadiers in European armies during the 17th century were frequently trimmed with fur. This fell out of fashion in many armies until the mid-18th century when grenadiers in the British, Spanish and French armies began wearing high fur-trimmed caps with crowns of coloured cloth and, in some cases, ornamental front plates. This added to the apparent height and impressive appearance of these troops both on the parade ground and the battlefield.

The mitre cap, whether in stiffened cloth or metal, had become the distinguishing feature of the grenadier in the armies of Britain, Russia, Prussia and most German states during the late 17th and early 18th centuries. Spanish and Austrian grenadiers favoured high fur hats with long coloured cloth &#x27;hoods&#x27; (&quot;bags&quot;). The mitre was gradually replaced by bearskin caps in other armies, and by 1914 it only survived in the 1st Foot Guards and the 1st (Emperor Alexander) Guards Grenadiers of the Prussian Imperial Guard, plus the Russian Pavlovsky Guard. Russian grenadiers had worn their brass fronted mitre hats on active service until 1807 and some of these preserved for parade wear by the Pavlovsky Guards until 1914 still had dents or holes from musket balls. Some have survived for display in museums and collections.

While Northern European armies such as Britain, Russia, Sweden, and various German states wore the mitre cap, southern countries such as France, Spain, Austria, Portugal, and various Italian states preferred the bearskin. By 1768, Britain had adopted the bearskin.

The shape and appearance of fur caps differed according to period and country. While France used smaller bearskins, Spain preferred towering caps with long flowing bags. Britain initially favoured tall cloth mitres with lacing and braiding, while Russia would sport equally tall leather helmets with brass front-plates. The first grenadier headdresses were fairly low, and in the case of Spain and Austria sometimes contained elements from both mitres and bearskins. Until the mid-18th century, French grenadiers wore tricorne hats, rather than either the mitre or fur cap. Grenadier caps gradually increased in size and decoration, with added devices such as pompoms, cords, badges, front-plates, plumes, and braiding, as well as various national heraldic emblems.

During the Napoleonic Wars, both mitres and fur caps fell out of use in favour of the shako. Two notable exceptions were the grenadier companies and Imperial Guard regiments of the French Grande Armée, plus those of the Austrian Army. After the Battle of Friedland in 1807, because of their distinguished performance, Russia&#x27;s Pavlovsk Regiment were allowed to keep their mitre caps and were admitted to the Imperial Guard.

During the Napoleonic Wars, British grenadiers had usually worn the bearskin cap only for full dress when on home service, since the fur was found to deteriorate rapidly during campaigning overseas. Following their role in the defeat of the French Imperial Guard at the Battle of Waterloo, the 1st Foot Guards was renamed the 1st (or Grenadier) Regiment of Foot Guards and all companies of the regiment adopted the bearskin. In 1831, it was ordered that all three Foot Guards should wear the bearskin cap, by then resembling the modern headdress in shape and size. The grenadier companies of line infantry regiments meanwhile retained the bearskin cap for parade dress until it was abolished in 1842. During the Crimean War, the Foot Guard regiments wore their bearskins in the field, the only time the celebrated Guards&#x27; headdress was worn in action.

==Grenadier companies==
From the 17th Century to the mid 19th centuries the &quot;Foot&quot; or infantry regiments of the British and several other armies comprised ten companies; eight of them &quot;Battalion&quot; or &quot;Centre&quot; companies, and two &quot;Flank Companies&quot; consisting of one Grenadier and one Light or Light Infantry Company. In the United States, an Act of Congress made on 8 May 1792 directed that for every infantry battalion there should be one company of grenadiers, riflemen, or light infantry.

On occasion the grenadier and light companies could be &quot;brigaded&quot; together into separate grenadier and light infantry battalions for assaults or skirmishing respectively.

Each of the line infantry regiments of the Austrian Army of this period included a grenadier division of two companies, separate from the fusilier companies that made up the bulk of the unit. The grenadier companies were frequently detached from the parent regiment and grouped into composite grenadier battalions for a particular campaign or purpose.

The Russian Imperial Army of the 18th century followed a different line of development. Prior to 1731 grenadiers made up five separate regiments. These were disbanded prior to the outbreak of war with Turkey and picked infantrymen were transferred to one of two grenadier companies incorporated in each (two-battalion) line infantry regiment. In 1753, 2 grenadier companies were added to the infantry regiments and all regiments were ordered to consist of a 3-battalion structure, with 3 grenadier companies of 200 grenadiers in each. In 1756 each of the grenadier companies was brought together in four permanent grenadier regiments. This policy of maintaining a separate corps of grenadiers continued until the Russian Revolution of 1917. The Palace Grenadiers was a ceremonial company selected from distinguished veterans, in existence from 1827 to 1917 with the primary role of guarding the Winter Palace.

With the standardisation of training and tactics, the need for separate grenadier companies at regimental level had passed by the mid-19th century and the British, French and Austrian armies phased out these sub-units between 1850 and 1862.
==Grenadier regiments==
The term grenadier was retained or adopted by various elite infantry units, including the Prussian Potsdam Grenadiers; the (Grenadiers of Sardinia) in Italy; France&#x27;s Foot Grenadiers, Fusilier-Grenadiers, Tirailleur-Grenadiers and ; the Russian Empire&#x27;s Imperial Guard; Britain&#x27;s Grenadier Guards and the 101st Grenadiers. The latter was part of the British Indian Army and claimed to be the first and oldest grenadier regiment (as opposed to grenadier companies) in the British Empire. In 1747 the grenadier companies of a number of disbanded French infantry regiments were brought together to form a single permanent unit - the .
During the American Revolution of 1775–1783, the Connecticut 1st Company Governor&#x27;s Guards and the 11th Regiment of Connecticut Militia had grenadier companies.
New York City also had a Grenadier unit, as did South Carolina – the elite 1st South Carolina Regiment, raised and commanded by Charles Cotesworth Pinckney.

In Mexico Antonio López de Santa Anna created the Grenadier Guards of the Supreme Power on 7 December 1841. The formation remained in service until 1847.

A Toronto militia unit was renamed the 10th Royal Grenadiers in 1881, then later became the Royal Regiment of Canada.

==Grenadier divisions==
In the nineteenth century, France had the Oudinot Grenadier Division and the Russian army had grenadier divisions such as the Caucasus Grenadier Division. During World War II, the Polish army had the 1st Grenadier Division, and the German military had several grenadier and &quot;panzergrenadier&quot; divisions.

==World War I and beyond==
In 1914, the Imperial German and Russian Armies still included a number of grenadier regiments. In the Russian Army, these comprised the Grenadier Guards Regiment (&quot;L-G Grenadierski Polk&quot;) as well as the Grenadier Corps of sixteen regiments (plus an independent reinforced company of Palace Grenadiers, guarding the St. Petersburg Imperial residences). Five regiments of the Prussian Guard were designated as &quot;Garde-Grenadiers&quot; and there were an additional fourteen regiment of grenadiers amongst the line infantry of the German Empire. In both the Russian and German armies, the grenadier regiments were considered as a historic elite; distinguished by features such as plumed helmets in full dress, distinctive facings (yellow for all Russian grenadiers) or special braiding. Their role and training, however, no longer differed from that of the rest of the infantry.

Today, regiments using the name grenadiers are effectively indistinguishable from other infantry, especially when hand grenades, RPGs, and other types of explosive arms have become standard-issue weaponry; however, such regiments retain at least the tradition of their elite past. Grenadier can also refer to soldiers using grenade launchers, including those mounted on rifles. During World War I a proposal to designate specialist grenade launching units in the British Army as grenadiers was vetoed by the Grenadier Guards, who considered that they now had exclusive rights to the ancient distinction, and the term &quot;bomber&quot; was substituted.

During World War I, German troops referred to as assault pioneers, who were early combat engineers or sappers and stormtroopers began using two types of hand grenades in trench warfare operations against the French to clear opposing trenches of troops. The more effective of the two was the so-called &quot;potato masher&quot; &quot;Stielhandgranate&quot;, which were stick grenades.

The term &quot;Panzergrenadier&quot; was adopted in the German &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; to describe mechanized heavy infantry elements whose greater protection and mobility allowed them to keep pace with (and provide intimate protection to) armoured units and formations. This designation reflects the traditional role of grenadiers as shock troops. The term in today&#x27;s &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; refer to mechanized infantry.

When parachute units were first created in the United States Army, the Air Corps desired them to be under their control and to be designated &quot;air grenadiers&quot;.

The last known unit to serve as grenadiers, and employing grenades as their weapons, was a special &quot;Grenadier brigade&quot; formed by the Red Army within the 4th Army during the Tikhvin defensive operation in October 1941. It was a measure taken because of lack of firearms, and the commander of the brigade was appropriately General Major G.T. Timofeyev who had served in one of the Russian Imperial Army&#x27;s grenadier regiments during the First World War.

In the Vietnam War, U.S. squads usually had at least one soldier whose role was that of a grenadier, armed with just an M79 grenade launcher and an M1911 pistol, though in some cases grenadiers were not even issued this sidearm. The M79 was designed to bridge the gap between the maximum throwing range of a grenade and the minimum distance of mortar fire. The XM148 grenade launcher, the M79&#x27;s replacement designed to be mounted to the M16 rifle, was first issued in December 1966, but was beset by problems: the cocking mechanism was difficult to squeeze, the sight was hard to use, and the complicated trigger design required constant maintenance. By May 1967, it was deemed unsuitable for use in the field, and was eventually replaced by the M203 grenade launcher. Though the M203 was later replaced by the M320 Grenade Launcher Module in U.S. Army service starting in 2009, the M203 remains a popular and familiar choice in the grenadier role and is still issued by other U.S. military branches.

===Argentina===

The Argentine Army still maintains a prestigious unit known as the Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers (&quot;Regimiento de Granaderos a Caballo&quot;)--actually a squadron-strength formation—which serves as the Presidential ceremonial escort and guard unit. The regiment was founded in 1903 as a recreation of a unit that existed from 1813 to 1826 under the leadership of national hero General José de San Martín.

Unlike most other units that carried the title of &quot;grenadiers&quot;, the Argentine Grenadiers are a cavalry unit, and continue to mount horses for ceremonial purposes, as well as carrying lances and cavalry sabers.

===Belgium===

The Belgian Land Component retains two regiments of grenadiers based in Brussels. First raised in 1837 from companies drawn from the line infantry of the newly independent kingdom, these troops served with distinction in both World Wars. In peacetime they had a ceremonial role that corresponded to that of royal guards in other armies. In 1960 the historic blue and red full dress worn prior to World War I was reintroduced for limited wear, although the tall bearskin headdress is now made of synthetic material.

===Canada===

The Canadian Grenadier Guards is one of the longest serving units in the Canadian Army&#x27;s Primary Reserve. It still continues today, both in its reserve role and as a ceremonial guard at the National War Memorial, Rideau Hall, and other places of symbolic importance.

The 10th Royal Grenadiers (later The Royal Grenadiers) of Toronto later became the Royal Regiment of Canada with tradition surviving in a grenadier company.

The Winnipeg Grenadiers was one of the 2 Canadian infantry regiments of C Force that took part in the Battle of Hong Kong in December 1941. The regiment is currently on the Supplementary Order of Battle.

===Chile===
The Presidential Horse Guards Cavalry Regiment &quot;Grenadiers&quot; (&quot;Regimiento Escolta Presidencial n.1 &quot;Granaderos&quot;&quot;) of the Chilean Army is active since 1827, has fought in every major battle of the Chilean Army in the 19th century and since 1840 and 1907 has served as the Escort Regiment to the President of Chile on important national occasions. This regiment is named after General Manuel Bulnes Prieto, the founding patron of the regiment, who led the Chilean Army and the anti-confederation North Peruvian dissidents to victory in the War of the Peru-Bolivia Confederation in the crucial Battle of Yungay in 1839, which signaled the confederation&#x27;s demise.

The Chilean Grenadiers&#x27; uniforms, until 2011, were similar to the full &quot;Feldgrau&quot; uniforms of the Chilean Army, but adapted for the cavalry and like their Argentine counterparts, carry lances but not cavalry sabers, which are reserved for officers and the mounted colors guard escort. Starting in 2011, the regiment now wears a cavalry light blue full dress uniform with Pickelhaubes for all ranks.

===Ecuador===
The &quot;Tarqui Grenadiers&quot; serve as the Presidential Escort Squadron for the President of Ecuador. The unit stands guard at Quito&#x27;s Carondelet Palace and retains the uniform worn during the Battle of Tarqui of 1829, reporting as part of the Ecuadorian Army.

===France===
While the French army has not included any grenadiers since 1870, the grenade badge is still a distinctive mark of the Foreign Legion, the National Gendarmerie and the French Customs, which was a military unit until 1940.

===Germany===
*Grenadier is the lowest rank (OR-1) in the Heeresteil (en: army part) of the Bundeswehr Wachbataillon (en: Bundeswehr guard battalion). 
*Furthermore, in the German Heer &quot;Panzergrenadier&quot; (en: armoured grenadier) is the lowest rank (OR-1) of the &quot;Panzergrenadieretruppe&quot; (en: mechanized infantry).

===India===

The oldest grenadier regiment of the armies in the Commonwealth belongs to the Indian Army. The concept of &#x27;Grenadiers&#x27; evolved from the practice of selecting the bravest and strongest men for the most dangerous tasks in combat. The Grenadiers have the longest unbroken record of existence in the Indian Army.

===Italy===
The Granatieri di Sardegna Mechanized Brigade (&quot;Reggimento Granatieri di Sardegna&quot;) is currently part of the mechanized infantry brigade with the same name in the Italian Army. This unit traces its history back to a guards regiment raised in 1659 and is made up predominantly of one year volunteers. Historically, as the senior regiment in the Piedmontese and Italian armies the Grenadiers of Sardinia took the tallest recruits of each intake. On ceremonial occasions the Italian Grenadiers parade in their 19th century blue uniforms and fur headdresses. The 1st Grenadiers of Sardinia regiment is currently (2010) the only infantry regiment of the Italian Army with two battalions (1st &quot;Assietta&quot; and 2nd &quot;Cengio&quot; Grenadiers battalions), and it is likely that in 2020 its 2nd Battalion will be detached to re-activate the 2nd Sardinia Grenadiers Regiment.

===Mexico===
In Mexico, Grenadiers (&quot;Granaderos&quot;) are armored specialist police units used for anti-riot duties and other security roles. The National Guard maintains regional grenadier companies for public security duties, while performing law enforcement and wearing NG uniforms.

===Netherlands===
The Royal Netherlands Army maintains a regiment of Guard Grenadiers who retain the bearskin headdress of the early 19th century. This regiment has been amalgamated with the Jager Guards to form the &quot;Garderegiment Grenadiers en Jagers&quot; Two of its companies are Jagers (riflemen), the other two are grenadiers; it wears the maroon beret and is an air assault and airborne forces trained unit.

===Norway===
In the Norwegian Army and Air Force, grenadier () is used as a rank, the lowest enlisted below sergeant, to distinguish professional soldiers from conscripts. The grenadiers are employed for positions requiring more experience and/or professional presence. Fully professionalised units, such as the Telemark Battalion, serve in international operations. Professional enlisted personnel in the Navy has the equivalent rank (able seaman).

===Spain===
There is one company of the 1st King&#x27;s Immemorial Infantry Regiment, which during ceremonies, is authorized to use grenadier uniforms of the Charles III period.

===Sweden===
The Grenadier Company is the honor guard of the Swedish Army&#x27;s Life Guards for state ceremonies. Their uniform includes bearskin hats, and white baldrics (cross belts) that originally carried the fuses used to light grenades. The grenadiers bear the King&#x27;s own Life Company banner, which was presented to the unit in 1868 by Charles XV&#x27;s consort, Queen Louise.

===Switzerland===
In the military of Switzerland, the Grenadiers form well trained mechanized infantry units. They are used for especially challenging operations and are initially trained in Isone, a secluded, mountainous region in the South of Switzerland. The Swiss Kommando Spezialkräfte specialize in urban warfare, guerrilla warfare, anti-terrorist operations, commando tactics, sniper missions, hand-to-hand combat, and other special operations.

===United Kingdom===

The Grenadier Guards are the most senior of the five prestigious regiments of Foot Guards, each of which retains the bearskin headdress originally associated with grenadiers.

Although the Coldstream Guards can trace their origins to an earlier date (1650) than that of the Grenadier Guards (1656), they are officially recognized as second in seniority since having been formed initially to serve the Commonwealth, their service to the Crown only dates from the Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660.

===United States===

The United States Army rifle squad consists of two fireteams of four soldiers each, with the designated grenadier being equipped with an M4/M16 with the M203 grenade launcher (or newer M320 Grenade Launcher Module) slung under the barrel and providing limited high-angle fire over &#x27;dead space&#x27;.

The United States Marine Corps rifle squad consists of three four-man fireteams including a team leader who also works as the M203 grenadier. During the Vietnam War there was one grenadier in the squad armed with an M79 grenade launcher.

===Yugoslavia===

Bombaši (Serbian Cyrillic: бомбаши; &quot;bombardiers&quot; or &quot;bombers&quot;) is the name widely used for the Yugoslav Partisan volunteer grenadiers, who had a significant importance in operations during World War II and are regarded as particularly heroic.

==References==
==Sources==
* Gudmundsson, Bruce I., Hyland, William, &quot;Stormtroop Tactics: Innovation in the German Army, 1914-1918&quot;, Greenwood Publishing Group, Incorporated, 1995

== External links ==

* The Grenadiers
* French Grenadiers, Chasseurs and Fusiliers of the Napoleonic Wars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313303" start="2" end="11" title="Grenadier" label="grenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="46" end="53" title="hand grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="118" end="130" title="Grenade" label="hand grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="578" end="591" title="siege warfare" label="siege warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455377" start="628" end="669" title="Grenadiers à Cheval de la Garde Impériale" label="Grenadiers à Cheval de la Garde Impériale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350989" start="686" end="716" title="Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers" label="Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q313303" start="739" end="755" title="Grenadier" label="Horse Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905433" start="793" end="815" title="Horse Grenadier Guards" label="Horse Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q523562" start="931" end="944" title="heavy cavalry" label="heavy cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348131" start="951" end="965" title="modern warfare" label="modern warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q506246" start="1033" end="1041" title="fireteam" label="fireteam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="1087" end="1100" title="indirect fire" label="indirect fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="1112" end="1121" title="Dead zone (military)" label="dead zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184613" start="1159" end="1175" title="grenade launcher" label="grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="1286" end="1293" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088059" start="1313" end="1341" title="military of the Ming dynasty" label="military of the Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="1382" end="1392" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575405" start="1398" end="1416" title="thunder crash bomb" label="thunder crash bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="1507" end="1523" title="early modern era" label="early modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="1632" end="1658" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1696" end="1705" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501917" start="1786" end="1803" title="French Royal Army" label="French Royal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173438" start="1834" end="1847" title="Jean Martinet" label="Jean Martinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240425" start="2055" end="2072" title="Dutch States Army" label="Dutch States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378171" start="2284" end="2296" title="English Army" label="English Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q342712" start="2536" end="2547" title="John Evelyn" label="John Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="2679" end="2688" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q246514" start="2750" end="2761" title="tennis ball" label="tennis ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q193888" start="4254" end="4259" title="mitre" label="mitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="4379" end="4388" title="Flintlock" label="Flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="4389" end="4396" title="muskets" label="muskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="4725" end="4733" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="4751" end="4760" title="flintlock" label="flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936177" start="4792" end="4806" title="shock troops" label="assault troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="5463" end="5481" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="5494" end="5512" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="6249" end="6261" title="Spanish Army" label="Spanish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142196" start="6582" end="6601" title="Trooping the Colour" label="Trooping the Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q999793" start="6609" end="6631" title="The British Grenadiers" label="The British Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019110" start="7115" end="7123" title="bearskin" label="bearskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162549" start="8266" end="8281" title="1st Foot Guards (German Empire)" label="1st Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q323559" start="8290" end="8331" title="1st (Emperor Alexander) Guards Grenadiers" label="1st (Emperor Alexander) Guards Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976634" start="8381" end="8396" title="Pavlovsky Regiment" label="Pavlovsky Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q763457" start="9453" end="9461" title="tricorne" label="tricorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="9713" end="9728" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q153389" start="9788" end="9793" title="shako" label="shako"/>
<link wikidata="Q504721" start="9890" end="9902" title="Grande Armée" label="Grande Armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q241108" start="9947" end="9966" title="Battle of Friedland" label="Battle of Friedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="10402" end="10420" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="10458" end="10500" title="Grenadier Guards" label="1st (or Grenadier) Regiment of Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="10844" end="10855" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761247" start="11253" end="11268" title="Flank Companies" label="Flank Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481555" start="11675" end="11686" title="skirmishing" label="skirmishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483744" start="11840" end="11848" title="fusilier" label="fusilier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="12059" end="12080" title="Russian Imperial Army" label="Russian Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="12950" end="12963" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q201622" start="13330" end="13348" title="Potsdam Giants" label="Potsdam Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="13473" end="13487" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049772" start="13495" end="13509" title="Imperial Guard (Russia)" label="Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="13526" end="13542" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546354" start="13551" end="13567" title="101st Grenadiers" label="101st Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="13596" end="13615" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13717" end="13731" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="13889" end="13908" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589461" start="13951" end="13973" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Guards" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="14092" end="14106" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q405463" start="14172" end="14199" title="Charles Cotesworth Pinckney" label="Charles Cotesworth Pinckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="14212" end="14239" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="14359" end="14366" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314135" start="14367" end="14379" title="Canadian Militia" label="militia unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950344" start="14396" end="14417" title="10th Royal Grenadiers" label="10th Royal Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522562" start="14445" end="14473" title="the Royal Regiment of Canada" label="the Royal Regiment of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q156373" start="14542" end="14549" title="Nicolas Oudinot" label="Oudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206981" start="14626" end="14653" title="Caucasus Grenadier Division (Russian Empire)" label="Caucasus Grenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596354" start="14700" end="14722" title="1st Grenadier Division (Poland)" label="1st Grenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q143087" start="15574" end="15581" title="Facing colour" label="facings"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="15846" end="15858" title="hand grenade" label="hand grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="15861" end="15864" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q184613" start="16056" end="16072" title="grenade launcher" label="grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="16240" end="16256" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808603" start="16435" end="16450" title="assault pioneer" label="assault pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="16488" end="16494" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304229" start="16500" end="16513" title="Stormtroopers (Imperial Germany)" label="stormtroopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="16556" end="16570" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q697655" start="16713" end="16741" title="Model 24 grenade" label="&amp;quot;Stielhandgranate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q590507" start="16786" end="16801" title="Panzergrenadier" label="Panzergrenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="16840" end="16849" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="17149" end="17159" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="17268" end="17277" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495641" start="17530" end="17538" title="4th Army (Soviet Union)" label="4th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17841" end="17852" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q482511" start="17954" end="17974" title="M79 grenade launcher" label="M79 grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q201419" start="17982" end="17994" title="M1911 pistol" label="M1911 pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566945" start="18195" end="18217" title="XM148 grenade launcher" label="XM148 grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="18276" end="18285" title="M16 rifle" label="M16 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="18585" end="18606" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203 grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841182" start="18650" end="18678" title="M320 Grenade Launcher Module" label="M320 Grenade Launcher Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301347" start="18862" end="18876" title="Argentine Army" label="Argentine Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350989" start="18925" end="18955" title="Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers" label="Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="19065" end="19077" title="President of Argentina" label="Presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="19248" end="19266" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257572" start="19509" end="19531" title="Belgian Land Component" label="Belgian Land Component"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520190" start="20039" end="20064" title="Canadian Grenadier Guards" label="Canadian Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="20108" end="20121" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402243" start="20129" end="20144" title="Primary Reserve" label="Primary Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064150" start="20206" end="20222" title="Ceremonial Guard (Canada)" label="ceremonial guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091081" start="20230" end="20251" title="National War Memorial (Canada)" label="National War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151874" start="20253" end="20264" title="Rideau Hall" label="Rideau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950344" start="20341" end="20361" title="The Royal Grenadiers" label="The Royal Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="20366" end="20373" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522562" start="20387" end="20415" title="the Royal Regiment of Canada" label="the Royal Regiment of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775174" start="20466" end="20489" title="Winnipeg Grenadiers" label="The Winnipeg Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015053" start="20538" end="20545" title="C Force" label="C Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q697059" start="20568" end="20587" title="Battle of Hong Kong" label="Battle of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644454" start="20639" end="20668" title="Supplementary Order of Battle" label="Supplementary Order of Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745472" start="20833" end="20845" title="Chilean Army" label="Chilean Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="21006" end="21024" title="President of Chile" label="President of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329" start="21095" end="21108" title="Manuel Bulnes" label="Manuel Bulnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890439" start="21303" end="21319" title="Battle of Yungay" label="Battle of Yungay"/>
<link wikidata="Q492192" start="21460" end="21468" title="Feldgrau" label="Feldgrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q163733" start="21764" end="21775" title="Pickelhaube" label="Pickelhaube"/>
<link wikidata="Q732562" start="21891" end="21911" title="List of heads of state of Ecuador" label="President of Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="21938" end="21943" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288157" start="21951" end="21968" title="Carondelet Palace" label="Carondelet Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q747266" start="22009" end="22025" title="Battle of Tarqui" label="Battle of Tarqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334371" start="22060" end="22075" title="Ecuadorian Army" label="Ecuadorian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="22210" end="22224" title="French Foreign Legion" label="Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422336" start="22230" end="22250" title="French National Gendarmerie" label="National Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029573" start="22259" end="22273" title="Directorate-General of Customs and Indirect Taxes" label="French Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q896633" start="22417" end="22430" title="Wachbataillon" label="Wachbataillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="22494" end="22498" title="German Army" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q590507" start="22505" end="22520" title="Panzergrenadier" label="Panzergrenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="22625" end="22644" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="22712" end="22724" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="22740" end="22751" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633195" start="22900" end="22914" title="The Grenadiers" label="The Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q452156" start="22998" end="23039" title="Granatieri di Sardegna Mechanized Brigade" label="Granatieri di Sardegna Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="23167" end="23179" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q61941046" start="24034" end="24048" title="National Guard (Mexico)" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123768" start="24197" end="24219" title="Royal Netherlands Army" label="Royal Netherlands Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q58214641" start="24525" end="24537" title="maroon beret" label="maroon beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="24548" end="24559" title="air assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="24564" end="24579" title="airborne forces" label="airborne forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384177" start="24615" end="24629" title="Norwegian Army" label="Norwegian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137453" start="24634" end="24643" title="Royal Norwegian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="24755" end="24765" title="conscripts" label="conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581644" start="24907" end="24925" title="Telemark Battalion" label="Telemark Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083573" start="25001" end="25005" title="Royal Norwegian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668082" start="25031" end="25042" title="able seaman (rank)" label="able seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596419" start="25086" end="25130" title="1st King&amp;#x27;s Immemorial Infantry Regiment" label="1st King&amp;#x27;s Immemorial Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="25204" end="25215" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="25267" end="25278" title="Guard of honour" label="honor guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="25286" end="25298" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q848470" start="25306" end="25317" title="Life Guards (Sweden)" label="Life Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019110" start="25363" end="25371" title="bearskin" label="bearskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52925" start="25573" end="25583" title="Charles XV of Sweden" label="Charles XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q130413" start="25600" end="25612" title="Louise of the Netherlands" label="Queen Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="25640" end="25663" title="military of Switzerland" label="military of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="25698" end="25717" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q69804" start="25806" end="25811" title="Isone" label="Isone"/>
<link wikidata="Q474612" start="25877" end="25905" title="Swiss Kommando Spezialkräfte" label="Swiss Kommando Spezialkräfte"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="25920" end="25933" title="urban warfare" label="urban warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="25935" end="25952" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="25981" end="25989" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="25999" end="26005" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="26016" end="26035" title="hand-to-hand combat" label="hand-to-hand combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="26094" end="26110" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019110" start="26207" end="26215" title="bearskin" label="bearskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="26279" end="26296" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="26491" end="26503" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="26552" end="26563" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="26615" end="26633" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q506246" start="26662" end="26670" title="fireteam" label="fireteam"/>
<link wikidata="Q214688" start="26748" end="26750" title="M4 Carbine" label="M4"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="26751" end="26754" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="26764" end="26785" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203 grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841182" start="26796" end="26824" title="M320 Grenade Launcher Module" label="M320 Grenade Launcher Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="26921" end="26947" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="27070" end="27081" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q482511" start="27133" end="27153" title="M79 grenade launcher" label="M79 grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947723" start="27174" end="27181" title="Bombaši" label="Bombaši"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71370" wikidata="Q170202" url="?curid=71370" title="Anne of Bohemia">
<text>Anne of Bohemia (11 May 1366 – 7 June 1394), also known as Anne of Luxembourg, was Queen of England as the first wife of King Richard II. A member of the House of Luxembourg, she was the daughter of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia, and Elizabeth of Pomerania. Her death at the age of 28 was believed to have been caused by plague.

==Early life==
Anne had four brothers, including the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, and one younger sister, Margaret of Bohemia, Burgravine of Nuremberg. She also had five half-siblings from her father&#x27;s previous marriages, including Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary. She was brought up mainly at Prague Castle, and spent much of her early life in the care of her brother, King Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia. She could read German, Czech, and Latin. On her journey through Flanders on the way to her new life in England, she came under the protection of her uncle, Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg.

==Queen of England==
Richard II married Anne of Bohemia (1382) as a result of the Western Schism (1378–1417) in the Papacy that had resulted in two rival popes. According to Eduard Perroy, Pope Urban VI sanctioned the marriage between Richard and Anne in an attempt to create an alliance on his behalf, particularly so that he might be stronger against the French and their preferred pope, Clement. Anne&#x27;s father was the most powerful monarch in Europe at the time, ruling over about half of Europe&#x27;s population and territory.

The marriage was contracted against the wishes of many members of his nobility and members of parliament, and occurred primarily at the instigation of Richard&#x27;s advisor Michael de la Pole. Richard had been offered Caterina Visconti, one of the daughters of Bernabò Visconti, the Lord of Milan, who would have brought a great deal of money with her as a dowry. However, instead, Anne was chosen. She brought with her no dowry, and in return for her hand in marriage, Richard gave 20,000 florins (around £4,000,000 in today&#x27;s value) in payments to her brother King Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia, who had written to Richard to stress their joint duty to reunite Christendom. He also gave grants to those in her train. There were few diplomatic benefits to the marriage – although English merchants were now allowed to trade freely within both the Bohemian lands and the lands of the Holy Roman Empire, this was not much when compared to the usual diplomatic benefits from marriages made as a result of the war with France.

Negotiations could not be completed until 1380 because Richard&#x27;s negotiating team were held for ransom while returning from Prague. The marriage treaty was signed in May 1381.

On her arrival in England in December 1381, having been delayed by storms, Anne was severely criticised by contemporary chroniclers, probably as a result of the financial arrangements of the marriage, although it was quite typical for queens to be viewed in critical terms. The Westminster Chronicler called her &quot;a tiny scrap of humanity&quot;, and Thomas Walsingham related a disastrous omen upon her arrival; her ships smashed to pieces as soon as she had disembarked. Nevertheless, Anne and King Richard II were married in Westminster Abbey on 20 January 1382. Still, the reception from Londoners was hostile at times. Tournaments were held for several days after the ceremony in celebration. They then made a tour of the realm, staying at many major abbeys along the way. In 1383, Anne visited the city of Norwich, where at the Great Hospital a ceiling comprising 252 black eagles was made in her honour. Anne and Richard were only 15 years old when they first met and married. Yet these &quot;two wispy teenagers&quot; soon fell into a loving relationship and &quot;over the years the king proved truly devoted to his new wife&quot;. Walsingham later wrote that Richard rarely allowed Anne to leave his side.

The court of Charles IV, Anne&#x27;s father, based in Prague, was a centre of the International Gothic style, then at its height, and her arrival seems to have coincided with, and probably caused, new influences on English art. The Crown of Princess Blanche, now in Munich, may have been made for Anne, either in Prague or Paris.

In 1393, Violante of Aragon wrote to Anne and she was drawn into a long-standing dispute between England and Aragon, which involved hostages.
Anne and Richard were married for 12 years, but had no children. Anne&#x27;s death from plague in 1394 at Sheen Manor was a devastating blow to Richard. He was so grief-stricken that he demolished Sheen Manor, where she had died. Historians have speculated that her counsel had a moderating effect on Richard during her lifetime. This is supported by his unwise conduct in the years after Anne&#x27;s death that lost him his throne.

Richard married his second wife, the six-year-old Isabella of Valois, on 4 November 1396.

==Estimation==
Although Anne was originally disliked and defamed by chroniclers, there is evidence that she became more popular in time. She was a very kind person and popular with the people of England; for example, she was well known for her tireless attempts to &quot;intercede&quot; on behalf of the people, procuring pardons for participants in the Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1381, and numerous other pardons for wrongdoers. In 1389, for example, she sought a pardon for a man who had been indicted for the murder of William de Cantilupe 14 years previously.

She also made several high-profile intercessions in front of the king. Anne saved the life of John Northampton, a former mayor of London, in 1384; her humble begging convinced Richard II to merely commit the offender to lifelong imprisonment. Anne&#x27;s most famous act of intercession was on behalf of the citizens of London in the ceremonial reconciliation of Richard and London in 1392. The queen&#x27;s role has been memorialized in Richard Maidstone&#x27;s &quot;Reconciliation of Richard II with the City of London&quot;. Anne also interceded on behalf of Simon de Burley, Richard II&#x27;s former tutor during his minority, in the 1388 Merciless Parliament. Despite her pleas to the Lords Appellant, Burley was executed.

She was praised in a eulogy by Thomas Walsingham for her &#x27;dedication to God, for her almsgiving, her support for the poor and the Church.&#x27;

On the other hand, she never fulfilled many traditional duties of queens. In particular, she did not bear children, despite twelve years of marriage, and this is perhaps emphasised in her epitaph, whereby she is mentioned as having been kind to &quot;pregnant women&quot;. The Evesham chronicler said, &quot;this queen, although she did not bear children, was still held to have contributed to the glory and wealth of the realm, as far as she was able. Noble and common people suffered greatly at her death&quot;. Nevertheless, her popular legacy as &quot;Good Queen Anne&quot; suggests that this lack of children was unimportant to many contemporaries.

==Legacy==

Anne is buried in Westminster Abbey beside her husband. In 1395, Richard sealed contracts for a monument for himself and for Anne. This was an innovation, the first time a double tomb was ordered for an English royal burial. Contracts for the base of Purbeck marble were sealed with two London masons, Henry Yevele and Stephen Lote, and for the two life size effigies with Nicholas Broker and Godfrey Prest, both coppersmiths of London. Designs, now lost, were supplied to both sets of craftsmen. The coppersmiths&#x27; contract stipulated that the effigies were to be made of gilded copper and latten and to lie under canopies. They were to be crowned, their right hands were to be joined, and they were to hold sceptres in their left hands.
Their joint tomb is now damaged, and the hands of the effigies are chipped off. The inscription on her tomb describes her as &quot;beauteous in body and her face was gentle and pretty.&quot; When her tomb was opened in 1871, it was discovered that many of her bones had been stolen via a hole in the side of the casket.

Anne of Bohemia is known to have made the sidesaddle more popular to ladies of the Middle Ages. She also influenced the design of carts in England when she arrived in a carriage, presumably from Kocs, Hungary, to meet her future husband Richard (the name of Kocs is considered to have given rise to the English word &quot;coach&quot;). She also made the horned, Bohemian-style headdress the fashion for Englishwomen in the late 14th century.

==In popular culture==

===Literature===
* &quot;Within the Hollow Crown&quot; (1941), a novel by Margaret Campbell Barnes.
* &quot;Passage to Pontefract&quot; (1981), a novel by Jean Plaidy.
* &quot;Frost on the Rose&quot; (1982), a novel by Maureen Peters about Anne of Bohemia and Isabella of Valois.
* &quot;The Last Plantagenets&quot; (1962) by Thomas b. Costain.

===Theatre===
She is one of the main characters in the play &quot;Richard of Bordeaux&quot; (1932) written by Gordon Daviot. The play tells the story of Richard II of England in a romantic fashion, emphasizing the relationship between Richard and Anne of Bohemia. The play was a major hit in 1933, ran for over a year in the West End, playing a significant role in turning its director and leading man John Gielgud into a major star.

Anne also appears in &quot;Two Planks and a Passion&quot; (1983) by Anthony Minghella, in which she accompanies her husband and their close friend Robert de Vere in attending the York Corpus Christi mystery plays.

===Film===
* She was played by Gwen Ffrangcon Davies in a 1938 TV adaptation of the play &quot;Richard of Bordeaux&quot;. Richard II was played by Andrew Osborn. No copy has survived.
* She was played by Joyce Heron in a 1947 TV adaptation of the play &quot;Richard of Bordeaux&quot;. Richard II was played by Andrew Osborn. No copy has survived.

==Arms==
==Ancestry==
==References==
==External links==
* Images of Anne of Bohemia at the National Portrait Gallery
* Bronze Effigy of Anne of Bohemia on Westminster Tomb </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170202" start="0" end="15" title="Anne of Bohemia" label="Anne of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170202" start="59" end="77" title="Anne of Bohemia" label="Anne of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192635" start="83" end="99" title="Queen consort of England" label="Queen of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="121" end="136" title="King Richard II" label="King Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122293" start="154" end="173" title="House of Luxembourg" label="House of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="199" end="229" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="234" end="249" title="King of Bohemia" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q266519" start="255" end="277" title="Elizabeth of Pomerania" label="Elizabeth of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="342" end="348" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="404" end="432" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057054" start="458" end="502" title="Margaret of Bohemia, Burgravine of Nuremberg" label="Margaret of Bohemia, Burgravine of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q265460" start="589" end="626" title="Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary" label="Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193369" start="657" end="670" title="Prague Castle" label="Prague Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152148" start="738" end="762" title="Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="828" end="836" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q658785" start="920" end="952" title="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg" label="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="976" end="986" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="1037" end="1051" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171626" start="1144" end="1157" title="Pope Urban VI" label="Pope Urban VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q320371" start="1345" end="1352" title="Antipope Clement VII" label="Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q714681" start="1667" end="1685" title="Michael de la Pole, 1st Earl of Suffolk" label="Michael de la Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464997" start="1712" end="1729" title="Caterina Visconti" label="Caterina Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q378756" start="1755" end="1771" title="Bernabò Visconti" label="Bernabò Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1785" end="1790" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152148" start="2066" end="2090" title="Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="2342" end="2356" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Bohemian lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2378" end="2395" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525652" start="3055" end="3072" title="Thomas Walsingham" label="Thomas Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="3205" end="3215" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="3232" end="3249" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="3516" end="3523" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3975" end="3981" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q867769" start="4003" end="4023" title="International Gothic" label="International Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126811" start="4153" end="4178" title="Crown of Princess Blanche" label="Crown of Princess Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="4187" end="4193" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059945" start="4500" end="4511" title="Richmond Palace" label="Sheen Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q229901" start="4878" end="4896" title="Isabella of Valois" label="Isabella of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="5114" end="5121" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="5273" end="5294" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787094" start="5429" end="5459" title="murder of William de Cantilupe" label="murder of William de Cantilupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250661" start="5576" end="5592" title="John Northampton" label="John Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112982" start="6045" end="6060" title="Simon de Burley" label="Simon de Burley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149428" start="6126" end="6146" title="Merciless Parliament" label="Merciless Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517470" start="6173" end="6188" title="Lords Appellant" label="Lords Appellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525652" start="6243" end="6260" title="Thomas Walsingham" label="Thomas Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="7047" end="7064" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092049" start="8135" end="8145" title="sidesaddle" label="sidesaddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8176" end="8187" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011605" start="8288" end="8292" title="Kocs" label="Kocs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="8294" end="8301" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="8415" end="8420" title="carriage" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q142106" start="8715" end="8726" title="Jean Plaidy" label="Jean Plaidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612750" start="8779" end="8793" title="Maureen Peters (novelist)" label="Maureen Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q229901" start="8820" end="8838" title="Isabella of Valois" label="Isabella of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330230" start="8972" end="8991" title="Richard of Bordeaux" label="Richard of Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q261521" start="9016" end="9029" title="Gordon Daviot" label="Gordon Daviot"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="9308" end="9320" title="John Gielgud" label="John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q188726" start="9409" end="9426" title="Anthony Minghella" label="Anthony Minghella"/>
<link wikidata="Q352566" start="9488" end="9502" title="Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland" label="Robert de Vere"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="9525" end="9539" title="Corpus Christi (feast)" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="9540" end="9552" title="mystery play" label="mystery play"/>
<link wikidata="Q438712" start="9587" end="9608" title="Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies" label="Gwen Ffrangcon Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330230" start="9651" end="9670" title="Richard of Bordeaux" label="Richard of Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9703" end="9716" title="Andrew Osborn (actor)" label="Andrew Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297515" start="9760" end="9771" title="Joyce Heron" label="Joyce Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330230" start="9814" end="9833" title="Richard of Bordeaux" label="Richard of Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9866" end="9879" title="Andrew Osborn (actor)" label="Andrew Osborn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71376" wikidata="Q309643" url="?curid=71376" title="Ed Gein">
<text>Edward Theodore Gein ( ; August 27, 1906 – July 26, 1984), also known as &quot;the Butcher of Plainfield&quot; or &quot;the Plainfield Ghoul&quot;, was an American murderer, suspected serial killer and body snatcher. Gein&#x27;s crimes, committed around his hometown of Plainfield, Wisconsin, gathered widespread notoriety in 1957 after authorities discovered that he had exhumed corpses from local graveyards and fashioned keepsakes from their bones and skin. He also confessed to killing two women: tavern owner Mary Hogan in 1954, and hardware store owner Bernice Worden in 1957.

Gein was initially found unfit to stand trial and confined to a mental health facility. By 1968 he was judged competent to stand trial; he was found guilty of the murder of Worden, but was found legally insane and thus was remanded to a psychiatric institution. Gein died at Mendota Mental Health Institute from respiratory failure resulting from lung cancer on July 26, 1984, aged 77. He is buried next to his family in the Plainfield Cemetery, in a now-unmarked grave.

==Early life==
=== Childhood ===
Edward Theodore Gein was born in La Crosse, Wisconsin, on August 27, 1906, the second of two sons to George Philip Gein (1873–1940) and Augusta Wilhelmine Gein (&quot;née&quot; Lehrke; 1878–1945). Gein had an older brother named Henry. Augusta, who was fervently religious and nominally Lutheran, frequently preached to her sons about the innate immorality of the world, the evil of drinking and her belief that all women were naturally promiscuous and instruments of the devil. She reserved time every afternoon to read to them from the Bible, usually selecting verses from the Old Testament and the Book of Revelation concerning death, murder and divine retribution. Gein idolized and became obsessed with his mother.

George Gein worked as a carpenter, tanner and in the city fire department. He also owned a local grocery shop but soon sold the business and left the city with his family to live on a farm in the town of Plainfield, Wisconsin, which became their permanent residence. Augusta took advantage of the farm&#x27;s isolation by turning away outsiders who could have influenced her sons. 
Gein left the farm only to attend school. Outside of school, he spent most of his time doing chores on the farm. Gein was shy; classmates and teachers remembered him as having strange mannerisms, such as seemingly random laughter, as if he were laughing at his own personal jokes. Augusta punished Gein whenever he tried to make friends, according to family acquaintances. Despite his poor social development, Gein did fairly well in school, particularly in reading.

=== Deaths in immediate family ===
On April 1, 1940, Gein&#x27;s father died of heart failure at age 66. Gein and his brother Henry began doing odd jobs around town to help cover living expenses. The brothers were generally considered reliable and honest by the rest of the community. While both worked as handymen, Gein also frequently babysat for neighbors. He enjoyed babysitting, seeming to relate more easily to children than adults. Henry began dating a divorced mother of two and planned to move in with her. He worried about his brother&#x27;s attachment to their mother and often spoke ill of her around Gein, who responded with shock and hurt.

On May 16, 1944, Gein was burning away marsh vegetation on the property; the fire got out of control, drawing the attention of the local fire department. By the end of the day—the fire having been extinguished and the firefighters gone—Gein reported Henry missing. With lanterns and flashlights, a search party searched for 43-year-old Henry, whose dead body was found lying face down. Apparently, Henry had been dead for some time, and it appeared that the cause of death was heart failure since he had not been burned or injured otherwise. 

It was later reported by biographer Harold Schechter that Henry had bruises on his head. Police dismissed the possibility of foul play and the county coroner later officially listed asphyxiation as the cause of death. The authorities accepted the accident theory, but no official investigation was conducted and an autopsy was not performed. Questioning Gein about the death of Bernice Worden in 1957, state investigator Joe Wilimovsky brought up questions about Henry&#x27;s death. George Arndt, who studied the case, wrote that, in retrospect, it was &quot;possible and likely&quot; that Henry&#x27;s death was &quot;the &#x27;Cain and Abel&#x27; aspect of this case.&quot;

With Henry deceased, Ed and Augusta were now alone. Augusta had a paralyzing stroke shortly after Henry&#x27;s death, and Ed devoted himself to taking care of her. Sometime in 1945, he later recounted, he and his mother visited a man named Smith, who lived nearby, to purchase straw. According to Ed, Augusta witnessed Smith beating a dog. A woman inside the Smith residence came outside and yelled for him to stop, but Smith beat the dog to death. Augusta was extremely upset by this scene; however, what bothered her did not appear to be the brutality toward the dog but, rather, the presence of the woman. Augusta told Ed that the woman was not married to Smith and so had no business being there, and angrily called her &quot;Smith&#x27;s harlot&quot;. She had a second stroke soon after, and her health deteriorated rapidly. Augusta died on December 29, 1945, at the age of 67. Ed was devastated by her death; in the words of Schechter, he had &quot;lost his only friend and one true love. And he was absolutely alone in the world.&quot;

==Work==
Gein held on to the farm and earned money from odd jobs. He boarded up rooms used by his mother, including the upstairs, downstairs parlor and living room, leaving them untouched. While the rest of the house became increasingly squalid, these rooms remained pristine. Gein lived thereafter in a small room next to the kitchen. Around this time, he became interested in reading pulp magazines and adventure stories, particularly those involving cannibals or Nazi atrocities, specifically concerning Ilse Koch, who selected tattooed prisoners for death in order to fashion lampshades and other items from their skins. Gein received a farm subsidy from the federal government starting in 1951. He occasionally worked for the local municipal road crew and crop-threshing crews in the Plainfield area. Sometime between 1946 and 1956, he also sold an parcel of land that Henry had owned.

== Crimes ==
===Confirmed===
On the morning of November 16, 1957, 58-year-old Plainfield hardware store owner Bernice Worden disappeared. The hardware store&#x27;s truck was seen driving out from the rear of the building at around 9:30a.m. The hardware store saw few customers the entire day; some area residents believed that this was because of deer hunting season. Worden&#x27;s son, Deputy Sheriff Frank Worden, entered the store around 5:00p.m. to find the cash register open and blood stains on the floor.

Frank Worden told investigators that on the evening before his mother&#x27;s disappearance, Gein had been in the store and was expected to have returned the next morning for a gallon of antifreeze. A sales slip for the antifreeze was the last receipt written by Worden on the morning that she disappeared. That evening, Gein was arrested at a West Plainfield grocery store, and the Waushara County Sheriff&#x27;s Department searched the Gein farm.

A sheriff&#x27;s deputy discovered Worden&#x27;s decapitated body in a shed on Gein&#x27;s property, hung upside down by her legs with a crossbar at her ankles and ropes at her wrists. The torso was &quot;dressed out like a deer&quot;. She had been shot with a .22-caliber rifle, and the mutilations were made after her death. Searching the house, authorities found:

* Whole human bones and fragments
* A wastebasket made of human skin
* Human skin covering several chairs
* Skulls on his bedposts
* Female skulls, some with the tops sawn off
* Bowls made from human skulls
* A corset made from a female torso skinned from shoulders to waist
* Leggings made from human leg skin
* Masks made from the skin of female heads
* Mary Hogan&#x27;s face mask in a paper bag
* Mary Hogan&#x27;s skull in a box
* Bernice Worden&#x27;s entire head in a burlap sack
* Bernice Worden&#x27;s heart &quot;in a plastic bag in front of Gein&#x27;s potbelly stove&quot;
* Nine vulvas in a shoe box
* A young girl&#x27;s dress and &quot;the vulvas of two females judged to have been about fifteen years old&quot;
* A belt made from female human nipples
* Four noses
* A pair of lips on a window shade drawstring
* A lampshade made from the skin of a human face
* Fingernails from female fingers

These artifacts were photographed at the state crime laboratory and then &quot;decently disposed of&quot;. When questioned, Gein told investigators that between 1947 and 1952, he had made as many as forty nocturnal visits to three local graveyards to exhume recently buried bodies while he was in a &quot;daze-like&quot; state. On about thirty of those visits, he said that he came out of the daze while in the cemetery, left the grave in good order and returned home emptyhanded. On the other occasions, he dug up the graves of recently buried middle-aged women he thought resembled his mother and took the bodies home, where he tanned their skins to make his paraphernalia.

Gein admitted to stealing from nine graves and led investigators to their locations. Allan Wilimovsky of the state crime laboratory participated in opening three test graves identified by Gein. The caskets were inside wooden boxes; the top boards ran crossways (not lengthwise). The tops of the boxes were about below the surface in sandy soil. Gein had robbed the graves soon after the funerals while the graves were not completed. The test graves were exhumed because authorities were uncertain as to whether the slight Gein was capable of single-handedly digging up a grave during a single evening. They were found as Gein described: one casket was empty; another casket was empty but contained a few bones and Gein&#x27;s crowbar; and the final casket saw most of the body missing, yet Gein had returned rings and some body parts. Thus, Gein&#x27;s confession was largely corroborated.

Soon after his mother&#x27;s death, Gein began to create a &quot;woman suit&quot; so that &quot;he could become his mother—to literally crawl into her skin.&quot; He denied having sex with the bodies he exhumed, explaining: &quot;They smelled too bad.&quot; During state crime laboratory interrogation, Gein also admitted to shooting 51-year-old Mary Hogan, a tavern owner missing since December 8, 1954, whose head was found in his house, but he later denied memory of details of her death.

A 16-year-old youth, whose parents were friends of Gein and who attended baseball games and movies with him, reported that Gein kept shrunken heads in his house, which he had described as relics sent by a cousin who had served in the Philippines during World War II. Upon investigation by the police, these were determined to be human facial skins, carefully peeled from corpses and used by Gein as masks.

During questioning, Sheriff Art Schley reportedly assaulted Gein by banging his head and face into a brick wall. As a result, Gein&#x27;s initial confession was ruled inadmissible. Schley died of heart failure in 1968 at age 43, before Gein&#x27;s trial. Many who knew Schley said he was traumatized by the horror of Gein&#x27;s crimes and this, along with the fear of having to testify (especially about assaulting Gein), caused his death.

===Suspected===
In addition to the murders of Hogan and Worden, Gein was also considered regarding several other unsolved cases in Wisconsin. In November 1957, authorities confronted Gein with a list of missing persons cases that had occurred between the death of his mother and Worden. Their suspicions were further aroused after the discovery of Hogan&#x27;s remains. However, lie detector tests exonerated Gein of any other murders, and his psychiatrists concluded that his violence was only directed to women who physically resembled his mother.
* Georgia Jean Weckler, 8, disappeared near her farm home in Fort Atkinson at approximately 3:30 p.m. on May 1, 1947. She was given a lift home from grade school in Jefferson by a neighbor who dropped Weckler off at the lane that led from U.S. Highway 12 to the Weckler farm. Weckler was last seen pausing to open the family mailbox and removing a stack of mail. She was never seen again. Witnesses reported seeing a dark-colored, possibly black, 1936 Ford sedan with a gray plastic spotlight in the vicinity that afternoon; Gein owned a black 1937 Ford.
* Evelyn Grace Hartley, 14, went missing while babysitting a 20-month-old girl at the home of La Crosse State College professor Viggo Rasmusen on the evening of October 24, 1953, in La Crosse. That evening, her father Richard called the Rasmussen house several times after she failed to check in as planned at 8:30 p.m.; he received no answer. Concerned, he drove to the Rasmussen house to find the doors were locked, the lights and radio on and items scattered all over the house. The living room furniture had been moved around to different places, as were Evelyn&#x27;s school books. Richard found her shoes in different rooms, one shoe upstairs and one downstairs. He also found his daughter&#x27;s broken glasses upstairs. Richard did not find Evelyn in the house. After his arrest, Gein was questioned regarding Evelyn&#x27;s disappearance, however, he denied involvement in the disappearance and passed two lie detector tests; police found no trace of Evelyn&#x27;s remains during a search of Gein&#x27;s property.
* Victor Harold Travis, 42, a resident of Adams County, went off to hunt deer in the company of acquaintance Raymond Burgess on November 1, 1952. In the late afternoon, the pair stopped for refreshments at Mac&#x27;s Bar in Plainfield for several hours. At around 7 p.m., they both left the bar, got into Burgess’ car and drove away. The hunters, along with the car Burgess was driving, were never seen again and no trace of them was ever found. Travis and Burgess had been hunting on the farm next to Gein&#x27;s despite his objections on the day of their disappearance.
* In addition, Gein has also been tentatively linked to the June 1954 disappearance of neighbor James Walsh, 32; Walsh and his wife lived near Gein, who performed chores for her after her husband went missing. Gein was also investigated for potential involvement in the August 1956 disappearance of Irene Keating, 30, who was last seen in Plainfield, and in the attempted abduction of Judy Rodencal, 16, from Auroraville.

==Aftermath==
===Trial===
On November 21, 1957, Gein was arraigned on one count of first degree murder in Waushara County Court, where he pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. He was diagnosed with schizophrenia and found mentally incompetent, thus unfit for trial. He was sent to the Central State Hospital for the Criminally Insane (now the Dodge Correctional Institution), a maximum-security facility in Waupun, and later transferred to the Mendota State Hospital in Madison.

In 1968, doctors determined Gein was &quot;mentally able to confer with counsel and participate in his defense&quot;. The trial began on November 7, 1968, and lasted one week. A psychiatrist testified that Gein had told him that he did not know whether the killing of Worden was intentional or accidental. Gein had told him that while he examined a gun in Worden&#x27;s store, the weapon discharged and killed Worden. He said he had not aimed the rifle at Worden, and did not remember anything else that happened that morning.

At the request of the defense, Gein&#x27;s trial was held without a jury, with Judge Robert H. Gollmar presiding. Gein was found guilty by Gollmar on November 14. A second trial dealt with Gein&#x27;s sanity; after testimony by doctors for the prosecution and defense, Gollmar ruled Gein &quot;not guilty by reason of insanity&quot; and ordered him committed to Central State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. Gein spent the rest of his life in a mental hospital. Judge Gollmar wrote, &quot;Due to prohibitive costs, Gein was tried for only one murder—that of Mrs. Worden. He also admitted to killing Mary Hogan.&quot;

===Fate of Gein&#x27;s property===
Gein&#x27;s house, the outbuildings and his property were appraised at $4,700 (). His possessions were scheduled to be auctioned on March 30, 1958, amidst rumors that the house and the land it stood on might become a tourist attraction. Early on the morning of March 20, the house was destroyed by fire. A deputy fire marshal reported that a garbage fire had been set from the house by a cleaning crew who was given the task of disposing refuse; that hot coals were recovered from the spot of the bonfire, but that the fire did not spread along the ground from that location to the house.

Arson was suspected, but the cause of the fire was never officially determined. It is possible that the fire was not considered a matter of urgency to Fire Chief Frank Worden, son of Gein&#x27;s victim, Bernice Worden. When Gein learned of the incident while in detention, he shrugged and said, &quot;Just as well.&quot; Gein&#x27;s Ford sedan, which he used to haul the bodies of his victims, was sold at public auction for $760 () to carnival sideshow operator, Bunny Gibbons. Gibbons charged carnival-goers 25¢ admission to see it.

===Death===

Gein died at the Mendota Mental Health Institute due to respiratory failure, secondary to lung cancer, on July 26, 1984, at the age of 77. Over the years, souvenir seekers chipped away pieces from his gravestone, until the stone itself was stolen in 2000. It was recovered in June 2001, near Seattle, Washington, and was placed in storage at the Waushara County Sheriff&#x27;s Department. Gein is interred between his parents and brother in Plainfield Cemetery; his gravesite now unmarked, but not unknown.

==In popular culture==

Gein&#x27;s story has had a lasting effect on American popular culture as evidenced by its numerous appearances in film, music and literature. The tale first came to widespread public attention in the fictionalized version presented by Robert Bloch in his 1959 suspense novel, &quot;Psycho&quot;. In addition to Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s 1960 film of Bloch&#x27;s novel, &quot;Psycho&quot;, Gein&#x27;s story was loosely adapted into numerous films, including &quot;Deranged&quot; (1974), &quot;In the Light of the Moon&quot; (2000) (released in the United States and Australia as &quot;Ed Gein&quot; (2001)), &quot;Ed Gein: The Butcher of Plainfield&quot; (2007), &quot;Ed Gein, the Musical&quot; (2010), and the Rob Zombie film, &quot;House of 1000 Corpses,&quot; and its sequel, &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Rejects&quot;. Gein served as the inspiration for a myriad of fictional serial killers, most notably, Norman Bates (&quot;Psycho&quot;), Leatherface (&quot;The Texas Chain Saw Massacre&quot;), Buffalo Bill (&quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot;), Garland Greene (&quot;Con Air&quot;), and the character of Dr. Oliver Thredson in the TV series &quot;American Horror Story: Asylum&quot;.

American filmmaker, Errol Morris, and German filmmaker, Werner Herzog, attempted unsuccessfully to collaborate on a film project about Gein from 1975 to 1976. Morris claimed to have interviewed Gein several times and ended up spending almost a year in Plainfield interviewing dozens of locals. The pair planned secretly to exhume Gein&#x27;s mother from her grave to test a theory, but never followed through on the scheme, and eventually ended their collaboration. The aborted project was described in a 1989 &quot;New Yorker&quot; profile of Morris.

Gein&#x27;s story inspired American grunge band Tad to write the song &quot;Nipple Belt&quot; for their 1989 album, &quot;God&#x27;s Balls&quot;. Gein also inspired American thrash metal band Slayer to write the song &quot;Dead Skin Mask&quot; for their 1990 album, &quot;Seasons in the Abyss&quot;. Additionally, Gein was the inspiration and namesake for the song &quot;Nothing to Gein,&quot; by American heavy metal band Mudvayne; released in 2000 on their album, &quot;L.D. 50.&quot;

The character, Patrick Bateman, in the 1991 novel &quot;American Psycho,&quot; and its 2000 film adaptation, mistakenly attributes a quote by Edmund Kemper to Gein saying, &quot;You know what Ed Gein said about women? ... He said, &#x27;When I see a pretty girl walking down the street, I think two things. One part of me wants to take her out, talk to her, be real nice and sweet and treat her right ... [the other part wonders] what her head would look like on a stick&#x27;.&quot;

In 2012, German director, Jörg Buttgereit, wrote and directed a stage play about Gein&#x27;s case titled &quot;Kannibale und Liebe,&quot; at Theater Dortmund in Germany. The part of Gein was played by actor Uwe Rohbeck. According to George W. Arndt, news reports at the time of Gein&#x27;s crimes spawned a subgenre of black humor called &quot;Geiners.&quot;

In 2022, Gein, portrayed by Shane Kerwin, appears in the first season of Netflix&#x27;s anthology series &quot;Monster&quot; as a possible inspiration for Jeffrey Dahmer. However, a direct connection between the two is seen as speculation. In 2024, it was announced that Charlie Hunnam will portray Gein in &quot;&quot;, the third season of &quot;Monster&quot;, where Gein will be the primary focus of the season. In 2023, a multi-part docuseries aired about the life and upbringing of Gein titled &quot;Psycho: The Lost Tapes of Ed Gein&quot;. 
==See also==

* Grave robbery
* Body snatching
* Anatoly Moskvin

General:
* List of homicides in Wisconsin
* List of serial killers in the United States

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 


==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309643" start="0" end="20" title="Ed Gein" label="Edward Theodore Gein"/>
<link wikidata="Q309643" start="79" end="104" title="Ed Gein" label="the Butcher of Plainfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q309643" start="120" end="140" title="Ed Gein" label="the Plainfield Ghoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="164" end="170" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="184" end="197" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262115" start="202" end="215" title="Body snatching" label="body snatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q607964" start="270" end="280" title="Plainfield, Wisconsin" label="Plainfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="282" end="291" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="372" end="379" title="Exhumation" label="exhumed"/>
<link wikidata="Q780654" start="414" end="459" title="Skinning" label="fashioned keepsakes from their bones and skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q847337" start="469" end="478" title="Confession" label="confessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311531" start="807" end="815" title="remand (court procedure)" label="remanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816736" start="859" end="890" title="Mendota Mental Health Institute" label="Mendota Mental Health Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="931" end="942" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q936780" start="1122" end="1131" title="La Crosse, Wisconsin" label="La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1133" end="1142" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1256" end="1259" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1376" end="1384" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796713" start="1435" end="1445" title="immorality" label="immorality"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="1557" end="1566" title="Satan" label="the devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1668" end="1681" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="1690" end="1708" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q226765" start="1738" end="1756" title="divine retribution" label="divine retribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="1845" end="1851" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200679" start="2014" end="2035" title="Plainfield (town), Wisconsin" label="Plainfield, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="2740" end="2753" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="3360" end="3370" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783449" start="3895" end="3911" title="Harold Schechter" label="Harold Schechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134614" start="4009" end="4016" title="coroner" label="coroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="4041" end="4049" title="asphyxia" label="asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717996" start="4488" end="4501" title="Cain and Abel" label="Cain and Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="4602" end="4612" title="Paralysis" label="paralyzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="4613" end="4619" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="5966" end="5979" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="6033" end="6042" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6046" end="6050" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58036" start="6087" end="6096" title="Ilse Koch" label="Ilse Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125859" start="6152" end="6203" title="Lampshades made from human skin" label="fashion lampshades and other items from their skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q503288" start="7171" end="7181" title="antifreeze" label="antifreeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q500880" start="7367" end="7382" title="Waushara County, Wisconsin" label="Waushara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="7483" end="7494" title="decapitated" label="decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194990" start="7639" end="7650" title="Field dressing (hunting)" label="dressed out"/>
<link wikidata="Q158715" start="7695" end="7706" title=".22 Long Rifle" label=".22-caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="8002" end="8007" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q302760" start="8366" end="8380" title="potbelly stove" label="potbelly stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="8394" end="8400" title="vulvas" label="vulvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188641" start="8561" end="8568" title="nipples" label="nipples"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125859" start="8632" end="8671" title="Lampshades made from human skin" label="lampshade made from the skin of a human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759540" start="9373" end="9386" title="paraphernalia" label="paraphernalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13681" start="10115" end="10122" title="crowbar (tool)" label="crowbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11026" end="11038" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="11468" end="11479" title="psychological trauma" label="traumatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q60920" start="12001" end="12018" title="lie detector test" label="lie detector test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570350" start="12233" end="12246" title="Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin" label="Fort Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569768" start="12337" end="12346" title="Jefferson, Wisconsin" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q407564" start="12411" end="12426" title="U.S. Highway 12" label="U.S. Highway 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825214" start="12729" end="12749" title="disappearance of Evelyn Hartley" label="Evelyn Grace Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q351887" start="13791" end="13803" title="Adams County, Wisconsin" label="Adams County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822646" start="14730" end="14741" title="Auroraville, Wisconsin" label="Auroraville"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="14827" end="14846" title="first degree murder" label="first degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="14890" end="14922" title="not guilty by reason of insanity" label="not guilty by reason of insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="14946" end="14959" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287852" start="15091" end="15121" title="Dodge Correctional Institution" label="Dodge Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570163" start="15155" end="15161" title="Waupun, Wisconsin" label="Waupun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816736" start="15192" end="15214" title="Mendota State Hospital" label="Mendota State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="15218" end="15225" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q838247" start="15331" end="15338" title="defense (law)" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="17003" end="17008" title="Arson" label="Arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534976" start="17448" end="17456" title="sideshow" label="sideshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997850" start="17467" end="17480" title="Bunny Gibbons" label="Bunny Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="17608" end="17627" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="17642" end="17653" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="17844" end="17851" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="17853" end="17863" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="18130" end="18154" title="American culture" label="American popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="18320" end="18332" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275361" start="18367" end="18373" title="Psycho (novel)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="18396" end="18412" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="18459" end="18465" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q280094" start="18548" end="18556" title="Deranged (1974 film)" label="Deranged"/>
<link wikidata="Q733718" start="18577" end="18601" title="In the Light of the Moon" label="In the Light of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18698" end="18732" title="Ed Gein: The Butcher of Plainfield" label="Ed Gein: The Butcher of Plainfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641789" start="18753" end="18773" title="Ed Gein, the Musical" label="Ed Gein, the Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="18796" end="18806" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q691788" start="18819" end="18840" title="House of 1000 Corpses" label="House of 1000 Corpses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534510" start="18870" end="18894" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Rejects" label="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Rejects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467893" start="18989" end="19001" title="Norman Bates" label="Norman Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647348" start="19024" end="19035" title="Leatherface" label="Leatherface"/>
<link wikidata="Q80981" start="19043" end="19071" title="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (franchise)" label="The Texas Chain Saw Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393619" start="19080" end="19092" title="Buffalo Bill (The Silence of the Lambs)" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q897685" start="19100" end="19124" title="The Silence of the Lambs (novel)" label="The Silence of the Lambs"/>
<link wikidata="Q607910" start="19155" end="19162" title="Con Air" label="Con Air"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19235" end="19264" title="American Horror Story: Asylum" label="American Horror Story: Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q977546" start="19293" end="19305" title="Errol Morris" label="Errol Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="19329" end="19342" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19389" end="19401" title="Errol Morris#Unfinished project on Ed Gein" label="film project"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="19789" end="19799" title="The New Yorker" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="19862" end="19868" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q912127" start="19874" end="19877" title="Tad (band)" label="Tad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772712" start="19948" end="19964" title="God&amp;#x27;s Balls" label="God&amp;#x27;s Balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="20000" end="20012" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="20018" end="20024" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q584600" start="20098" end="20118" title="Seasons in the Abyss" label="Seasons in the Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696026" start="20197" end="20212" title="Nothing to Gein" label="Nothing to Gein"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="20232" end="20243" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671183" start="20249" end="20257" title="Mudvayne" label="Mudvayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821218" start="20298" end="20305" title="L.D. 50 (album)" label="L.D. 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q203927" start="20329" end="20344" title="Patrick Bateman" label="Patrick Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q466504" start="20370" end="20385" title="American Psycho" label="American Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405126" start="20401" end="20421" title="American Psycho (film)" label="2000 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q549242" start="20456" end="20469" title="Edmund Kemper" label="Edmund Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q564182" start="20825" end="20840" title="Jörg Buttgereit" label="Jörg Buttgereit"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="21118" end="21129" title="black humor" label="black humor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21216" end="21228" title="Dahmer – Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="21232" end="21239" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q130325444" start="21270" end="21277" title="Monster (American TV series)" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q298364" start="21314" end="21328" title="Jeffrey Dahmer" label="Jeffrey Dahmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q356294" start="21430" end="21444" title="Charlie Hunnam" label="Charlie Hunnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537376" start="21721" end="21734" title="Grave robbery" label="Grave robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q262115" start="21737" end="21751" title="Body snatching" label="Body snatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752206" start="21754" end="21769" title="Anatoly Moskvin" label="Anatoly Moskvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q115765291" start="21782" end="21812" title="List of homicides in Wisconsin" label="List of homicides in Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638171" start="21815" end="21858" title="List of serial killers in the United States" label="List of serial killers in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71377" wikidata="Q7354792" url="?curid=71377" title="Rock crystal vase">
<text>Vases and ewers made of rock crystal were rare, expensive, and usually decorated with gold and gemstones. They are a type of hardstone carving. They were a specialty of Fatimid art and were often used by royalty in Europe.

==Examples==
===Eleanor of Aquitaine&#x27;s vase===
A rock crystal vase {fr} with honeycomb decoration that probably originated from either the Sassanid (6th-7th century) or post-Sassanid (9th-10th century) period that was given to Duke William IX of Aquitaine (the Troubadour) by a Muslim ally (Abd al-Malik Imad ad-Dawla as referred in Latinised form as Mitadolus on the inscription). When Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine, William IX&#x27;s granddaughter, married King Louis VII of France in 1137, she gave him the rock crystal vase as a wedding present. The inscription finally says that the king gave it to Suger, who in turn offered it to the saints, to be kept at the Abbey of St.-Denis which he had rebuilt. The vase is now in the Louvre in Paris, and is the only artefact of Eleanor&#x27;s known to exist today.

===Mary I and Philip II&#x27;s vase===
Another was a crystal and gold posset that the Spanish ambassador gave Queen Mary I of England and Philip of Spain as a betrothal gift. It was made by Benvenuto Cellini and the whole set is now on display at Hatfield House in England.

==Notes==
==External links==

*The Eleanor Vase &quot;Images of Medieval Art and Architecture&quot;
*&quot;Vase d’Aliénor&quot; at the Louvre.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191851" start="0" end="4" title="Vase" label="Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q132397" start="10" end="14" title="ewer" label="ewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="24" end="36" title="rock crystal" label="rock crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="86" end="90" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="95" end="103" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q929254" start="125" end="142" title="hardstone carving" label="hardstone carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004598" start="169" end="180" title="Fatimid art" label="Fatimid art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="204" end="211" title="Royal family" label="royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="215" end="221" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="296" end="300" title=":fr:Vase de cristal d&amp;#x27;Aliénor" label="{fr}"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="368" end="376" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sassanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351" start="461" end="484" title="William IX of Aquitaine" label="William IX of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186370" start="490" end="500" title="Troubadour" label="Troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735888" start="520" end="546" title="Abd al-Malik Imad ad-Dawla" label="Abd al-Malik Imad ad-Dawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="624" end="644" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="692" end="711" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q137934" start="832" end="837" title="Suger" label="Suger"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="895" end="913" title="Abbey of St.-Denis" label="Abbey of St.-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="959" end="965" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="969" end="974" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576426" start="1112" end="1118" title="posset" label="posset"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="1158" end="1175" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1180" end="1195" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="1232" end="1249" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q19813" start="1289" end="1303" title="Hatfield House" label="Hatfield House"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1307" end="1314" title="England" label="England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71386" wikidata="Q229261" url="?curid=71386" title="Wyomia Tyus">
<text>Wyomia Tyus (pronunciation: &quot;why-o-mi&quot;; born August 29, 1945) is a retired American track and field sprinter, and the first person to retain the Olympic title in the 100 m (a feat since duplicated by Carl Lewis, Gail Devers, Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, Usain Bolt, and Elaine Thompson-Herah).

== Early life ==
Raised on a dairy farm, as the youngest of four children, and the only girl in the family Tyus was encouraged by her father to participate in sports. While a high school athlete Tyus participated in basketball and began her track endeavors as a high jumper before transitioning to the sprints after being invited to a summer track clinic at Tennessee State University in 1960. It was in this same year that Tyus&#x27;s father died leaving the job of male role model in Tyus&#x27;s life to her soon to be track coach at Tennessee State Ed Temple.

== College and professional career ==
Tyus, from Tennessee State University, participated in the 1964 Summer Olympics at age 19. In the heats of the event, she equaled Wilma Rudolph&#x27;s world record, propelling her to a favored position for the final, where her main rival was fellow American Edith McGuire. Tyus won the final, beating McGuire by 0.2 seconds. At the same Olympics, she also won a silver medal with the 4 × 100 m relay team.

The following years, Tyus won numerous national championships in the sprint events, and a gold medal in the 200 m at the Pan-American Games. In 1968, she returned to the Olympics to defend her title in the 100 m. In the final, she set a new world record of 11.08 s to become the first person, male or female, to retain the Olympic 100 metres title. Tyus also qualified for the 200 m final, in which she finished sixth. Running the final leg for the relay team, Tyus helped setting a new world record, winning her third gold medal.

Director Bud Greenspan filmed Tyus casually dancing behind her starting blocks before the Olympic final. When interviewed later she said she was doing the &quot;Tighten Up&quot; to stay loose.

Tyus retired from international sports after the 1968 Olympics. In 1973, she was invited to compete in the 60-yard dash in the new International Track Association competitions. In her first-year return, she won eight of eighteen events. The following year, she won every event she entered, a total of twenty-two races. Tyus continued to compete in the 60 yard dash up until 1982.

== Post athletics ==
Tyus went on to coach at Beverly Hills High School, and was a founding member of the Women&#x27;s Sports Foundation.

During the Richard Dawson era of &quot;Family Feud&quot;, Tyus appeared with her family (1980). They won the $5,000 prize. In 1976, Tyus was inducted into the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame. In 1980, Tyus was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame. At the 1984 Summer Olympics, she was one of eleven athletes who carried in the Olympic Flag during the Opening Ceremony. In 1985, she was inducted into the U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame.

In 1999, her hometown Griffin, Georgia honored her with the unveiling of the Wyomia Tyus Olympic Park. The 2010 Breeder&#x27;s World Cup featured a two-year-old filly racing horse bearing her namesake. In 2018, she published the memoir &quot;Tigerbelle : the Wyomia Tyus story&quot;, with co-author Elizabeth Terzakis; it is part of Dave Zirin&#x27;s &quot;Edge of Sports&quot; series.

== Personal life ==
Tyus grew up in a primarily white neighborhood and became aware of her race and of racial segregation at an early age. She was forced to take an hour bus ride to school each day, in spite of the fact that there was a white school within walking distance. Racial divide in her neighborhood also prevented Tyus from playing with the white girls that lived nearby and as the nearest black family lived almost a mile away, Tyus spent most of her time playing sports with her brothers and the white boys in the neighborhood. As she grew older her father helped to solidify the idea that she could accomplish anything in her life, but not without hard work to overcome racial stigma.

After finishing high school Tyus attended Tennessee State University (TSU), making her the first of her family to go to college. While at TSU Tyus participated in the Tigerbelles collegiate team. Tyus began training with TSU coach Ed Temple, but poor grades, study habits, and a general lack of interest in classes nearly derailed Tyus&#x27;s chances to continue her training and attend the 1964 Olympics. She has credited her training with Coach Temple as helping with her development and success in sporting, academic, and professional life, especially as he highlighted the struggle that comes with being a black athlete and having to work harder to receive positive recognition.

In December 1968, Tyus moved with her then boyfriend from Georgia to California, where she worked as a substitute teacher. She married her boyfriend Art Simburg in 1969 and held multiple jobs until becoming a teacher in 1971. Tyus left this job within a year in order to stay at home with her first child. Tyus&#x27;s first marriage ended in 1974 and in 1978 she married Duane Tillman, with whom she had her second child, a son.

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* 
* Tigerbelles Olympic Tradition
* 
* 1968 Olympic Funky dance
* Wyomia Tyus Olympic Park</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229261" start="0" end="11" title="Wyomia Tyus" label="Wyomia Tyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="13" end="26" title="pronunciation" label="pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="94" end="109" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q624482" start="110" end="118" title="sprint (running)" label="sprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="155" end="162" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131237" start="210" end="220" title="Carl Lewis" label="Carl Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217354" start="222" end="233" title="Gail Devers" label="Gail Devers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5793" start="235" end="258" title="Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce" label="Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189" start="260" end="270" title="Usain Bolt" label="Usain Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035636" start="276" end="297" title="Elaine Thompson-Herah" label="Elaine Thompson-Herah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335486" start="853" end="862" title="Ed Temple" label="Ed Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="914" end="940" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="962" end="982" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31083" start="1033" end="1046" title="Wilma Rudolph" label="Wilma Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q240640" start="1161" end="1174" title="Edith McGuire" label="Edith McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="1431" end="1449" title="Pan-American Games" label="Pan-American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="1641" end="1651" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000498" start="1851" end="1864" title="Bud Greenspan" label="Bud Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801639" start="2003" end="2013" title="Tighten Up (Archie Bell &amp;amp; the Drells song)" label="Tighten Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154130" start="2167" end="2198" title="International Track Association" label="International Track Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185037" start="2463" end="2488" title="Beverly Hills High School" label="Beverly Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031075" start="2523" end="2553" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Sports Foundation" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Sports Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354328" start="2567" end="2581" title="Richard Dawson" label="Richard Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q506074" start="2595" end="2606" title="Family Feud" label="Family Feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547739" start="2715" end="2742" title="Georgia Sports Hall of Fame" label="Georgia Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087567" start="2780" end="2817" title="National Track and Field Hall of Fame" label="National Track and Field Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="2826" end="2846" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q381360" start="2898" end="2910" title="Olympic Flag" label="Olympic Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012372" start="3025" end="3041" title="Griffin, Georgia" label="Griffin, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230177" start="3336" end="3346" title="Dave Zirin" label="Dave Zirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="3493" end="3511" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335486" start="4320" end="4329" title="Ed Temple" label="Ed Temple"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71394" wikidata="Q234335" url="?curid=71394" title="Jane Jacobs">
<text>Jane Isabel Jacobs (&quot;née&quot; Butzner; 4 May 1916 – 25 April 2006) was an American-Canadian journalist, author, theorist, and activist who influenced urban studies, sociology, and economics. Her book &quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; (1961) argued that &quot;urban renewal&quot; and &quot;slum clearance&quot; did not respect the needs of city-dwellers.

Jacobs organized grassroots efforts to protect neighborhoods from urban renewal and slum clearance, in particular plans by Robert Moses to overhaul her own Greenwich Village neighborhood. She was instrumental in the eventual cancellation of the Lower Manhattan Expressway, which would have passed directly through the area of Manhattan that would later become known as SoHo, as well as part of Little Italy and Chinatown. She was arrested in 1968 for inciting a crowd at a public hearing on that project. After moving to Toronto in 1968, she joined the opposition to the Spadina Expressway and the associated network of expressways in Toronto that were planned and under construction.

As a woman and a writer who criticized experts in the male-dominated field of urban planning, Routinely, she was described first as a housewife, as she did not have a college degree or any formal training in urban planning; as a result, her lack of credentials was seized upon as grounds for criticism. The influence of her concepts eventually was acknowledged by highly respected professionals, such as Richard Florida and Robert Lucas.

== Early years ==
Jane Isabel Jacobs was born Jane Isabel Butzner in Scranton, Pennsylvania, the daughter of Bess Robison Butzner, a former teacher and nurse, and John Decker Butzner, a physician. They were a Protestant family. Her brother, John Decker Butzner Jr., served as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. After graduation from Scranton High School, she worked for a year as the unpaid assistant to the women&#x27;s page editor at the &quot;Scranton Tribune&quot;.

=== New York City ===
In 1935, during the Great Depression, she moved to New York City with her sister Betty. Jane Butzner took an immediate liking to Manhattan&#x27;s Greenwich Village, which deviated some from the city&#x27;s grid structure. The sisters soon moved there from Brooklyn.

During her early years in Manhattan, Jacobs held a variety of jobs working as a stenographer and freelance writer, writing about working districts in the city. These experiences, she later said, &quot;gave me more of a notion of what was going on in the city and what business was like, what work was like&quot;. Her first job was for a trade magazine, as a secretary, then an editor. She sold articles to the &quot;Sunday Herald Tribune&quot;, &quot;Cue&quot; magazine, and &quot;Vogue&quot;.

She studied at Columbia University&#x27;s School of General Studies for two years, taking courses in geology, zoology, law, political science, and economics. About the freedom to pursue study across her wide-ranging interests, she said:

For the first time I liked school and for the first time I made good marks. This was almost my undoing because after I had garnered, statistically, a certain number of credits I became the property of Barnard College at Columbia, and once I was the property of Barnard I had to take, it seemed, what Barnard wanted me to take, not what I wanted to learn. Fortunately my high-school marks had been so bad that Barnard decided I could not belong to it and I was therefore allowed to continue getting an education.

== Career ==
After attending Columbia University&#x27;s School of General Studies for two years, Butzner found a job at &quot;Iron Age&quot; magazine. Her 1943 article on economic decline in Scranton was well publicized and led the Murray Corporation of America to locate a warplane factory there. Encouraged by this success, Butzner petitioned the War Production Board to support more operations in Scranton. Experiencing job discrimination at &quot;Iron Age&quot;, she also advocated for equal pay for women and for the right of workers to unionize.

=== &quot;Amerika&quot; ===
She became a feature writer for the Office of War Information and then a reporter for &quot;Amerika&quot;, a publication of the US State Department in the Russian language. While working there she met Robert Hyde Jacobs Jr., a Columbia-educated architect who was designing warplanes for Grumman. They married in 1944. Together they had a daughter, Burgin, and two sons, James and Ned. They bought a three-story building at 555 Hudson Street. Jane continued to write for &quot;Amerika&quot; after the war, while Robert left Grumman and resumed work as an architect. The Jacobses rejected the rapidly growing suburbs as &quot;parasitic&quot;, choosing to remain in Greenwich Village. They renovated their house, in the middle of a mixed residential and commercial area, and created a garden in the backyard.

Working for the State Department during the McCarthy era, Jacobs received a questionnaire about her political beliefs and loyalties. Jacobs was anti-communist and had left the Federal Workers Union because of its apparent communist sympathies. Nevertheless, she was pro-union and purportedly appreciated the writing of Saul Alinsky, and therefore she was under suspicion. On 25 March 1952, Jacobs delivered her response to Conrad E. Snow, chairman of the Loyalty Security Board at the US Department of State. In her foreword to her answer, she said:

The other threat to the security of our tradition, I believe, lies at home. It is the current fear of radical ideas and of people who propound them. I do not agree with the extremists of either the left or the right, but I think they should be allowed to speak and to publish, both because they themselves have, and ought to have, rights, and once their rights are gone, the rights of the rest of us are hardly safe.

=== &quot;Architectural Forum&quot; ===
Jacobs left &quot;Amerika&quot; in 1952 when it announced its relocation to Washington, DC. She then found a well-paying job at &quot;Architectural Forum&quot;, published by Henry Luce of Time Inc. She was hired as an associate editor. After early success in that position, Jacobs began to take assignments on urban planning and &quot;urban blight&quot;. In 1954, she was assigned to cover the Society Hill development designed by Edmund Bacon. Although her editors expected a positive story, Jacobs criticized Bacon&#x27;s project, reacting against its lack of concern for the poor African Americans who were directly affected. When Bacon showed Jacobs examples of undeveloped and developed blocks, she determined that &quot;development&quot; seemed to end community life on the street. When Jacobs returned to the offices of &quot;Architectural Forum&quot;, she began to question the 1950s consensus on urban planning.

In 1955, Jacobs met William Kirk, an Episcopal minister who worked in East Harlem. Kirk came to the &quot;Architectural Forum&quot; offices to describe the impact that &quot;revitalization&quot; had on East Harlem, and he introduced Jacobs to the neighborhood.

In 1956, while standing in for Douglas Haskell of &quot;Architectural Forum&quot;, Jacobs delivered a lecture at Harvard University. She addressed leading architects, urban planners, and intellectuals (including Lewis Mumford), speaking on the topic of East Harlem. She urged this audience to &quot;respect – in the deepest sense – strips of chaos that have a weird wisdom of their own not yet encompassed in our concept of urban order&quot;. Contrary to her expectations, the talk was received with enthusiasm, but it also marked her as a threat to established urban planners, real estate owners, and developers. &quot;Architectural Forum&quot; printed the speech that year, along with photographs of East Harlem.

=== Rockefeller Foundation and &quot;Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; ===
After reading her Harvard speech, William H. Whyte invited Jacobs to write an article for &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine. The resulting piece, &quot;Downtown Is for People&quot;, appeared in a 1958 issue of &quot;Fortune&quot;, and marked her first public criticism of Robert Moses. Her criticism of the Lincoln Center was not popular with supporters of urban renewal at &quot;Architectural Forum&quot; and &quot;Fortune&quot;. C. D. Jackson, the publisher of &quot;Fortune&quot;, was outraged and over the telephone, demanded of Whyte: &quot;Who is this crazy dame?&quot;

The &quot;Fortune&quot; article brought Jacobs to the attention of Chadbourne Gilpatric, then associate director of the Humanities Division at the Rockefeller Foundation. The foundation had moved aggressively into urban topics, with a recent award to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for studies of urban aesthetics that would culminate in the publication of Kevin A. Lynch&#x27;s &quot;Image of the City&quot;. In May 1958, Gilpatric invited Jacobs to begin serving as a reviewer for grant proposals. Later that year, the Rockefeller Foundation awarded a grant to Jacobs to produce a critical study of city planning and urban life in the US. (From the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s, the foundation&#x27;s Humanities Division sponsored an &quot;Urban Design Studies&quot; research program, of which Jacobs was the best known grantee.) Gilpatric encouraged Jacobs to &quot;explor[e] the field of urban design to look for ideas and actions which may improve thinking on how the design of cities might better serve urban life, including cultural and humane value.&quot; Affiliating with The New School (then called The New School for Social Research), she spent three years conducting research and writing drafts. In 1961, Random House published the result: &quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot;.

&quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; remains one of the most influential books in the history of American city planning. She coined the terms &quot;mixed primary uses&quot;, and &quot;eyes on the street&quot;, which were adopted professionally in urban design, sociology, and many other fields. Jacobs painted a devastating picture of the profession of city planning, labeling it a pseudoscience. This angered the male-dominated urban planning profession. Jacobs was criticized with ad hominem attacks, being called a &quot;militant dame&quot; and a &quot;housewife&quot;: an amateur who had no right to interfere with an established discipline. One planner dismissed Jacobs&#x27;s book as &quot;bitter coffee-house rambling&quot;. Robert Moses, sent a copy, called it &quot;intemperate and also libelous ... Sell this junk to someone else.&quot;
Later, her book was criticized from the left for leaving out race and openly endorsing gentrification, which Jacobs referred to as &quot;unslumming&quot;.

In 1962, she resigned her position at &quot;Architectural Forum&quot; to become a full-time author and concentrate on raising her children. In other political activities she became an opponent of the Vietnam War, marched on the Pentagon in October 1967, and criticized the construction of the World Trade Center as a disaster for Manhattan&#x27;s waterfront.

=== Struggle for Greenwich Village ===
During the 1950s and 1960s, her home neighborhood of Greenwich Village was being transformed by city and state efforts to build housing (see, for example, Jacobs&#x27;s 1961 fight to build the West Village Houses in lieu of large apartment houses), private developers, the expansion of New York University, and by the urban renewal plans of Robert Moses. Moses&#x27; plan, funded as &quot;slum clearance&quot; by Title I of the Housing Act of 1949, also called for several blocks to be razed and replaced with upscale high-rises. The plan forced 132 families out of their homes and displaced 1,000 small businessesthe result was Washington Square Village.
As part of his efforts to revitalize the area, Moses had proposed the extension of Fifth Avenue through Washington Square Park in 1935. In the face of community opposition, Moses had shelved the project, but revived the idea in the 1950s. Moses argued that the Fifth Avenue extension would improve the flow of traffic through the neighborhood and provide access to the planned Lower Manhattan Expressway (LOMEX), which would connect the Manhattan Bridge and Williamsburg Bridge with the Holland Tunnel.

In response, local activist Shirley Hayes created the &quot;Committee to Save Washington Square Park&quot;, a coalition of dozens of local neighborhood groups that opposed the roadway extension. Raymond S. Rubinow eventually took over the organization, changing its name to the &quot;Joint Emergency Committee to Close Washington Square to Traffic&quot;. Jacob—recruited to the cause by Gerard La Mountain, a local Catholic priest whose church was in the path of the planned LOMEX route—had joined the committee under Hayes, but she took a more prominent role under Rubinow, reaching out to media outlets such as &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, which provided more sympathetic coverage than &quot;The New York Times&quot;. The committee gained the support of Margaret Mead, Eleanor Roosevelt, Lewis Mumford, Charles Abrams, and William H. Whyte, as well as Carmine De Sapio, a Greenwich Village resident and influential Democratic leader. De Sapio&#x27;s involvement proved decisive. On 25 June 1958, the city closed Washington Square Park to traffic, and the joint committee held a ribbon tying (not cutting) ceremony.

Plans for LOMEX expressway continued despite growing community opposition in areas such as Little Italy. In the 1960s, Jacobs chaired the Joint Committee to Stop the Lower Manhattan Expressway. &quot;The New York Times&quot; was sympathetic to Moses, while &quot;The Village Voice&quot; covered community rallies and advocated against the expressway. Jacobs continued to fight the expressway when plans resurfaced in 1962, 1965, and 1968, and she became a local hero for her opposition to the project. She was arrested by a plainclothes police officer on 10 April 1968, at a public hearing during which the crowd had charged the stage and destroyed the stenographer&#x27;s notes. She was accused of inciting a riot, criminal mischief, and obstructing public administration. After months of trials conducted in New York City (to which Jacobs commuted from Toronto), her charge was reduced to disorderly conduct.

&quot;New York: A Documentary Film&quot; devoted an hour of the eight-part, seventeen-and-a-half-hour series to the battle between Moses and Jacobs. Robert Caro&#x27;s biography of Moses, &quot;The Power Broker&quot;, gives only passing mention to this event, however, despite Jacobs&#x27;s strong influence on Caro. In 2017, Caro told an interviewer about the difficulty in cutting more than 300,000 words from his initial manuscript: &quot;The section that I wrote on Jane Jacobs disappeared. To this day, when someone says: &#x27;There&#x27;s hardly a mention of Jane Jacobs,&#x27; I think, &#x27;But I wrote a lot about her.&#x27; Every time I&#x27;m asked about that, I have this sick feeling.&quot;

== Life in Toronto ==

Soon after her arrest in 1968, Jacobs moved to Toronto, eventually settling at 69 Albany Avenue in The Annex from 1971 until her death in 2006. She decided to leave the US in part because she opposed the Vietnam War, she worried about the fate of her two draft-age sons, and she did not want to continue fighting the New York City government. She and her husband chose Toronto because it was pleasant and offered employment opportunities, and they moved to an area of Toronto that included so many Americans avoiding the draft that it was called the &quot;American ghetto&quot;.

She quickly became a leading figure in her new city and helped stop the proposed Spadina Expressway. A frequent theme of her work was to ask whether cities were being built for people or for cars. She was arrested twice during demonstrations. She also had considerable influence on the regeneration of the St. Lawrence neighbourhood, a housing project regarded as a major success. She became a Canadian citizen in 1974 and later, she told writer James Howard Kunstler that dual citizenship was not possible at the time, implying that her US citizenship was lost.

In 1980, she offered a more urban perspective on Quebec&#x27;s sovereignty in her book, &quot;The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Separation&quot;. Jacobs was an advocate of a Province of Toronto to separate the city proper from Ontario. Jacobs said, &quot;Cities, to thrive in the twenty-first century, must separate themselves politically from their surrounding areas.&quot; 

She was selected to be an officer of the Order of Canada in 1996 for her seminal writings and thought-provoking commentaries on urban development. The community and urban sociology section of the American Sociological Association awarded her its Outstanding Lifetime Contribution award in 2002. In 1997, the city government of Toronto sponsored a conference entitled, &quot;Jane Jacobs: Ideas That Matter&quot;, which led to a book by the same name. At the end of the conference, the Jane Jacobs Prize was created. It includes an annual stipend of $5,000 for three years to be given to &quot;celebrate Toronto&#x27;s original, unsung heroes – by seeking out citizens who are engaged in activities that contribute to the city&#x27;s vitality&quot;.
Jacobs never shied away from expressing her political support for specific candidates. She opposed the 1997 amalgamation of the cities of Metro Toronto, fearing that individual neighbourhoods would have less power with the new structure. She backed an ecologist, Tooker Gomberg, who lost Toronto&#x27;s 2000 mayoralty race, and she was an adviser to David Miller&#x27;s successful mayoral campaign in 2003, at a time when he was seen as a . During the mayoral campaign, Jacobs helped lobby against the construction of a bridge to join the city waterfront to island airport on the Toronto Islands. Following the election, the Toronto City Council&#x27;s earlier decision to approve the bridge was reversed and the bridge construction project was stopped. The airport instead upgraded the ferry service and later built a pedestrian tunnel.

Jacobs also was active in a campaign against a plan of Royal St. George&#x27;s College (an established school very close to the Jacobs residence in Toronto&#x27;s Annex district) to reconfigure its facilities. Jacobs suggested not only that the redesign be stopped but that the school be forced from the neighbourhood entirely. Although Toronto council initially rejected the school&#x27;s plans, the decision later was reversed – and the project was given the go-ahead by the Ontario Municipal Board (OMB) when opponents failed to produce credible witnesses and tried to withdraw from the case during the hearing.

She also had an influence on Vancouver&#x27;s urban planning. Jacobs has been called &quot;the mother of Vancouverism&quot;, referring to that city&#x27;s use of her &quot;density done well&quot; philosophy.

Jacobs died in Toronto Western Hospital aged 89, on 25 April 2006, apparently of a stroke. She was survived by a brother, James Butzner (d. 2009); a daughter, Burgin Jacobs, her sons, James and Ned of Vancouver, and by two grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. Upon her death her family&#x27;s statement noted: &quot;What&#x27;s important is not that she died but that she lived, and that her life&#x27;s work has greatly influenced the way we think. Please remember her by reading her books and implementing her ideas&quot;.

== Legacy ==
Jacobs is credited, along with Lewis Mumford, with inspiring the New Urbanist movement. She has been characterized as a major influence on decentralist and radical centrist thought. She discussed her legacy in an interview with &quot;Reason&quot; magazine.

While Jacobs saw her greatest legacy to be her contributions to economic theory, it is in the realm of urban planning that she has had her most extensive effect. Her observations about the ways in which cities function revolutionized the urban planning profession and discredited many accepted planning models that had dominated mid-century planning. The influential Harvard economist Edward Glaeser, known for his work on urban studies, acknowledged that Jane Jacobs (1960s) had been prescient in attacking Moses for &quot;replacing well-functioning neighborhoods with Le Corbusier-inspired towers&quot;. Glaeser agreed that these housing projects proved to be Moses&#x27; greatest failures, &quot;Moses spent millions and evicted tens of thousands to create buildings that became centers of crime, poverty, and despair.&quot;

She also was famous for introducing concepts such as the &quot;Ballet of the Sidewalk&quot; and &quot;Eyes on the Street&quot;, a reference to what would later be known as natural surveillance. The concept had a huge influence on planners and architects such as Oscar Newman, who prepared the idea through a series of studies that would culminate in his defensible space theory. The work of Jacobs and Newman would go on to affect American housing policy through the HOPE VI Program, an effort by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to demolish the high-rise public housing projects so reviled by Jacobs and to replace them with low-rise, mixed-income housing.

Throughout her life, Jacobs fought to alter the way in which city development was approached. By arguing that cities were living beings and ecosystems, she advocated ideas such as &quot;mixed use&quot; development and bottom-up planning. Furthermore, her harsh criticisms of &quot;slum clearing&quot; and &quot;high-rise housing&quot; projects were instrumental in discrediting these once universally supported planning practices.

Jacobs is remembered as being an advocate for the mindful development of cities, and for leaving &quot;a legacy of empowerment for citizens to trust their common sense and become advocates for their place&quot;.

Despite the fact that Jacobs mainly focused on New York City, her arguments have been identified as universal. For instance, her opposition against the demolition of urban neighborhoods for projects of urban renewal had &quot;special resonance&quot; in Melbourne, Australia. In Melbourne in the 1960s, resident associations fought against large-scale high-rise housing projects of the Housing Commission of Victoria, which they argued had little regard for the impact on local communities.

Jacobs fought an uphill battle against dominant trends of planning. Despite the United States remaining very much a suburban nation, the work of Jacobs has contributed to city living being rehabilitated and revitalized. Because of her ideas, today, many distressed urban neighborhoods are more likely to be gentrified than cleared for redevelopment.

Samuel R. Delany&#x27;s book &quot;Times Square Red, Times Square Blue&quot; relies heavily on &quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; in its analysis of the nature of social relations within the realm of urban studies.

=== Jane Jacobs Days ===
After the death of Jacobs in April 2006, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced a Jane Jacobs Day, held on 28 June 2006. The City of Toronto proclaimed her birthday the following year, 4 May 2007, as Jane Jacobs Day.

=== Jane&#x27;s Walks ===

In connection with Jane Jacobs Day in Toronto, two dozen free neighborhood walks in the city were offered that weekend (5 May 2007) as an active memorial to Jacobs, and they were dubbed Jane&#x27;s Walks. Later, a Jane&#x27;s Walk event was held in New York on 29–30 September 2007. In 2008, the event spread to eight cities and towns throughout Canada, and by 2016, Jane&#x27;s Walks were taking place in 212 cities in 36 countries, on six continents. The interpretive walks typically apply ideas Jacobs identified or espoused to local areas, which are explored on foot and sometimes by bicycle. The walks normally take place in early May, on or close to her 4 May birth anniversary. Walks are organized and led by local volunteers, coordinated by a headquarters office in Toronto. There are more than 200 walks offered in Toronto, alone, in 2016, taking place on 6, 7 and 8 May.

=== Exhibitions ===
In 2016, to mark the hundredth birth anniversary of Jane Jacobs, a Toronto gallery staged &quot;Jane at Home&quot;, an exhibition running from 29 April – 8 May. Curated by Jane&#x27;s son, Jim Jacobs, it offered glimpses of her home life, where she also worked. Her Toronto living room was represented, based on the one at her Albany Avenue house in The Annex, where she often spoke with noted thinkers and political leaders including Marshall McLuhan, Paul Martin, and the Queen of the Netherlands. On display were her typewriter, original manuscripts, rediscovered photographs demonstrating her distinctive styles, and personal mementos. The exhibit included furniture from previous homes in New York (her dining room is set up) and from Scranton, Pennsylvania.

In 2007, the Municipal Art Society of New York partnered with the Rockefeller Foundation to host an exhibit focusing on &quot;Jane Jacobs and the Future of New York&quot;, which opened at the society in September that year. The exhibit aimed to educate the public on her writings and activism and used tools to encourage new generations to become active in issues involving their own neighborhoods. An accompanying exhibit publication included essays and articles by such architecture critics, artists, activists, and journalists as Malcolm Gladwell, Reverend Billy, Robert Neuwirth, Tom Wolfe, Thomas de Monchaux, and William McDonough. Many of these contributors participated in a series of panel discussions on &quot;Jane Jacobs and the Future of New York&quot;.

=== Jane Jacobs Medal ===
As a tribute to Jacobs, the Rockefeller Foundation, which had awarded grants to Jacobs in the 1950s and 1960s, announced on 9 February 2007, the creation of the Jane Jacobs Medal, &quot;to recognize individuals who have made a significant contribution to thinking about urban design, specifically in New York City&quot;. Recipients include:
* Barry Benepe, co-founder of the New York City Green Market program and a founding member of Transportation Alternatives, was awarded with the inaugural Jane Jacobs Medal for Lifetime Leadership and a $100,000 cash prize in September 2007. The inaugural Jane Jacobs Medal for New Ideas and Activism was awarded to Omar Freilla, the founder of Green Worker Cooperatives in the South Bronx; Mr. Freilla donated his $100,000 to his organization.
* Peggy Shepard, executive director of West Harlem Environmental Action, received the 2008 Jane Jacobs Medal for Lifetime Leadership and Alexie Torres-Fleming, founder of Youth Ministries for Peace and Justice, received the award for New Ideas and Activism. Both women received their medals and $100,000 awards at a dinner ceremony in September 2008 in New York City.
* Damaris Reyes, executive director of Good Old Lower East Side (GOLES), received the 2009 Jane Jacobs Medal for New Ideas and Activism. Richard Kahan, as founder and CEO of the Urban Assembly, which created and manages 22 secondary public schools located in many of the lowest income neighborhoods in New York City, received the 2009 Jane Jacobs Medal for Lifetime Leadership. Both received $100,000, in addition to the medal.
* The 2010 recipients were Joshua David and Robert Hammond, whose work in establishing the High Line Park atop an unused elevated railroad line, led the foundation to award the 2010 Jane Jacobs Medal for New Ideas and Activism, along with $60,000 to each man. The 2010 Jane Jacobs Medal for Lifetime Leadership was given to Elizabeth Barlow Rogers, for her longtime work as writer, park administrator, and co-founder of Central Park Conservancy. She received $80,000 as well.

The Canadian Urban Institute offers an award to honor her, the Jane Jacobs Lifetime Achievement Award, to recognize a person &quot;who has had significant impact on the health of their region consistent with Jane Jacob&#x27;s belief that successful cities foster a place-based, community-centered approach&quot;. The 2011 winner was Eberhard Zeidler, while his daughter, Margie Zeidler, won the 2015 award. In 2012, Anne Golden took the prize &quot;for her long-standing leadership in public policy, her academic work and her varied leadership experience in business, not-for-profit and government sectors&quot;. William (Bill) Teron accepted the 2013 award &quot;for his influential career in public policy and passionate advocacy for quality design and commitment to development in the Ottawa area&quot;. In 2014, Jack Diamond was recognized for his &quot;contribution to improving the built form and advocacy for cities and the future of the Greater Toronto Area&quot;.

In April 2014, &quot;Spacing&quot; was appointed the stewards of the Jane Jacobs Prize. &quot;Spacing&quot;, winners of the prize in 2010, has continued to provide the award with a new life and new ways of promoting (and finding) the winners.

=== Other honors ===
* Jane Jacobs Way, West Village, New York City (Hudson Street and Eleventh Street, New York, New York)
* Jane Jacobs Park, 11 Wellesley Street West, Toronto (construction began in 2016)
* Jane Jacobs sculptural chairs, Victoria Memorial Square (St. John&#x27;s Square), Toronto
* Jane Jacobs Toronto Legacy Plaque, 69 Albany Avenue, Toronto
* Jacobs&#x27; Ladder, rose bushes dedicated by Grassroots Albany (neighbors) in 1997, Toronto
* Jane Jacobs Street, Mount Pleasant, South Carolina
* Jane Jacobs Street (Village of Cheshire) Black Mountain, North Carolina
* a Google Doodle marked the 100th anniversary of Jacobs&#x27;s birth, on 4 May 2016, and was featured on Google&#x27;s homepage in 15 countries on four continents
* a conference room at the offices of the New Economics Foundation in London is named in honor of Jacobs

Jacobs received the second Vincent Scully Prize from the National Building Museum in 2000.

Jacobs is the subject of the 2017 documentary film &quot;Citizen Jane: Battle for the City&quot;, which depicts her victories over Robert Moses and her philosophy of urban design.

== In popular culture ==
* A fictionalized version of her is played by Alison Smith in 3 episodes (Season 1, 2 and 5) of the Amazon series &quot;The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel&quot;.
* The community organizer played by Cherry Jones in &quot;Motherless Brooklyn&quot; has drawn comparisons to Jane Jacobs. The director, Edward Norton, has clarified that the composite character was partially based on Jacobs, but more so on Hortense Gabel who was active a decade earlier.

== Criticism ==
The planners and developers she fought against to preserve the West Village were among those who initially criticized her ideas. Robert Moses has generally been identified as her arch-rival during this period. One of their primary differences was their opposite views, the &quot;top down&quot; aggressive approach practiced by Moses contrasted the &quot;bottom up&quot; approach practiced by Jacobs that considered the community. Since then, Jacobs&#x27;s ideas have been analysed many times, often in regard to the outcomes that their influences have produced.

In places such as the West Village, the factors that she argued would maintain economic and cultural diversity have led instead to gentrification and some of the most expensive real estate in the world. Her family&#x27;s conversion of an old candy shop into a home is an example of the gentrifying trend that would continue under the influence of Jacobs&#x27;s ideas.

Gentrification also was caused, however, by &quot;the completely unexpected influx of affluent residents back into the inner city&quot;. The extent to which her ideas facilitated this phenomenon was at the time unimaginable. For example, she advocated the preservation of older buildings specifically because their lack of economic value made them affordable for poor people. In this respect, she saw them as &quot;guarantors of social diversity&quot;. That many of these older structures have increased in economic value solely due to their age was implausible in 1961. Issues of gentrification have dominated criticism of Jane Jacobs&#x27;s planning ideas.

Economist Tyler Cowen has criticized her ideas for not addressing problems of scale or infrastructure, and suggests that economists disagree with some of her approaches to development. For example, although her ideas of planning were praised at times as &quot;universal&quot;, they are now thought inapplicable when a city grows from one million to ten million (as has happened many times in developing nations). Such arguments suggest that her ideas apply only to cities with similar issues to those of New York, where Jacobs developed many of them.

== Works ==
Jane Jacobs spent her life studying cities. Her books include:

=== &quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; ===

&quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; is her single-most influential book and, possibly, the most influential book on urban planning and cities. Published in 1961, this book was widely read by both planning professionals and the general public. The book is a strong critique of the urban renewal policies of the 1950s, which, she claimed, destroyed communities and created isolated, unnatural urban spaces. In the book, she celebrates the diversity and complexity of old mixed-use neighborhoods while lamenting the monotony and sterility of modern planning. Jacobs advocated the abolition of zoning laws and restoration of free markets in land, which would result in dense, mixed-use neighborhoods and she frequently cited New York City&#x27;s Greenwich Village as an example of a vibrant urban community.

Robert Caro has cited it as the strongest influence on &quot;The Power Broker&quot;, his Pulitzer-winning biography of Robert Moses, although Caro does not mention Jacobs by name in the book despite Jacobs&#x27;s battles with Moses over his proposed Lower Manhattan Expressway. Caro reportedly cut a chapter about Jacobs due to his book&#x27;s length.

Beyond the practical lessons in city design and planning that &quot;Death and Life&quot; offers, the theoretical underpinnings of the work challenge the modern development mindset. Jane Jacobs defends her positions with common sense and anecdotes.

=== &quot;The Economy of Cities&quot; ===
The thesis of this book is that cities are the primary drivers of economic development. Her main argument is that explosive economic growth derives from urban import replacement. Import replacement is the process of producing goods locally that formerly were imported, e.g., Tokyo bicycle factories replacing Tokyo bicycle importers in the 1800s. Jacobs claims that import replacement builds up local infrastructure, skills, and production. Jacobs also claims that the increased production is subsequently exported to other cities, giving those other cities a new opportunity to engage in import replacement, thus producing a positive cycle of growth.

In an interview with Bill Steigerwald in &quot;Reason&quot;, Jacobs said that if she is remembered for being a great intellectual she will be remembered not for her work concerning city planning, but for the discovery of import replacement. Critics erroneously claim that her ideas parrot the idea of import substitution advanced earlier by scholars such as Andre Gunder Frank. Import substitution was a national economic theory implying that if a nation substituted its imports with national production, the nation would become wealthier, whereas Jacob&#x27;s idea is entirely about cities and could be called urban import substitution. However, even this would lead to confusion since in practice, import substitution in India and Latin America were government subsidized and mandated, whereas Jacobs&#x27;s concept of import replacement is a free market process of discovery and division of labor within a city.

In the second part of the book, Jacobs argues that cities preceded agriculture. She argues that in cities trade in wild animals and grains allowed for the initial division of labor necessary for the discovery of husbandry and agriculture; these discoveries then moved out of the city due to land competition. It is commonly taught that agriculture preceded cities. This notion was promoted originally by archaeologist Vere Gordon Childe and in recent times, by Charles Keith Maisels. The apparent opposition between the traditional history and Jacobs&#x27; rests in differing definition of &#x27;city&#x27;, &#x27;civilization&#x27;, or &#x27;urban&#x27;. Traditional history and archeology define &#x27;urban&#x27; or &#x27;civilization&#x27; as Synoecismas a literate, socially stratified, monolithic political community, whereas, as one can see from &quot;The Economy of Cities&quot; or from &quot;Cities and the Wealth of Nations&quot;, Jacobs defined the city purely along the lines of geographically dense trade giving way to entrepreneurial discovery and subsequent improvements in the division of labor. Without the requirements of literacy, permanent and monumental building, or the signs of specialized civil and armed forces, &#x27;cities&#x27; can be accurately interpreted as existing thousands of years before when Childe and Maisels place them.

=== &quot;The Question of Separatism&quot; ===

&quot;The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Sovereignty&quot; incorporated and expanded Jacobs&#x27;s presentation of the 1979 Massey Lectures, entitled &quot;Canadian Cities and Sovereignty-Association&quot;. It was published in 1980 and reprinted in 2011 with a previously-unpublished 2005 interview with Robin Philpot on the subject in which she evokes the relative overlooking of that book among her usual readership. This was the first time Jacobs was requested to discuss it in an interview. Columnist Richard Gwyn advanced that while not openly criticizing her, English-speaking Canadian readers thought she did not understand how Canadian politics worked and that she was not being helpful in a time of distress for national unity (the 1980 referendum was just defeated by a vote of 60 per cent). &quot;The Question of Separatism&quot; was also not mentioned in the bibliography of her 2006 obituary in &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;.

Jacobs&#x27;s book advances the view that Quebec&#x27;s eventual independence is best for Montreal, Toronto, the rest of Canada, and the world; and that such independence can be achieved peacefully. As precedent, she cites Norway&#x27;s secession from Sweden and how it enriched both nations. The origins of the contemporary secessionist-movement in the Quiet Revolution are examined, along with Canada&#x27;s historical reliance on natural resources and foreign-owned manufacturing for its own economic development. Jacobs asserts that such an approach is colonial and hence backward, citing by example, Canada buying its skis and furniture from Norway or Norwegian-owned factories in Canada, the latter procedure being a product of Canadian tariffs designed specifically to foster such factories.

The relevant public views of René Lévesque, Claude Ryan, and then Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau are also critically analyzed, an example being their failure to recognize that two respective, independent currencies are essential to the success of an independent Quebec and a smaller resultant Canada, an issue that is central to her book. Jacobs stresses the need for Montreal to continue developing its leadership of Québécois culture, but that ultimately, such a need can never be fulfilled by Montreal&#x27;s increasing tendencies toward regional-city status, tendencies foretelling economic, political, and cultural subservience to English-speaking Toronto. Such an outcome, Jacobs believed, would in the long run doom Quebec&#x27;s independence as much as it would hinder Canada&#x27;s own future. She concludes with her observation that the popular equating of political secession with political and economic failure is the result of the Enlightenment, which perceived nature as a force for &quot;standardization, uniformity, universality, and immutability&quot;. Since then, naturalists and their readers have gradually realized that nature is a force for diversity, and that, &quot;diversity itself is of the essence of excellence&quot;. The right kind of secession, Jacobs states, can lead to the right kind of diversity, and Quebec and Canada are capable of both, and must achieve both, to survive.

=== &quot;Cities and the Wealth of Nations&quot; ===
&quot;Cities and the Wealth of Nations&quot; (1984) attempts to do for economics what &quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; did for modern urban planning, although it has not received the same critical attention. Beginning with a concise treatment of classical economics, this book challenges one of the fundamental assumptions of the greatest economists. Classical (and Neo-classical) economists consider the nation-state to be the main player in macroeconomics. Jacobs argues that it is not the nation-state, rather it is the city that is the true player in this worldwide game. She restates the idea of import replacement from her earlier book &quot;The Economy of Cities&quot;, while speculating on the further ramifications of considering the city first and the nation second, or not at all.

A spectrum of economic regions

Along with the previous books focused on economics, Jacobs proposes an array of types of regional economies (stylized facts) which can help to understand their different challenges, and potential for development. One can start at the bottom end of the spectrum with the &#x27;backward&#x27; region, which are economies who have lost their competitive advantages and are losing population or becoming dependent on &quot;largesse&quot; transfers from wealthier areas. Next are the &#x27;supply regions&#x27;, which are usually known as natural resource extraction towns, and may be very wealthy during their heyday, but often suffer a decline into backwardness if the resource has run-out or has been substituted on outside markets. Similar to this is the &#x27;transplant region&#x27;, a fundamental aspect of Jacobs economic theory. Transplant economies are usually manufacturing plants who have been moved from the location where the product was invented. The reason for the transplant is to save land, labour, fiscal, and transportation costs. Transplant regions are usually found along main transportation routes, where there is a large labour pool of available labour. Backward regions, Supply regions, and Transplant regions make up the most vulnerable types of economies to outside shocks and competition from low-cost production zones.
The Jacobs spectrum of regions also includes types of cities which rely on classical principles of central-location. Jacobs discusses &#x27;Entrepôt cities&#x27;, which are economies based on the accumulation and warehousing of export goods, usually at a maritime port location. Next are &#x27;Hub cities&#x27;, or regional capitals, which are central locations for private markets and public services in a given geography. 
Finally, Jacobs presents the qualities of growing metropolitan areas. Jacobs defines the metropolis as a city that grows beyond its political borders. She terms the core city as the &#x27;Import-Replacing&#x27; city. She terms the suburban sprawl of the metropolis as the &#x27;City-Region&#x27;. Economic literature sometimes uses the term &quot;Jacobs agglomeration&quot; for these growing and innovative cities. CA Ramsay has proposed the term Forward Cities, as an echo to the opposing principle of &#x27;Backward&#x27; economies.

According to Jacobs, economies are constantly evolving and may move in and out of any of these categories. However, for an export-based economy such as a supply region, or a transplant town, to develop into a Forward city, the economy must engage in what she terms new-work. This implies a diversification of the economy. Jacobs strongly encourages breakaway entrepreneurship and local investment capital to do this. The modus operandi may be in import-replacing, in world-first innovation, or the adoption of production which is new to the community. Jacobs also insists on the benefits of having a city-currency, which acts as a positive feedback mechanism, to help drive local innovation and import-replacement. It also protects from outside demand shocks.

=== &quot;Systems of Survival&quot; ===
&quot;Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics&quot; (1992) moves outside of the city, studying the moral underpinnings of work. As with her other work, she used an observational approach. This book is written as a Platonic dialogue. It appears that she (as described by characters in her book) took newspaper clippings of moral judgments related to work, collected and sorted them to find that they fit two patterns of moral behavior that were mutually exclusive. She calls these two patterns &quot;moral syndrome A&quot;, or commercial moral syndrome, and &quot;moral syndrome B&quot;, or guardian moral syndrome. She claims that the commercial moral syndrome is applicable to business owners, scientists, farmers, and traders. Similarly, she claims that the guardian moral syndrome is applicable to government, charities, hunter-gatherers, and religious institutions. She also claims that these moral syndromes are fixed, and do not fluctuate over time.

It is important to stress that Jane Jacobs is providing a theory about the morality of work, and not all moral ideas. Moral ideas that are not included in her system are applicable to both syndromes.

Jane Jacobs goes on to describe what happens when these two moral syndromes are mixed, showing the work underpinnings of the Mafia and communism, and what happens when New York subway police are paid bonuses here – reinterpreted slightly as a part of the larger analysis.

=== &quot;The Nature of Economies&quot; ===
&quot;The Nature of Economies&quot; (2000), a dialog between friends concerning the premise: &quot;human beings exist wholly within nature as part of the natural order in every respect&quot; (p. &quot;ix&quot;), argues that the same principles underlie both ecosystems and economies: &quot;development and co-development through differentiation and their combinations; expansion through diverse, multiple uses of energy; and self-maintenance through self-refueling&quot; (p. 82). Jacobs also comments on the nature of economic and biological diversity and its role in the development and growth of the two kinds of systems.

Jacobs&#x27;s characters discuss the four methods by which &quot;dynamically stable systems&quot; may evade collapse: &quot;bifurcations; positive-feedback loops; negative-feedback controls; and emergency adaptations&quot; (p. 86). Their conversations also cover the &quot;double nature of fitness for survival&quot; (traits to avoid destroying one&#x27;s own habitat as well as success in competition to feed and breed, p. 119), and unpredictability including the butterfly effect characterized in terms of multiplicity of variables as well as disproportional response to cause, and self-organization where &quot;a system can be making itself up as it goes along&quot; (p. 137).

The book is infused with many real-world economic and biological examples, which help keep the book &quot;down to earth&quot; and comprehensible, if dense. Concepts are furnished with both economic and biological examples, showing their coherence in both worlds.

One particularly interesting insight is the creation of &quot;something from nothing&quot; – an economy from nowhere. In the biological world, free energy is given through sunlight, but in the economic world human creativity and natural resources supply this free energy, or at least starter energy. Another interesting insight is the creation of economic diversity through the combination of different technologies, for example the typewriter and television as inputs and outputs of a computer system: this can lead to the creation of &quot;new species of work&quot;.

=== &quot;Dark Age Ahead&quot; ===
Published in 2004 by Random House, &quot;Dark Age Ahead&quot; posits Jacobs&#x27;s argument that North American civilization shows signs of a spiral decline comparable to the Roman empire&#x27;s collapse. Her discussion focuses on &quot;five pillars of our culture that we depend on to stand firm&quot;, summarized as the nuclear family and community; quality in education; free thought in science; representational government and responsible taxes; and corporate and professional accountability. As the title of this book suggests, Jacobs&#x27;s outlook is far more pessimistic than that of her previous works. However, in the conclusion she admits: &quot;At a given time it is hard to tell whether forces of cultural life or death are in the ascendancy. Is suburban sprawl, with its murders of communities and wastes of land, time, and energy, a sign of decay? Or is rising interest in overcoming sprawl a sign of vigor and adaptability in North American culture? Arguably, either could turn out to be true.&quot; While Jacobs idealized US democracy, &quot;Dark Age Ahead&quot; echoes the skepticism and disappointment that led to her emigration to Canada in 1968. Later, she would indicate that North American cultures, among others, were grounded in a &quot;plantation mentality&quot; that was culturally and ecologically unsustainable.

== Writings ==
* &quot;Constitutional Chaff; Rejected Suggestions of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, With Explanatory Argument&quot; Compiled by Jane Butzner, (1941) Columbia University Press; Compiled by Jane Jacobs (Née Butzner), Reprinted 1970 by Kennikat Press, Port Washington, New York. 
* &quot;The Death and Life of Great American Cities&quot; (1961) New York: Random House. 
* &quot;The Economy of Cities&quot; (1969) 
* &quot;The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Sovereignty&quot; (1980 Random House and 2011 Baraka Books) 
* &quot;Cities and the Wealth of Nations&quot; (1985) 
* &quot;The Girl on the Hat&quot; (Children&#x27;s Book Illustrated by Karen Reczuch), (June 1990) Oxford University Press. 
* &quot;Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics&quot; (1992) 
* &quot;A Schoolteacher in Old Alaska: The Story of Hannah Breece&quot; (1995) Random House of Canada. 
* &quot;The Nature of Economies&quot; (2000) New York: Random House, The Modern Library. 
* &quot;Dark Age Ahead&quot; (2004) 
* &quot;Vital Little Plans: The Short Works of Jane Jacobs&quot; (2016) New York: Random House. 

== See also ==
* David Crombie
* Fred Gardiner
* Highway revolts in the United States
* Innovation economics
* Urban secession
* Urban vitality

== References ==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Jane Jacobs&#x27;s Order of Canada Citation
* Jane Jacobs&#x27;s Papers at John J. Burns Library, Boston College
* Jane Jacobs Oral History, 1997 Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation
* Jane Jacobs&#x27;s Legacy, &quot;City Journal&quot; online, July 31, 2009 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234335" start="0" end="18" title="Jane Jacobs" label="Jane Isabel Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q234335" start="36" end="43" title="Jane Jacobs" label="Butzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23578769" start="156" end="169" title="urban studies" label="urban studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918023" start="212" end="255" title="The Death and Life of Great American Cities" label="The Death and Life of Great American Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="287" end="300" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864311" start="317" end="331" title="Slum clearance in the United States" label="slum clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="400" end="410" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="506" end="518" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="539" end="556" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447530" start="628" end="654" title="Lower Manhattan Expressway" label="Lower Manhattan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q461572" start="752" end="756" title="SoHo, Manhattan" label="SoHo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201462" start="777" end="789" title="Little Italy, Manhattan" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q866332" start="794" end="803" title="Chinatown, Manhattan" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120061" start="954" end="972" title="Spadina Expressway" label="Spadina Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031376" start="992" end="1025" title="Cancelled expressways in Toronto" label="network of expressways in Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="1147" end="1161" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="1236" end="1250" title="college degree" label="college degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q375612" start="1473" end="1488" title="Richard Florida" label="Richard Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q107264" start="1493" end="1505" title="Robert Lucas Jr." label="Robert Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="1577" end="1599" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228107" start="1749" end="1772" title="John Decker Butzner Jr." label="John Decker Butzner Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="1799" end="1852" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438747" start="1876" end="1896" title="Scranton High School (Pennsylvania)" label="Scranton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118550" start="1951" end="1968" title="women&amp;#x27;s page" label="women&amp;#x27;s page"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769386" start="1989" end="2005" title="Scranton Tribune" label="Scranton Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2056" end="2072" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="2182" end="2199" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050052" start="2242" end="2256" title="Commissioners&amp;#x27; Plan of 1811" label="grid structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="2383" end="2395" title="stenographer" label="stenographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="2400" end="2416" title="freelance writer" label="freelance writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="2784" end="2789" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2813" end="2832" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149901" start="2840" end="2865" title="Columbia University School of General Studies" label="School of General Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="2908" end="2915" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="2922" end="2939" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="3237" end="3252" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958277" start="3781" end="3810" title="Murray Corporation of America" label="Murray Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="3898" end="3918" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414572" start="4039" end="4058" title="equal pay for women" label="equal pay for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630740" start="4166" end="4191" title="Office of War Information" label="Office of War Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064162" start="4222" end="4229" title="Amerika (magazine)" label="Amerika"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="4258" end="4277" title="United States Department of State" label="US State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q463261" start="4417" end="4424" title="Grumman" label="Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q389991" start="4557" end="4570" title="Hudson Street (Manhattan)" label="Hudson Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="4737" end="4744" title="suburbs" label="suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="4981" end="4989" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5113" end="5134" title="Federal Workers Union" label="Federal Workers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25649" start="5256" end="5268" title="Saul Alinsky" label="Saul Alinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6022" end="6036" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860271" start="6080" end="6099" title="Architectural Forum" label="Architectural Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q516473" start="6120" end="6130" title="Henry Luce" label="Henry Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411739" start="6134" end="6143" title="Time Inc." label="Time Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="6281" end="6293" title="urban blight" label="urban blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717906" start="6340" end="6352" title="Society Hill" label="Society Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285964" start="6377" end="6389" title="Edmund Bacon (architect)" label="Edmund Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069687" start="6938" end="6949" title="East Harlem" label="East Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301577" start="7161" end="7176" title="Douglas Haskell" label="Douglas Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="7243" end="7261" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="7342" end="7355" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104843" start="7967" end="7983" title="William H. Whyte" label="William H. Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="8029" end="8036" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="8200" end="8212" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="8235" end="8249" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8359" end="8372" title="C. D. Jackson" label="C. D. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="8652" end="8674" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="8760" end="8797" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q445008" start="8873" end="8887" title="Kevin A. Lynch" label="Kevin A. Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="9037" end="9059" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q63100" start="9406" end="9418" title="urban design" label="urban design"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="9595" end="9609" title="The New School" label="The New School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918023" start="9772" end="9815" title="The Death and Life of Great American Cities" label="The Death and Life of Great American Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="10225" end="10238" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q189183" start="10326" end="10336" title="ad hominem" label="ad hominem"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="10777" end="10791" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="11030" end="11057" title="Opposition to U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War" label="opponent of the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974373" start="11059" end="11082" title="National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam" label="marched on the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="11139" end="11157" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="11298" end="11315" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744015" start="11438" end="11457" title="West Village Houses" label="West Village Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="11531" end="11550" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="11563" end="11576" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="11586" end="11598" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985066" start="11673" end="11692" title="Housing Act of 1949" label="Housing Act of 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566521" start="11874" end="11899" title="Washington Square Village" label="Washington Square Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447530" start="12278" end="12304" title="Lower Manhattan Expressway" label="Lower Manhattan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q125050" start="12338" end="12354" title="Manhattan Bridge" label="Manhattan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125068" start="12359" end="12378" title="Williamsburg Bridge" label="Williamsburg Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125753" start="12388" end="12402" title="Holland Tunnel" label="Holland Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968036" start="12600" end="12618" title="I. M. Rubinow" label="Raymond S. Rubinow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12820" end="12828" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="13024" end="13041" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13101" end="13119" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q180099" start="13163" end="13176" title="Margaret Mead" label="Margaret Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="13178" end="13195" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="13197" end="13210" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074954" start="13212" end="13226" title="Charles Abrams" label="Charles Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104843" start="13232" end="13248" title="William H. Whyte" label="William H. Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043687" start="13261" end="13277" title="Carmine De Sapio" label="Carmine De Sapio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447530" start="13663" end="13717" title="Joint Committee to Stop the Lower Manhattan Expressway" label="Joint Committee to Stop the Lower Manhattan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14443" end="14471" title="New York: A Documentary Film" label="New York: A Documentary Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q373423" start="14586" end="14597" title="Robert Caro" label="Robert Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757917" start="14631" end="14647" title="The Power Broker" label="The Power Broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="15213" end="15220" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048712" start="15265" end="15274" title="The Annex" label="The Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="15370" end="15381" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="15421" end="15426" title="Conscription" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120061" start="15827" end="15845" title="Spadina Expressway" label="Spadina Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589470" start="16052" end="16064" title="St. Lawrence, Toronto" label="St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="16082" end="16097" title="housing project" label="housing project"/>
<link wikidata="Q962004" start="16192" end="16213" title="James Howard Kunstler" label="James Howard Kunstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="16359" end="16365" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250371" start="16507" end="16526" title="Proposal for the Province of Toronto" label="Province of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="16560" end="16567" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="16751" end="16766" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="16838" end="16855" title="urban development" label="urban development"/>
<link wikidata="Q466928" start="16906" end="16939" title="American Sociological Association" label="American Sociological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795689" start="17596" end="17609" title="Metro Toronto" label="Metro Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824028" start="17721" end="17735" title="Tooker Gomberg" label="Tooker Gomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826658" start="17746" end="17780" title="2000 Toronto municipal election" label="Toronto&amp;#x27;s 2000 mayoralty race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175688" start="17808" end="17827" title="David Miller (Canadian politician)" label="David Miller&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826660" start="17839" end="17863" title="2003 Toronto municipal election" label="mayoral campaign in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q117708" start="18016" end="18030" title="Billy Bishop Toronto City Airport" label="island airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q248110" start="18038" end="18053" title="Toronto Islands" label="Toronto Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374870" start="18352" end="18383" title="Royal St. George&amp;#x27;s College" label="Royal St. George&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094842" start="18774" end="18797" title="Ontario Municipal Board" label="Ontario Municipal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="18942" end="18951" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163606" start="19018" end="19030" title="Vancouverism" label="Vancouverism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826568" start="19137" end="19161" title="Toronto Western Hospital" label="Toronto Western Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="19698" end="19711" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q735901" start="19732" end="19744" title="New Urbanism" label="New Urbanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="19806" end="19818" title="Decentralization" label="decentralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448005" start="19823" end="19839" title="Radical center (politics)" label="radical centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="19901" end="19907" title="Reason (magazine)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292350" start="20310" end="20324" title="Edward Glaeser" label="Edward Glaeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="20495" end="20507" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980792" start="20926" end="20946" title="natural surveillance" label="natural surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q125259514" start="21016" end="21028" title="Oscar Newman (architect)" label="Oscar Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251458" start="21108" end="21131" title="defensible space theory" label="defensible space theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635459" start="21221" end="21228" title="HOPE VI" label="HOPE VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="21255" end="21312" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883847" start="21419" end="21439" title="mixed-income housing" label="mixed-income housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="22340" end="22349" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916103" start="22472" end="22502" title="Housing Commission of Victoria" label="Housing Commission of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="22885" end="22895" title="gentrification" label="gentrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="22929" end="22945" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806558" start="22964" end="22999" title="Times Square Red, Times Square Blue" label="Times Square Red, Times Square Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918023" start="23030" end="23073" title="The Death and Life of Great American Cities" label="The Death and Life of Great American Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="23252" end="23269" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658421" start="23631" end="23647" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Walk" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048712" start="24697" end="24706" title="The Annex" label="The Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q193871" start="24782" end="24798" title="Marshall McLuhan" label="Marshall McLuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="24800" end="24811" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="24821" end="24845" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="Queen of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952813" start="25125" end="25146" title="Municipal Art Society" label="Municipal Art Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="25178" end="25200" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318429" start="25645" end="25661" title="Malcolm Gladwell" label="Malcolm Gladwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q464486" start="25663" end="25677" title="Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping" label="Reverend Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348003" start="25679" end="25694" title="Robert Neuwirth" label="Robert Neuwirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="25696" end="25705" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Tom Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25707" end="25725" title="Thomas de Monchaux" label="Thomas de Monchaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662745" start="25731" end="25748" title="William McDonough" label="William McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="25933" end="25955" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q63100" start="26175" end="26187" title="urban design" label="urban design"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857933" start="26294" end="26314" title="Farmers&amp;#x27; Market (New York City)" label="Green Market program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835160" start="26340" end="26367" title="Transportation Alternatives" label="Transportation Alternatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603415" start="26590" end="26615" title="Green Worker Cooperatives" label="Green Worker Cooperatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404798" start="26623" end="26634" title="South Bronx" label="South Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q47009913" start="26692" end="26705" title="Peggy Shepard" label="Peggy Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985306" start="26729" end="26761" title="West Harlem Environmental Action" label="West Harlem Environmental Action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26827" end="26848" title="Alexie Torres-Fleming" label="Alexie Torres-Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q843869" start="27577" end="27591" title="High Line Park" label="High Line Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362379" start="27810" end="27833" title="Elizabeth Barlow Rogers" label="Elizabeth Barlow Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061606" start="27906" end="27930" title="Central Park Conservancy" label="Central Park Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030655" start="27967" end="27991" title="Canadian Urban Institute" label="Canadian Urban Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q91976" start="28296" end="28312" title="Eberhard Zeidler (architect)" label="Eberhard Zeidler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28334" end="28348" title="Margie Zeidler" label="Margie Zeidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768385" start="28379" end="28390" title="Anne Golden" label="Anne Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342320" start="28576" end="28596" title="William Teron" label="William (Bill) Teron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112099" start="28779" end="28791" title="Jack Diamond (architect)" label="Jack Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024624" start="28908" end="28928" title="Greater Toronto Area" label="Greater Toronto Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572759" start="28958" end="28965" title="Spacing (magazine)" label="Spacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617684" start="29328" end="29344" title="Wellesley Street, Toronto" label="Wellesley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926868" start="29421" end="29445" title="Victoria Memorial Square" label="Victoria Memorial Square"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29494" end="29515" title="Heritage Toronto#Plaques and Markers" label="Toronto Legacy Plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010216" start="29660" end="29690" title="Mount Pleasant, South Carolina" label="Mount Pleasant, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413277" start="29734" end="29764" title="Black Mountain, North Carolina" label="Black Mountain, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="29769" end="29782" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932045" start="30062" end="30082" title="Vincent Scully Prize" label="Vincent Scully Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="30092" end="30116" title="National Building Museum" label="National Building Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30634329" start="30453" end="30478" title="The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel" label="The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q239046" start="30522" end="30534" title="Cherry Jones" label="Cherry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q21581258" start="30544" end="30563" title="Motherless Brooklyn (film)" label="Motherless Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="30622" end="30635" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906695" start="30726" end="30740" title="Hortense Gabel" label="Hortense Gabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191048" start="30854" end="30866" title="West Village" label="West Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="30920" end="30932" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="31485" end="31499" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q602278" start="32393" end="32404" title="Tyler Cowen" label="Tyler Cowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="33838" end="33855" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q373423" start="33901" end="33912" title="Robert Caro" label="Robert Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757917" start="33962" end="33978" title="The Power Broker" label="The Power Broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="33990" end="33998" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447530" start="34151" end="34177" title="Lower Manhattan Expressway" label="Lower Manhattan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110569" start="34704" end="34722" title="import replacement" label="import replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="35245" end="35251" title="Reason (magazine)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110569" start="35419" end="35437" title="import replacement" label="import replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660379" start="35499" end="35518" title="import substitution industrialization" label="import substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58040" start="35556" end="35574" title="Andre Gunder Frank" label="Andre Gunder Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q154655" start="36532" end="36550" title="Vere Gordon Childe" label="Vere Gordon Childe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36575" end="36596" title="Charles Keith Maisels" label="Charles Keith Maisels"/>
<link wikidata="Q977693" start="36861" end="36870" title="Synoecism" label="Synoecism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992965" start="37669" end="37684" title="Massey Lectures" label="Massey Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437115" start="37849" end="37862" title="Robin Philpot" label="Robin Philpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q288974" start="38050" end="38062" title="Richard Gwyn (Canadian writer)" label="Richard Gwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064289" start="38286" end="38301" title="1980 Quebec referendum" label="1980 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="38459" end="38477" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="38528" end="38563" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec&amp;#x27;s eventual independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="38576" end="38584" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264910" start="38709" end="38744" title="Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden" label="Norway&amp;#x27;s secession from Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q239514" start="38840" end="38856" title="Quiet Revolution" label="Quiet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="38919" end="38936" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="38981" end="39001" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="39109" end="39113" title="skis" label="skis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="39229" end="39235" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q381007" start="39315" end="39328" title="René Lévesque" label="René Lévesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978118" start="39330" end="39341" title="Claude Ryan" label="Claude Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="39367" end="39381" title="Pierre Elliott Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="39489" end="39499" title="Currency" label="currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q245507" start="39703" end="39712" title="Québécois (word)" label="Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="39826" end="39834" title="regional" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="40229" end="40242" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="40260" end="40266" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40754" end="40786" title="Cities and the Wealth of Nations" label="Cities and the Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918023" start="40840" end="40883" title="The Death and Life of Great American Cities" label="The Death and Life of Great American Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="41214" end="41228" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41419" end="41440" title="The Economy of Cities" label="The Economy of Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="44865" end="44869" title="labour (economics)" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="44957" end="44962" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="46026" end="46031" title="American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="46069" end="46084" title="New York City Subway" label="New York subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="46476" end="46485" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="46491" end="46500" title="economic system" label="economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q918004" start="46981" end="47004" title="positive feedback" label="positive-feedback loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="47006" end="47032" title="negative feedback" label="negative-feedback controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q187536" start="47308" end="47324" title="butterfly effect" label="butterfly effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q609408" start="47427" end="47444" title="self-organization" label="self-organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="49155" end="49167" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918023" start="50044" end="50087" title="The Death and Life of Great American Cities" label="The Death and Life of Great American Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663876" start="50484" end="50503" title="Systems of Survival" label="Systems of Survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223119" start="50782" end="50796" title="Dark Age Ahead" label="Dark Age Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174104" start="50926" end="50939" title="David Crombie" label="David Crombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452880" start="50942" end="50955" title="Fred Gardiner" label="Fred Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070764" start="50958" end="50994" title="Highway revolts in the United States" label="Highway revolts in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664193" start="50997" end="51017" title="Innovation economics" label="Innovation economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900163" start="51020" end="51035" title="Urban secession" label="Urban secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q110608929" start="51038" end="51052" title="Urban vitality" label="Urban vitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="51265" end="51279" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604904" start="51313" end="51364" title="Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation" label="Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71396" wikidata="Q245421" url="?curid=71396" title="Cedilla">
<text>A cedilla ( ; from Spanish &#x27;, &quot;small &quot;ceda&quot;&quot;, i.e. small &quot;z&quot;), orcedille (from French , ), is a hook or tail () added under certain letters (as a diacritical mark) to indicate that their pronunciation is modified. In Catalan (where it is called ), French, and Portuguese (where it is called a ) it is used only under the letter (to form ), and the entire letter is called, respectively, (i.e. &quot;broken C&quot;), , and (or , colloquially). It is used to mark vowel nasalization in many languages of Sub-Saharan Africa, including Vute from Cameroon.

This diacritic is not to be confused with the &quot;ogonek&quot; (◌̨), which resembles the cedilla but mirrored. It looks also very similar to the diacrital comma, which is used in the Romanian and Latvian alphabet, and which is misnamed &quot;cedilla&quot; in the Unicode standard.

==Origin==
The tail originated in Spain as the bottom half of a miniature cursive z. The word &quot;cedilla&quot; is the diminutive of the Old Spanish name for this letter, (). Modern Spanish and isolationist Galician no longer use this diacritic, although it is used in Reintegrationist Galician, Portuguese, Catalan, Occitan, and French, which gives English the alternative spellings of &quot;cedille&quot;, from French &quot;&quot;, and the Portuguese form . An obsolete spelling of &quot;cedilla&quot; is &quot;cerilla&quot;. The earliest use in English cited by the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; is a 1599 Spanish-English dictionary and grammar. Chambers&#x27; &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; is cited for the printer-trade variant &quot;ceceril&quot; in use in 1738. Its use in English is not universal and applies to loan words from French and Portuguese such as &quot;façade&quot;, &quot;limaçon&quot; and &quot;cachaça&quot; (often typed &quot;facade&quot;, &quot;limacon&quot; and &quot;cachaca&quot; because of lack of &quot;ç&quot; keys on English-language keyboards).

With the advent of typeface modernism, the calligraphic nature of the cedilla was thought somewhat jarring on sans-serif typefaces, and so some designers instead substituted a comma design, which could be made bolder and more compatible with the style of the text. This reduces the visual distinction between the cedilla and the diacritical comma.

==C==

The most frequent character with cedilla is &quot;ç&quot; (&quot;c&quot; with cedilla, as in &quot;façade&quot;). It was first used for the sound of the voiceless alveolar affricate in old Spanish and stems from the letter (the Visigothic form of the letter ), whose upper loop was lengthened and reinterpreted as a &quot;c&quot;, whereas its lower loop became the diminished appendage, the cedilla.

It represents the &quot;soft&quot; sound , the voiceless alveolar sibilant, where a &quot;c&quot; would normally represent the &quot;hard&quot; sound (before &quot;a&quot;, &quot;o&quot;, &quot;u&quot;, or at the end of a word) in English and in certain Romance languages such as Catalan, Galician, French (where ç appears in the name of the language itself, &#x27;), Ligurian, Occitan, and Portuguese. In Occitan, Friulian, and Catalan, &quot;ç&quot; can also be found at the beginning of a word (&#x27;, &#x27;) or at the end (&#x27;).

It represents the voiceless postalveolar affricate (as in English &quot;church&quot;) in Albanian, Azerbaijani, Crimean Tatar, Friulian, Kurdish, Tatar, Turkish (as in &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;), and Turkmen. It is also sometimes used this way in Manx, to distinguish it from the velar fricative.

In the International Phonetic Alphabet, ⟨ç⟩ represents the voiceless palatal fricative.

==S==

The character &quot;ş&quot; represents the voiceless postalveolar fricative (as in &quot;show&quot;) in several languages, including many belonging to the Turkic languages, and included as a separate letter in their alphabets:
* Turkish
* Azerbaijani
* Crimean Tatar
* Gagauz
* Tatar
* Turkmen
* Romanian (substitution use when S-comma [Ș] was missing from pre-3.0 Unicode standards, and older standards, still frequent, but an error)
* Kurdish
In HTML character entity references codice_1 and codice_2 can be used.

==T==

Gagauz uses Ţ (T with cedilla), one of the few languages to do so, and Ş (S with cedilla). Besides being present in some Gagauz orthographies, T with Cedilla also exists in the General Alphabet of Cameroon Languages, in the Kabyle language, in the Manjak and Mankanya languages, and possibly elsewhere.

In 1868, Ambroise Firmin-Didot suggested in his book &#x27; (Observations on French Spelling) that French phonetics could be better regularized by adding a cedilla beneath the letter &quot;t&quot; in some words. For example, the suffix &#x27; is usually not pronounced as but as . It has to be distinctly learned that in words such as &#x27; (but not &#x27;), it is pronounced . A similar effect occurs with other prefixes or within words. Firmin-Didot surmised that a new character could be added to French orthography. A letter with the same description, T-cedilla (majuscule: Ţ, minuscule: ţ), is used in Gagauz. A similar letter, the T-comma (majuscule: Ț, minuscule: ț), exists in Romanian, but it has a comma accent, not a cedilla.

==Languages with other characters with cedillas==
===Latvian===
Comparatively, some consider the diacritics on the palatalized Latvian consonants &quot;ģ&quot;, &quot;ķ&quot;, &quot;ļ&quot;, &quot;ņ&quot;, and formerly &quot;ŗ&quot; to be cedillas. Although their Adobe glyph names are commas, their names in the Unicode Standard are &quot;g&quot;, &quot;k&quot;, &quot;l&quot;, &quot;n&quot;, and &quot;r&quot; with a cedilla. The letters were introduced to the Unicode standard before 1992, and their names cannot be altered. The uppercase equivalent &quot;Ģ&quot; sometimes has a regular cedilla.

===Marshallese===

In Marshallese orthography, four letters in Marshallese have cedillas: . In standard printed text they are &quot;always&quot; cedillas, and their omission or the substitution of comma below and dot below diacritics are nonstandard.

, many font rendering engines do not display &quot;any&quot; of these properly, for two reasons:
* &quot; and &quot; usually do not display properly at all, because of the use of the cedilla in Latvian. Unicode has precombined glyphs for these letters, but most quality fonts display them with comma below diacritics to accommodate the expectations of Latvian orthography. This is considered nonstandard in Marshallese. The use of a zero-width non-joiner between the letter and the diacritic can alleviate this problem: &quot; and &quot; may display properly, but may not; see below.
* &quot; and &quot; do not currently exist in Unicode as precombined glyphs, and must be encoded as the plain Latin letters &quot; and &quot; with the combining cedilla diacritic. Most Unicode fonts issued with Windows do not display combining diacritics properly, showing them too far to the right of the letter, as with Tahoma (&quot;m̧&quot; and &quot;o̧&quot;) and Times New Roman (&quot;m̧&quot; and &quot;o̧&quot;). This mostly affects &quot;, and may or may not affect &quot;. But some common Unicode fonts like Arial Unicode MS (&quot;m̧&quot; and &quot;o̧&quot;), Cambria (&quot;m̧&quot; and &quot;o̧&quot;) and Lucida Sans Unicode (&quot;m̧&quot; and &quot;o̧&quot;) do not have this problem. When &quot;&quot; is properly displayed, the cedilla is either underneath the center of the letter, or is underneath the right-most leg of the letter, but is always directly underneath the letter wherever it is positioned.

Because of these font display issues, it is not uncommon to find nonstandard &quot;ad hoc&quot; substitutes for these letters. The online version of the Marshallese-English Dictionary (the only complete Marshallese dictionary in existence) displays the letters with dot below diacritics, all of which do exist as precombined glyphs in Unicode: &quot;, &quot;, &quot; and &quot;. The first three exist in the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration, and &quot;&quot; exists in the Vietnamese alphabet, and both of these systems are supported by the most recent versions of common fonts like Arial, Courier New, Tahoma and Times New Roman. This sidesteps most of the Marshallese text display issues associated with the cedilla, but is still inappropriate for polished standard text.

===Vute===
Vute, a Mambiloid language from Cameroon, uses cedilla for the nasalization of all vowel qualities (cf. the ogonek used in Polish and Navajo for the same purpose). This includes unconventional Roman letters that are formalized from the IPA into the official writing system. These include &lt;&quot;i̧ ȩ ɨ̧ ə̧ a̧ u̧ o̧ ɔ̧&gt;.&quot;

===Hebrew===
The ISO 259 romanization of Biblical Hebrew uses Ȩ (E with cedilla) and Ḝ (E with cedilla and breve).

==Diacritical comma==
Languages such as Romanian, Latvian and Livonian add a comma (virgula) to some letters, such as &quot;&quot;, which looks somewhat like a cedilla, but is more precisely a diacritical comma. This is particularly confusing with letters which can take either diacritic: for example, the consonant is written as &quot;ş&quot; in Turkish but as &quot;ș&quot; in Romanian, and Romanian writers will sometimes use the former instead of the latter because of insufficient computer support. 

Adobe names of the Latvian letters ( and formerly ) use the word &quot;comma&quot;, but in the Unicode Standard they are named &quot;g&quot;, &quot;k&quot;, &quot;l&quot;, &quot;n&quot;, and &quot;r&quot; with &quot;cedilla&quot;. The letters were introduced to the Unicode standard before 1992, and their names cannot be altered. Influenced by Latvian, Livonian has the same problem for &quot;d̦&quot;, &quot;ļ&quot;, &quot;ņ&quot;, &quot;ŗ&quot; and &quot;ț&quot;. 
The Polish letters and and Lithuanian letters and are not made with the cedilla either, but with the unrelated ogonek diacritic.

==Unicode==
Unicode encodes a number of cases of &quot;letter with cedilla&quot; (so called, as explained above) as precomposed characters and these are displayed below. In addition, many more symbols may be composed using the combining character facility ( and ) that may be used with any letter or other diacritic to create a customised symbol but this does not mean that the result has any real-world application and are not shown in the table. 
In ambiguous cases, typeface designers must choose whether to use a cedilla diacritic or comma-below diacritic for these codepoints, leaving it to others to provide the user with a method to achieve the other form (i.e., that relies on the combining character method). Here are three popular faces that demonstrate the choices made:
* Arial: Ç ç Ḉ ḉ Ḑ ḑ Ȩ ȩ Ḝ ḝ Ģ ģ Ḩ ḩ Ķ ķ Ļ ļ Ņ ņ Ŗ ŗ Ş ş Ţ ţ 
* Times New Roman: Ç ç Ḉ ḉ Ḑ ḑ Ȩ ȩ Ḝ ḝ Ģ ģ Ḩ ḩ Ķ ķ Ļ ļ Ņ ņ Ŗ ŗ Ş ş Ţ ţ 
* Courier New: Ç ç Ḉ ḉ Ḑ ḑ Ȩ ȩ Ḝ ḝ Ģ ģ Ḩ ḩ Ķ ķ Ļ ļ Ņ ņ Ŗ ŗ Ş ş Ţ ţ

In each case, the diacritic displayed with D, G, K, L N and R is a comma-below; in the other cases it is displayed as a cedilla. It may be that computer fonts are sold in the Romanian and Turkish markets that favour the national standard form of this diacritic.

==References==

==External links==
* ScriptSource—Positioning the traditional cedilla
* Diacritics Project—All you need to design a font with correct accents
* Keyboard Help—Learn how to make world language accent marks and other diacriticals on a computer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q245421" start="2" end="9" title="Cedilla" label="cedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="19" end="26" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q245421" start="27" end="100" title="Cedilla" label="&amp;#x27;, &amp;quot;small &amp;quot;ceda&amp;quot;&amp;quot;, i.e. small &amp;quot;z&amp;quot;), or"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="181" end="197" title="diacritic" label="diacritical mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="252" end="259" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="283" end="289" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="295" end="305" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="537" end="555" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36897" start="567" end="571" title="Vute language" label="Vute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="577" end="585" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q684050" start="640" end="646" title="ogonek" label="ogonek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="735" end="750" title="Comma#Diacritical_usage" label="diacrital comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q67693351" start="786" end="802" title="Latvian alphabet" label="Latvian alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="946" end="953" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751" start="954" end="955" title="z" label="z"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="993" end="1003" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088025" start="1011" end="1022" title="Old Spanish language" label="Old Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151220" start="1143" end="1168" title="Reintegrationism" label="Reintegrationist Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1170" end="1180" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="1182" end="1189" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="1191" end="1198" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1204" end="1210" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1224" end="1231" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1287" end="1293" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1316" end="1326" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1449" end="1474" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9992" start="1614" end="1621" title="c-cedilla" label="ceceril"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1711" end="1717" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1722" end="1732" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="1747" end="1753" title="façade" label="façade"/>
<link wikidata="Q733697" start="1767" end="1774" title="limaçon" label="limaçon"/>
<link wikidata="Q744729" start="1791" end="1798" title="cachaça" label="cachaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889081" start="1972" end="1990" title="modern typography" label="typeface modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="2063" end="2073" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q161736" start="2282" end="2299" title="diacritical comma" label="diacritical comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q862614" start="2462" end="2490" title="voiceless alveolar affricate" label="voiceless alveolar affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807516" start="2537" end="2547" title="Visigothic script" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q334723" start="2757" end="2784" title="voiceless alveolar sibilant" label="voiceless alveolar sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="2990" end="2997" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="2999" end="3007" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3009" end="3015" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="3078" end="3086" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="3088" end="3095" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3101" end="3111" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q518603" start="3267" end="3299" title="voiceless postalveolar affricate" label="voiceless postalveolar affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="3338" end="3346" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="3348" end="3359" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33357" start="3361" end="3374" title="Crimean Tatar language" label="Crimean Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33441" start="3376" end="3384" title="Friulian language" label="Friulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="3386" end="3393" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25285" start="3395" end="3400" title="Tatar language" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="3402" end="3409" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="3454" end="3461" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="3501" end="3505" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q271603" start="3534" end="3549" title="Voiceless velar fricative" label="velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="3559" end="3590" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q506701" start="3611" end="3638" title="voiceless palatal fricative" label="voiceless palatal fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q334695" start="3691" end="3723" title="voiceless postalveolar fricative" label="voiceless postalveolar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="3803" end="3819" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="3877" end="3884" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="3887" end="3898" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33357" start="3901" end="3914" title="Crimean Tatar language" label="Crimean Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="3917" end="3923" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q25285" start="3926" end="3931" title="Tatar language" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="3934" end="3941" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="3944" end="3952" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q396845" start="3976" end="3983" title="S-comma" label="S-comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4013" end="4020" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="4085" end="4092" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567428" start="4096" end="4127" title="HTML character entity reference" label="HTML character entity reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="4172" end="4178" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583923" start="4349" end="4387" title="General Alphabet of Cameroon Languages" label="General Alphabet of Cameroon Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35853" start="4396" end="4402" title="Kabyle language" label="Kabyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="4420" end="4426" title="Manjak language" label="Manjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="4431" end="4439" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q181122" start="5033" end="5042" title="Ţ" label="T-cedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="5084" end="5090" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q423402" start="5114" end="5121" title="T-comma" label="T-comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="5330" end="5341" title="palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q161736" start="5501" end="5507" title="comma (diacritic)" label="commas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36280" start="5838" end="5861" title="Marshallese orthography" label="Marshallese orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q36280" start="5879" end="5890" title="Marshallese language" label="Marshallese"/>
<link wikidata="Q161736" start="6013" end="6024" title="comma below" label="comma below"/>
<link wikidata="Q669057" start="6029" end="6038" title="dot below" label="dot below"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6240" end="6269" title="#Latvian" label="use of the cedilla in Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q67693351" start="6420" end="6439" title="Latvian orthography" label="Latvian orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q863569" start="6501" end="6522" title="zero-width non-joiner" label="zero-width non-joiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q685216" start="6803" end="6812" title="Combining character" label="combining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="6863" end="6870" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q910757" start="6974" end="6980" title="Tahoma (typeface)" label="Tahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="7021" end="7036" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361299" start="7171" end="7187" title="Arial Unicode MS" label="Arial Unicode MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300682" start="7225" end="7232" title="Cambria (typeface)" label="Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="Q713566" start="7273" end="7292" title="Lucida Sans Unicode" label="Lucida Sans Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q194486" start="7987" end="8037" title="International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration" label="International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q622712" start="8070" end="8089" title="Vietnamese alphabet" label="Vietnamese alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q653123" start="8180" end="8185" title="Arial" label="Arial"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="8187" end="8198" title="Courier New" label="Courier New"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="8211" end="8226" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q36897" start="8383" end="8387" title="Vute language" label="Vute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888151" start="8391" end="8400" title="Mambiloid languages" label="Mambiloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="8415" end="8423" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q684050" start="8491" end="8497" title="ogonek" label="ogonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="8506" end="8512" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="8517" end="8523" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="8619" end="8622" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056238" start="8733" end="8740" title="ISO 259" label="ISO 259"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="8757" end="8772" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="8872" end="8880" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="8882" end="8889" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33698" start="8894" end="8902" title="Livonian language" label="Livonian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9025" end="9042" title="Comma (punctuation)#Diacritical usage" label="diacritical comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="9179" end="9186" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="9338" end="9343" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="9433" end="9440" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="9604" end="9611" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="9810" end="9816" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="9833" end="9843" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q684050" start="9917" end="9923" title="ogonek" label="ogonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422376" start="10052" end="10073" title="precomposed character" label="precomposed character"/>
<link wikidata="Q685216" start="10163" end="10182" title="combining character" label="combining character"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="10405" end="10422" title="typeface designer" label="typeface designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="10506" end="10515" title="codepoint" label="codepoint"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71397" wikidata="Q1567423" url="?curid=71397" title="Cadaver monument">
<text>A cadaver monument or transi is a type of funerary monument to a deceased person, featuring a sculpted tomb effigy of a skeleton, or of an emaciated or decomposing dead body, with closed eyes. It was particularly characteristic of the Late Middle Ages when they were designed as a to remind viewers of the transience and vanity of mortal life compared to the eternity and desirability of the Christian after-life. The format is in stark contrast to gisants, which are always recumbent, in full dress, with open eyes and hands clasped and raised in prayer.

Cadaver monuments first appeared in the 1380s and remained a popular form of funerary art for 200 subsequent years. In a still widely debated theory popularized by the historians Helen M. Roe and John Aberth, cadaver monuments are often interpreted as a form of memento mori or adaption of the motif of &quot;The Three Living and the Three Dead&quot;. They show the human body&#x27;s &quot;transition&quot; from life to decomposition, highlighting the contrast between worldly riches and elegance and the degradation of death.

Over the centuries, the depictions became more realistic and gruesome, while earlier tendencies to line the tombs with moralizing inscriptions on the vanities of life were abandoned. The morbid art form reached its peak in the late 16th century, with more extreme effigies depicting putrefied corpses outside of the funerary monument context, and taking centre stage as stand-alone sculptures.

==Development==

A depiction of a rotting cadaver in art (as opposed to a skeleton) is called a transi. However, the term &quot;cadaver monument&quot; can really be applied to other varieties of monuments, e.g. with skeletons or with the deceased completely wrapped in a shroud. In the &quot;double-decker&quot; monuments, in Erwin Panofsky&#x27;s phrase, a sculpted stone bier displays on the top level the recumbent effigy (or &quot;gisant&quot;) of a living person, where they may be life-sized and sometimes represented kneeling in prayer, and in dramatic contrast as a rotting cadaver on the bottom level, often shrouded and sometimes in company of worms and other flesh-eating creatures. The iconography is regionally distinct: the depiction of such animals on these cadavers is more commonly found on the European mainland, and especially in the German regions. The dissemination of cadaver imagery in the late-medieval danse macabre may also have influenced the iconography of cadaver monuments.

In Christian funerary art, cadaver monuments were a dramatic departure from the usual practice of depicting the deceased as they were in life, for example recumbent but with hands together in prayer, or even as dynamic military figures drawing their swords, such as the 13th- and 14th-century effigies surviving in the Temple Church, London. Cadaver monuments often acted as a portrait of the deceased in death.
The term can also be used for a monument which shows only the cadaver without a corresponding representation of the living person. The sculpture is intended as a didactic example of how transient earthly glory is, since it depicts what all people of every status finally become. Kathleen Cohen&#x27;s study of five French ecclesiastics who commissioned &quot;transi&quot; monuments determined that common to all of them was a successful worldliness that seemed almost to demand a shocking display of transient mortality. A classic example is the &quot;Transi de René de Chalons&quot; by Ligier Richier, in the church of Saint Etienne in Bar-le-Duc, France, pictured below right.

Cadaver monuments were made only for high-ranking persons, usually royalty, bishops, abbots or nobility, because one had to be wealthy to have one made, and influential enough to be allotted space for one in a church of limited capacity. Some monuments for royalty were double tombs, for both a king and queen. The French kings Louis XII, Francis I and Henry II were doubly portrayed, as couples both as living effigies and as naked cadavers, in their double double-decker monuments in the Basilica of Saint-Denis near Paris. Other varieties also exist, such as cadaver imagery on incised slabs and monumental brasses, including the so-called &quot;shroud brasses&quot;, of which many survive in England.

==Countries==
===France===
France has a long history of cadaver monuments, though not as many examples or varieties survive as in England. One of the earliest and anatomically convincing examples is the gaunt cadaver effigy of the medieval physician Guillaume de Harsigny (d. 1393) at Laon. Another early example is the effigy on the multi-layered wall-monument of Cardinal Jean de La Grange (died 1402) in Avignon. Kathleen Cohen lists many further extant examples. A revival of the form occurred in the Renaissance, as testified by the two examples to Louis XII and his wife Anne of Brittany at Saint-Denis, and of Queen Catherine de&#x27; Medici who commissioned a cadaver monument for her husband Henry II.

===England===
The earliest known &quot;transi&quot; monument is the very faint matrix (i.e. indent) of a now lost monumental brass shrouded demi-effigy on the ledger stone slab commemorating &quot;John the Smith&quot; (c.1370) at St Bartholomew’s Church in Brightwell Baldwin in Oxfordshire. In the 15th century the sculpted &quot;transi&quot; effigy made its appearance in England. Cadaver monuments survive in many English cathedrals and parish churches. The earliest surviving one is in Lincoln Cathedral, to Bishop Richard Fleming who founded Lincoln College, Oxford and died in 1431. Canterbury Cathedral houses the well-known cadaver monument to Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury (died 1443) and in Exeter Cathedral survives the 16th-century monument and chantry chapel of Precentor Sylke, inscribed in Latin: &quot;I am what you will be, and I was what you are. Pray for me I beseech you.&quot; Winchester Cathedral has two cadaver monuments. Exeter Cathedral has an example.

The cadaver monument traditionally identified as that of John Wakeman, Abbot of Tewkesbury from 1531 to 1539, survives in Tewkesbury Abbey. Following the dissolution of the monasteries, he retired and later became the first Bishop of Gloucester. The monument, with vermin crawling on a sculpted skeletal corpse, may have been prepared for him, but his body was in fact buried at Forthampton in Gloucestershire.

A rarer, modern type is the standing, shrouded effigy type exemplified by the tomb of the poet John Donne (d. 1631) in the crypt of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in London. Similar examples from the Early Modern period signify faith in the Resurrection.

===Italy===
Cadaver monuments are found in many Italian churches. Andrea Bregno sculpted several of them, including those of Cardinal Alain de Coëtivy in Santa Prassede, Ludovico Cardinal d&#x27;Albert at Santa Maria in Ara Coeli and Bishop Juan Díaz de Coca in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome. Three other prominent monuments are those of Cardinal Matteo d&#x27;Acquasparta in Santa Maria in Ara Coeli and those of Bishop Gonsalvi (1298) and of Cardinal Gonsalvo (1299) in Santa Maria Maggiore, all sculpted by Giovanni de Cosma, the youngest of the Cosmati family lineage. St Peter’s Basilica in Rome contains the tomb of Pope Innocent III, sculpted by Giovanni Pisano.

===Germany and the Netherlands===
Many cadaver monuments and ledger stones survive in Germany and the Netherlands. An impressive example is the 16th-century Van Brederode double-decker monument at Vianen near Utrecht, which depicts Reynoud van Brederode (d. 1556) and his wife Philippote van der Marck (d. 1537) as shrouded figures on the upper level, with a single verminous cadaver below.

=== Ireland ===

A total of 11 cadaver monuments have been recorded in Ireland, many of which are no longer in situ. The earliest complete record of these monuments was compiled by Helen M. Roe in 1969. One of the best known examples of this tradition is the monumental limestone slab known as &quot;The Modest Man&quot;, dedicated to Thomas Ronan (d. 1554), and his wife Johanna Tyrry (d. 1569), now situated in the Triskel Christchurch in Cork. This is one of two examples recorded in Cork, with the second residing in Church of St Multose in Kinsale.
A variant is in the form of Cadaver Stones, which lack any sculpted superstructure or canopy. These may merely be sculptural elements removed from more elaborate now lost monuments, as is the case with the stone of Sir Edmond Goldyng and his wife Elizabeth Fleming, which in the early part of the 16th century was built into the churchyard wall of St. Peter&#x27;s Church of Ireland, Drogheda.

==References==
==Sources==

* Barker, Jessica. &quot;Revisiting The Monument: Fifty Years since Panofsky’s Tomb Sculpture&quot;. London: Courtauld Institute of Art, 2016. 
* Bass, Marisa Anne. &quot;The transi tomb and the genius of sixteenth century Netherlandish funerary sculpture&quot;. &quot;Netherlands Yearbook for the History of Art&quot;, volume 67, 2017. 
* Heimerman, Emily. &quot;A Portrait of Death: Analyzing the Transi Tomb of Guillaume de Harcigny (1300–1393 A.D.)&quot;. &quot;Coalition of Master’s Scholars on Material Culture&quot;, April 2, 2021
* Panofsky, Erwin. &quot;Tomb Sculpture: Four Lectures on its Changing Aspects from Ancient Egypt to Bernini&quot;. London: Harry Abrams, 1964. 
* Roe, Helen M. &quot;Cadaver Effigial Monuments in Ireland&quot;. &quot;Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland&quot;, volume 99, No. 1, 1969. p. 4. 
* Welch, Christina. &quot;For Prayers and Pedagogy: Contextualising English Carved Cadaver Monuments of the Late-Medieval Social and Religious Elite&quot;. &quot;Fieldwork in Religion&quot;, Equinox Publishing, 2012</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1567423" start="2" end="18" title="Cadaver monument" label="cadaver monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="42" end="59" title="funerary art" label="funerary monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642845" start="103" end="114" title="tomb effigy" label="tomb effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="235" end="251" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642845" start="449" end="455" title="gisant" label="gisant"/>
<link wikidata="Q78172286" start="736" end="748" title="Helen M. Roe" label="Helen M. Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q273383" start="819" end="831" title="memento mori" label="memento mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="1554" end="1562" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57656" start="1806" end="1820" title="Erwin Panofsky" label="Erwin Panofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q546377" start="1853" end="1857" title="bier" label="bier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642845" start="1888" end="1904" title="Tomb effigy" label="recumbent effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q473450" start="2407" end="2420" title="Danse Macabre" label="danse macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="2488" end="2510" title="Christian funerary art" label="Christian funerary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429312" start="2804" end="2817" title="Temple Church" label="Temple Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="3032" end="3041" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537615" start="3449" end="3474" title="Cadaver Tomb of René of Chalon" label="Transi de René de Chalons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343122" start="3484" end="3498" title="Ligier Richier" label="Ligier Richier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="3534" end="3544" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="3905" end="3914" title="Louis XII" label="Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="3916" end="3925" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="3930" end="3938" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="4067" end="4090" title="Basilica of Saint-Denis" label="Basilica of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q899459" start="4176" end="4192" title="monumental brass" label="monumental brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553950" start="4533" end="4554" title="Guillaume de Harsigny" label="Guillaume de Harsigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q167141" start="4568" end="4572" title="Laon" label="Laon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259784" start="4657" end="4674" title="Jean de La Grange" label="Jean de La Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="4906" end="4931" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="4984" end="4992" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832720" start="5154" end="5166" title="ledger stone" label="ledger stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263290" start="5252" end="5270" title="Brightwell Baldwin" label="Brightwell Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="5420" end="5429" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="5435" end="5448" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="5485" end="5502" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325709" start="5514" end="5529" title="Richard Fleming (bishop)" label="Richard Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q81153" start="5542" end="5565" title="Lincoln College, Oxford" label="Lincoln College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="5584" end="5604" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376957" start="5647" end="5661" title="Henry Chichele" label="Henry Chichele"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="5663" end="5687" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131208" start="5707" end="5723" title="Exeter Cathedral" label="Exeter Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="5763" end="5777" title="chantry chapel" label="chantry chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="5904" end="5924" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131208" start="5952" end="5968" title="Exeter Cathedral" label="Exeter Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848660" start="6043" end="6055" title="John Wakeman" label="John Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="6108" end="6124" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="6140" end="6170" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558439" start="6210" end="6230" title="Bishop of Gloucester" label="Bishop of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469409" start="6365" end="6376" title="Forthampton" label="Forthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="6493" end="6503" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="6530" end="6554" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="6633" end="6645" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q493515" start="6714" end="6727" title="Andrea Bregno" label="Andrea Bregno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772120" start="6782" end="6798" title="Alain de Coëtivy" label="Alain de Coëtivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q733890" start="6802" end="6816" title="Santa Prassede" label="Santa Prassede"/>
<link wikidata="Q318660" start="6853" end="6877" title="Santa Maria in Ara Coeli" label="Santa Maria in Ara Coeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q823685" start="6910" end="6935" title="Santa Maria sopra Minerva" label="Santa Maria sopra Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346310" start="6999" end="7024" title="Matthew of Acquasparta" label="Matteo d&amp;#x27;Acquasparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="7124" end="7144" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q640579" start="7162" end="7179" title="Giovanni de Cosma" label="Giovanni de Cosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q640579" start="7201" end="7208" title="Cosmati" label="Cosmati"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="7225" end="7244" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter’s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246112" start="7266" end="7291" title="List of extant papal tombs" label="tomb of Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q314932" start="7305" end="7320" title="Giovanni Pisano" label="Giovanni Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832720" start="7384" end="7397" title="ledger stones" label="ledger stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="7823" end="7830" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q78172286" start="7896" end="7908" title="Helen M. Roe" label="Helen M. Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q120883266" start="8132" end="8152" title="Christ Church, Cork" label="Triskel Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55028021" start="8236" end="8256" title="Church of St Multose" label="Church of St Multose"/>
<link wikidata="Q55028957" start="8617" end="8661" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church of Ireland, Drogheda" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church of Ireland, Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q57656" start="9232" end="9247" title="Erwin Panofsky" label="Panofsky, Erwin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71402" wikidata="Q465991" url="?curid=71402" title="Margaret of York">
<text>Margaret of York (3 May 1446 – 23 November 1503), also known as Margaret of Burgundy, was Duchess of Burgundy from 1468 to 1477 as the third wife of Charles the Bold, and after his death (1477) acted as a protector of the Burgundian State. She was a daughter of Richard, 3rd Duke of York, and of Cecily Neville, and the sister of two kings of England, Edward IV and Richard III. Born at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, in the Kingdom of England, she died at Mechelen in the Low Countries.

==Early life==
Duchess Isabella of Burgundy, the mother of Charles the Bold, was, through her blood ties and her perception of Burgundian interests, pro-English. As a granddaughter of John of Gaunt, she was consequently sympathetic to the House of Lancaster. She believed that Burgundian trade, from which the Burgundian State drew its vast wealth, depended upon friendly relations with England. For this reason she was prepared to favour any English faction which was willing to favour Burgundy. By 1454, she favoured the House of York, headed by Margaret&#x27;s father, Richard, 3rd Duke of York. Although the King of England, Henry VI, was the head of the House of Lancaster, his wife, Margaret of Anjou, was a niece of Burgundy&#x27;s bitter enemy, Charles VII of France, and was herself an enemy of the Burgundians. The Duke of York, by contrast, shared Burgundy&#x27;s enmity towards the French, and preferred the Burgundians.

Because of this, when the Duke of York came to power in 1453–1454, during Henry VI&#x27;s first period of insanity, negotiations were made between himself and Isabella for a marriage between Charles the Bold, then Count of Charolais, and one of York&#x27;s unmarried daughters, of whom the 8-year-old Margaret was the youngest. The negotiations petered out, however, due to power struggles in England, and the preference of Charles&#x27;s father, Philip the Good, for a French alliance. Philip had Charles betrothed to Isabella of Bourbon, the daughter of Charles I, Duke of Bourbon, and Agnes of Burgundy, in late March 1454, and the pair were married on 31 October 1454.

Margaret, being a useful bargaining tool to her family, was still unmarried at age 19, when Isabella of Bourbon died in September 1465. She had borne Charles only a daughter, Mary, which made it an imperative for him to remarry and father a son. The situation had changed since 1454: Charles was now highly respected by his father, who had in his old age entrusted the rule of Burgundy to his son. Charles was pro-English, and wished to make an English marriage and alliance against the French. For her own part, Margaret&#x27;s family were far more powerful and secure than they had been in 1454: her father had been killed at the Battle of Wakefield on 30 December 1460, but her brother was now King Edward IV, opposed ineffectively only by Margaret of Anjou and her son, Edward of Westminster. This made Margaret a far more valuable bride than she had been as the mere daughter of a duke. Because of this, Charles sent his close advisor, Guillaume de Clugny, to London weeks after the death of his wife, to propose to Edward IV a marriage between himself and Margaret. Edward responded warmly, and in spring 1466 sent his brother-in-law, Lord Scales, to Burgundy, where Scales made a formal offer of Margaret&#x27;s hand in marriage to Charles, and put forward Edward&#x27;s own proposal of a reciprocal marriage between Charles&#x27; daughter Mary and Edward&#x27;s brother, George, 1st Duke of Clarence.

==Marriage==
The marriage did not take place immediately, however. Continued talks were required, particularly since Charles was unwilling to marry his only child and potential heiress to George, Duke of Clarence, and these talks were undertaken by Anthony, Grand Bastard of Burgundy, Charles&#x27;s half-brother. But added problems were introduced by the French: Louis XI did not want an alliance between Burgundy and England, his two greatest enemies. Louis accordingly tried to break the two apart, by offering the hand of his elder daughter, Anne, to Charles, that of his younger daughter, Joan, to Edward&#x27;s youngest brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and that of his brother-in-law, Philip of Bresse, to Margaret. Edward showed interest in the latter two propositions, offending Charles the Bold, and delaying the Anglo-Burgundian relations.

Instead, in 1466, Margaret was betrothed to Peter, Constable of Portugal, whom the rebellious Catalans had invited to become their King. Peter was himself a nephew of Duchess Isabella of Burgundy, and the betrothal thus signified an attempt to placate Burgundy. It was not to be, however; worn out by illness, disappointments, sorrow and overwork, Peter died on 29 June 1466, leaving Margaret available once more.

By 1467, the situation had changed again. Philip the Good had died, and Charles the Bold had become Duke of Burgundy. Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, had turned against Edward IV, and was plotting against him with French support. Edward in such circumstances needed the support of Charles, and provided no further obstacles to the marriage negotiations, formally agreeing to it in October 1467. Negotiations between the Duke&#x27;s mother, Isabella, and the King of England&#x27;s in-laws, Lord Scales and Earl Rivers, then proceeded between December 1467 and June 1468.

During this time, Louis XI did all he could to prevent the marriage, demanding that the Pope refuse to give a dispensation for the marriage (the pair were cousins in the fourth degree), promising trade favours to the English, undermining Edward&#x27;s credit with the international bankers to prevent him being able to pay for Margaret&#x27;s dowry, encouraging a Lancastrian invasion of Wales, and slandering Margaret, claiming that she was not a virgin and had borne a bastard son. He was ignored, and a dispensation was secured after Burgundian bribes secured Papal acquiescence. A complex agreement was drawn up between England and Burgundy, covering mutual defence, trade, currency exchange, fishing rights and freedom of travel, all based on the marriage between the Duke and Margaret. By the terms of the marriage contract, Margaret retained her rights to the English throne, and her dowry was promised to Burgundy even if she died within the first year (often, the dowry would return to the bride&#x27;s family under such circumstances). For his own part, Charles dowered Margaret with the cities of Mechelen, Oudenaarde and Dendermonde.

The marriage contract was completed in February 1468, and signed by Edward IV in March. The Papal dispensation arrived in late May, and preparations to send Margaret to Burgundy began. There was little enthusiasm for it outside Burgundy – the French naturally detested this union between their two enemies, whilst the English merchants, who still suffered from restrictions on the sale of their cloth in England, showed their disapproval by attacking Dutch and Flemish merchants amongst them.

Margaret left Margate for Sluys on 23 June 1468. Lord Scales and Richard Boyville were among those who escorted her to meet her future bridegroom. Despite Louis XI having ordered his ships to seize her on her journey, her convoy crossed without incident, reaching Sluys on the evening of the 25th. The following day, she met with her bridegroom&#x27;s mother, Isabella, and daughter, Mary; the meeting was a success, and the three of them would remain close friends for the rest of their lives. On 27 June, she met Charles for the first time, and the pair were privately married between 5am and 6am on 3 July, in the house of a wealthy merchant of Damme. Charles then left for Bruges, allowing the new Duchess the honour of entering separately a few hours later.

The celebrations that followed were extravagant even by the standards of the Burgundians, who were already noted for their opulence and generous festivities. The bride made her Joyous Entry in a golden litter drawn by white horses, wearing upon her head a coronet. During this procession, she charmed the burghers of Bruges when she chose to wave to them rather than shut herself away from the wind and rain. In the city itself, wine spurted freely from sculpted archers and artificial pelicans in artificial trees; the canals were decorated with torches, and the bridges decked with flowers; the arms of the happy couple were displayed everywhere, accompanied by the mottoes of the pair: Charles&#x27;s &quot;Je l&#x27;ay emprins&quot; (&quot;I have undertaken it&quot;) and Margaret&#x27;s &quot;Bien en aviengne&quot; (&quot;May good come of it&quot;). The celebrations also included the &quot;Tournament of the Golden Tree&quot; that was arranged around an elaborately detailed allegory, designed to honor the bride.

===Crown of Margaret of York===
When the Duke and Duchess appeared there, both wore magnificent crowns. Margaret&#x27;s crown was adorned with pearls, and with enamelled white roses for the House of York set between red, green and white enamelled letters of the Latinization of her name (&quot;Margarita de York&quot;, &quot;m ar ga ri ta de yo rk&quot;), with gold Cs and Ms, entwined with lovers&#x27; knots. Though it seems to have been made some years earlier, Margaret wore this crown at her wedding to Charles the Bold in Bruges in 1468. Its original leather case still bears traces of old gilt. The initials CM as well as the coats of arms of York and Burgundy are again found on the lid. The rest of the case is decorated with tendrils and small dragons embossed in the leather. 

The crown is much too small to fit around a head, and was probably intended to be worn around a pointed hennin, or on top of piled-up hair. It may always have been intended to be presented at some point after the coronation as a votive crown for a famous statue of the Virgin Mary. Margaret presented the crown to the Church of Our Lady during a visit to Aachen in 1475. Today the statue, placed next to the altar in the cathedral, wears the crown on festive days. In 1475 a matching crown was fashioned for the child.

Margaret&#x27;s donation of the crown to Aachen spared it the fate of much royal regalia in the English Civil War which saw the destruction of all the main English Crown Jewels. It thus remains one of only two medieval royal English crowns still surviving, the other being the Crown of Princess Blanche, now in the Munich Residenz in Germany. Margaret&#x27;s crown can still be seen in the Aachen Cathedral Treasury. 

Charles wore an equally splendid but no doubt larger crown, accompanied by a golden gown encrusted with diamonds, pearls and great jewels. The parades, the streets lined with tapestry hung from houses, the feasting, the masques and allegorical entertainments, the jewels, impressed all observers as &quot;the marriage of the century&quot;. It is re-enacted at Bruges for tourists every five years as the Procession of the Golden Tree.

==Duchess of Burgundy==


Although the marriage produced no children, Margaret proved a valuable asset to Burgundy. Immediately after her wedding, she journeyed with her step-daughter Mary through Flanders, Brabant and Hainaut, visiting the great towns: Ursel, Ghent, Dendermonde, Asse, Brussels, Oudenaarde and Kortrijk were all impressed by her intelligence and capability. Less valuable, perhaps, were the family connections she brought. In May 1469, her brother, Edward IV, attempted to present Charles the Bold with the Order of the Garter, an honour which would have made Charles guilty of treason against Louis XI had he accepted it; although the Dowager Duchess Isabella warned her son to refuse the offer, which he did, giving Louis XI an excuse for further machinations against Burgundy.

In August 1469, Edward IV temporarily lost power, when his brother the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick rebelled and took the King into custody; Charles was forced to intercede on the part of his brother-in-law, ordering the London merchants to swear loyalty to Edward under threat of losing their trading rights in Burgundy, a threat that proved successful. But the next year, Margaret was left despairing when Clarence and Warwick supported a French-backed Lancastrian invasion of England: although she, together with her mother Cecily, Dowager Duchess of York, attempted to reconcile Clarence and Edward IV, the rebellion continued, and on 2 October 1470 the Lancastrians were returned to power and Edward had fled to Margaret and Charles in Burgundy.

Her brother&#x27;s overthrow lessened Margaret&#x27;s dynastic worth; this, together with regard for her brother, made her plead passionately to her husband that he support Edward and make measures to restore him. Nonetheless, her husband paid little attention to her begging; when he decided to support Edward, it was when he had decided for himself that it was in his best interests to oppose the Lancastrian rule of England, backed as it was by a France which had in early December 1470 been encouraged by the English situation to declare war on Burgundy. Even so, by 4 January 1471, Charles had agreed to support the King-in-exile in regaining the English throne, and this renewal of friendship between the two men was followed by Edward visiting Margaret at Hesdin until 13 January, the first time the pair had seen one another since Margaret&#x27;s departure from England.
By April 1471, Edward was back in England: Margaret followed events carefully, requesting meticulous details of events in England, and was pleased to note the reconciliation between her brothers George and Edward. She also provided her mother-in-law, Isabella, with information on the progress of Edward&#x27;s campaign to regain the throne: it was she, for example, who replied to Isabella&#x27;s questions over alleged disrespectful treatment of the Earl of Warwick, by explaining that Edward had &quot;heard that nobody in the city believed that Warwick and his brother were dead, so he [Edward] had their bodies brought to St Paul&#x27;s where they were laid out and uncovered from the chest upwards in the sight of everybody.&quot; Edward IV was successfully restored; Edward of Westminster, the son and heir of Henry VI, had died in battle, and Henry VI, who had been briefly restored, died or was murdered in his cell in the Tower of London two weeks later. The two deaths brought to an end the direct line of the House of Lancaster.

By this time, Isabella&#x27;s health was beginning to fail; in June 1471, she drew up her will, in which she bequeathed her favourite residence of La-Motte-au-Bois to Margaret. Yet, at the same time, Isabella and Charles struck against Margaret&#x27;s family: with Henry VI and his son dead, Isabella was one of the most senior members of the House of Lancaster, and had a good claim to the English throne; this claim she legally transferred to Charles in July, which would allow Charles later that year to officially claim the English throne, despite the fact that his brother-in-law was the Yorkist King of England. However, Charles chose not to press the claim, finding it more to his advantage to maintain his support of Edward IV.

By 1477, Margaret&#x27;s position as Duchess of Burgundy was no longer as brilliant as it had been: after Isabella&#x27;s death in 1471, Charles had become increasingly tyrannical and grandiose, dreaming of assembling a new Kingdom of Lotharingia from the North Sea to the Mediterranean; to accomplish this, he warred continuously with his neighbours, who responded by allying against him. Meanwhile, Louis XI had proved masterful at destabilising the Burgundian State: Edward IV had been detached from his alliance, Charles&#x27; reputation and banking credit had been undermined by Louis, and Burgundian trade was choked by French embargoes. By 1476, the Duke was regarded as a tyrant by his people, who were suffering from the French refusal to export their wine and bread to Burgundy, and who dreaded his terrible reprisals against rebels being unleashed on them. In 1476, he arranged for his daughter and heiress, Mary, to be betrothed to Maximilian of Austria; on 5 January 1477 he was killed in battle outside Nancy, in Lorraine.

==Dowager duchess==
It was in the wake of her husband&#x27;s death that Margaret proved truly invaluable to Burgundy. She had always been regarded as a skillful and intelligent politician; now, she went beyond even that. To her step-daughter, Mary, now Duchess of Burgundy, she gave guidance and help using her own experiences in the court of Edward IV, where she had largely avoided being used as a pawn and contributed to the arrangement of her own marriage; against the wave of marriage offers that flooded to the two duchesses in Ghent (from the recently widowed Duke of Clarence, from Charles, the 7-year-old Dauphin of France, and from a brother of Edward IV&#x27;s wife, Elizabeth Woodville) she stood firm and advised Mary to marry Maximilian of Austria. Maximilian, the 18-year-old son of the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick III to whom Charles the Bold had betrothed Mary, was ambitious and active enough, in Margaret&#x27;s opinion, to defend Mary&#x27;s legacy.

She strongly advised Mary to accept Maximilian&#x27;s suit and marry him immediately; he arrived in Burgundy on 5 August 1477, and by 17 August had arrived at Ten Waele Castle, in Ghent. He met Mary there—they were both &quot;pale as death&quot;, but found each other to their mutual liking—and Margaret took part in the traditional courtly games of love, telling Maximilian before the assembled nobility that his bride &quot;had about her a carnation it behoved him to discover.&quot; The carnation duly proved to be in the Duchess&#x27;s bodice, from which Maximilian carefully removed it. The pair were married the next day, on 18 August.

Burgundy was far from safe: the Duchy of Burgundy itself had already been conquered by the French, who were continuing to attack from all sides, taking advantage of the state&#x27;s instability. Margaret now moved to secure military support from her brother, Edward IV; he sent enough support to allow Mary and Maximilian to resist the French advances any further, although the Duchy itself remained lost. Louis XI, recognising the danger Margaret posed to him, attempted to buy her off with a French pension and a promise of personally protecting her; she contemptuously refused, and instead sailed in summer 1480 to London, where she was again attended by Richard Boyville and negotiated a resumption of the Anglo-Burgundian alliance and renewed trade. Nor did she stop there in supporting Mary and Maximilian; when, on 22 July 1478, Mary gave birth to a son and heir, Philip, Louis XI had rumours spread that the child was, in fact, a girl. Margaret, who was standing godmother to the child, matter-of-factly disproved the rumour: as the Christening party left the church of St Donat, she conclusively proved that the child was an undoubted male, by undressing him and presenting him to the assembled crowd. In 1480, the next child of Mary and Maximilian was a girl: the Duke and Duchess named her Margaret, after the dowager Duchess.

Margaret was however dealt a devastating blow in 1482: her much-loved step-daughter, Mary, fell from her horse whilst hunting, and broke her back. The injuries were fatal, and Mary died on 27 March. From a personal point of view, this was a harsh blow to Margaret; politically, Mary&#x27;s death weakened the Burgundian state further. The Burgundians were now sick of war, and unwilling to accept the rule of Maximilian as regent for his son, the 4-year-old Duke Philip, or even as guardian of the children. They forced his hand: on 23 December 1482, the Three Estates of the Lowlands signed the Treaty of Arras with Louis XI, granting him the Burgundian Lowlands, Picardy and the county of Boulogne. Margaret was unable to secure assistance from Edward IV, who had made a truce with France; consequently, she and Maximilian were forced to accept the &quot;fait accompli&quot;. Maximilian brokered a personal peace with Louis by arranging for his daughter, Margaret, to be betrothed to the young Dauphin of France; she was sent to be raised at the French court, taking with her the Free County of Burgundy and the County of Artois with her as a dowry.

This was not the end of the problems for Margaret and Maximilian: the Netherlanders still disliked his rule of the territory. In 1488, he was taken prisoner in Bruges by the citizens. Margaret called on the emperor for help. Later he was released after making concessions and also because Bruges feared his father&#x27;s army. The next year, he was summoned back to Austria by his father, the Emperor; Burgundy was left to be governed by Margaret together with the Burgundian Estates, both of whom also undertook the guardianship of the young Duke Philip. She would later welcome his daughter, Margaret, after her rejection by the French court in 1493. Her residence in Mechelen thus became a princely court. This was also the place Philip the Fair&#x27;s children would be educated when he departed for Spain in 1501. Margaret of Austria, her godchild, would continue to choose Mechelen as residence (and thus the capital city of the Low Countries) as a widowed governor in 1507. Blockmans opines that Margaret of York was the model of Margaret of Austria as well as later widowed female governors, as they inherited her residence, library and household. Another indication of the close relationship between Margaret and Maximilian was a book recounting Macedonian monarchy and the Hellenistic kingdom, written by Justinius, that she gave him, with the inscription &quot;Your loyal mother&quot;. The sign that showed this book was intended for Maximilian was the imperial coat of arms, which he could not have carried before his father&#x27;s death in 1493, as well as the codex style, the subject, the language.

By this time, Margaret had already suffered more personal tragedies. Her brother, the Duke of Clarence, had been executed by Edward IV in 1478; Edward himself had died of illness in 1483 and finally, her younger brother Richard, who took the throne as Richard III was in 1485 killed at the Battle of Bosworth by the leader of the House of Lancaster, Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond, a cousin and nephew of Henry VI, who went on to become Henry VII, and to marry the daughter of Edward IV, Elizabeth of York. With the death of Richard, the House of York ceased to rule in England. Margaret consequently was a staunch supporter of anyone willing to challenge Tudor, and backed both Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck, even going so far as to acknowledge Warbeck as her nephew, the younger son of Edward IV, the Duke of York. She offered financial backing to support his attempt to take the throne, hiring continental mercenaries to accompany him on an expedition to England in 1495. Warbeck suffered a significant defeat at the Battle of Deal, and then failed to take Waterford in Ireland. Warbeck was probably an imposter and would be locked up in the Tower of London and subsequently executed by Henry VII. Henry in fact found Margaret undoubtedly problematic, but there was little he could do since she was protected by her step-son-in-law Maximilian.

Margaret died on 23 November 1503, at the age of 57, shortly after the return of her step-grandson, Philip the Handsome, to Burgundy. Her death in that year allowed her to be spared the grief of Philip&#x27;s untimely death of typhoid fever in 1506. She was buried in the Church of the Cordeliers in Mechelen.

==Legacy and personal life==


William Caxton, who introduced the new art of printing into the Kingdom of England and was a staunch Yorkist supporter, counted Margaret as one of his patrons. A presentation copy of &quot;Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye&quot;, the first book printed in the English language (late 1473 – early 1474), has a specially made engraving showing Caxton presenting the book to Margaret. The volume is now in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. This &quot;patronage&quot; may be more advertising than analogous to traditional medieval patronage.

Of the many illuminated manuscripts commissioned by Margaret when she was Duchess of Burgundy, one of the most celebrated is &quot;The Visions of Tondal&quot;, illustrated by Simon Marmion and currently in the Getty Museum (a facsimile has been published).

A good-looking woman, but (rarely for the hyperbole of her age) never described as beautiful, Margaret had fine features, and was, at almost 6 feet, very tall, a feature accentuated by her slimness, and her straight and upright bearing. Her eyes were grey, and her mouth was small; her smile allowed her to demonstrate her wry humour, her wit, and her graciousness. In appearance, she was utterly unlike the dark and burly Duke Charles the Bold, who was shorter than her: when they met for the first time, she was forced to bend in order to receive his kiss. But her intelligence was keen, and her will strong; she made a worthy bride for the Duke in nature.

With her husband&#x27;s family, she got on excellently: she became a mother figure to her step-daughter, Mary, who shared Margaret&#x27;s interests in reading, riding, hunting, and falconry; her mother-in-law, Isabella of Portugal, said of Margaret that she was &quot;well pleased with the sight of this lovely lady, and pleased with her manners and virtues&quot;. A capable ruler, she proved a masterful Duchess; she was a Yorkist in sympathies, but she was before that the Duchess of Burgundy. She bore no male heir to succeed to Burgundy, but she preserved it from ruin; to her actions can be ascribed the survival of the Burgundian state, and the prevention of French dominance in Europe.

==In fiction and media==
Margaret is the major character in the 2008 novel &quot;A Daughter of York&quot; by Anne Easter Smith. The book begins with Margaret mourning her father and brother and continues through her marriage and the aftermath of her husband&#x27;s death. She also features in Easter Smith&#x27;s 2009 &quot;The King&#x27;s Grace&quot;.

In the video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed: Brotherhood&quot;, there is a contract mission in London where Margaret is killed on behalf of Henry VII.

In the 1972 BBC drama &quot;The Shadow of the Tower&quot; she was played by Rachel Kempson.

In the 2017 Starz drama &quot;The White Princess&quot; (not to be confused with its predecessor &quot;The White Queen&quot;), she was portrayed by English actress Joanne Whalley.

In the 2017 German-Austrian TV series &quot;Maximilian&quot; about Maximilian I and Mary of Burgundy, she was portrayed by French actress Alix Poisson.

==Ancestors==
==References==
==Sources==
* Taylor, Aline S, &quot;Isabel of Burgundy&quot;
* Heer, Friedrich, &quot;The Holy Roman Empire&quot;
* Calmette, Joseph, &quot;The Golden Age of Burgundy&quot;

==External links==

* Margaret of York
* Notes on the 1468 wedding, especially its music
* Burgundian Netherlands court life, reflected in collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art
* &quot;Daughter of York&quot;, by Anne Easter Smith, an historical novel about Margaret, set in England and Burgundy (now Belgium)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465991" start="0" end="16" title="Margaret of York" label="Margaret of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q465991" start="64" end="84" title="Margaret of York" label="Margaret of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565256" start="90" end="109" title="Duchess of Burgundy" label="Duchess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="149" end="165" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882199" start="222" end="238" title="Burgundian State" label="Burgundian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q312137" start="262" end="287" title="Richard, 3rd Duke of York" label="Richard, 3rd Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q238004" start="296" end="310" title="Cecily Neville" label="Cecily Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="352" end="361" title="Edward IV" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="366" end="377" title="Richard III" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439593" start="387" end="406" title="Fotheringhay Castle" label="Fotheringhay Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="408" end="424" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="433" end="451" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="465" end="473" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="481" end="494" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q466268" start="512" end="540" title="Isabella of Portugal, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Duchess Isabella of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="556" end="572" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="681" end="694" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="736" end="754" title="House of Lancaster" label="House of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="1020" end="1033" title="House of York" label="House of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q312137" start="1069" end="1094" title="Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York" label="Richard, 3rd Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="1126" end="1134" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q231145" start="1186" end="1203" title="Margaret of Anjou" label="Margaret of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882199" start="1220" end="1228" title="Burgundian State" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="1250" end="1271" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q707090" start="1645" end="1663" title="Count of Charolais" label="Count of Charolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="1878" end="1893" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q466300" start="1950" end="1969" title="Isabella of Bourbon" label="Isabella of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692291" start="1987" end="2013" title="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269783" start="2019" end="2036" title="Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Bourbon" label="Agnes of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466300" start="2197" end="2216" title="Isabella of Bourbon" label="Isabella of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157073" start="2280" end="2284" title="Mary of Burgundy" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q906912" start="2737" end="2756" title="Battle of Wakefield" label="Battle of Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="2807" end="2816" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q313262" start="2879" end="2900" title="Edward of Westminster" label="Edward of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q574171" start="3246" end="3257" title="Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers" label="Lord Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q356173" start="3484" end="3512" title="George Plantagenet, 1st Duke of Clarence" label="George, 1st Duke of Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q588143" start="3764" end="3798" title="Anthony, Grand Bastard of Burgundy" label="Anthony, Grand Bastard of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="3879" end="3887" title="Louis XI of France" label="Louis XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q232801" start="4061" end="4065" title="Anne of France" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q236220" start="4109" end="4113" title="Joan, Duchess of Berry" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="4150" end="4177" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard, Duke of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q461667" start="4211" end="4227" title="Philip II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philip of Bresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q965686" start="4415" end="4420" title="Peter, Constable of Portugal" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993517" start="4422" end="4443" title="Constable of Portugal" label="Constable of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="4465" end="4473" title="Catalan people" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="4886" end="4902" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q437571" start="4904" end="4936" title="Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick" label="Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q574171" start="5278" end="5289" title="Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers" label="Lord Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q934384" start="5294" end="5305" title="Richard Woodville, 1st Earl Rivers" label="Earl Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="6468" end="6476" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12992" start="6478" end="6488" title="Oudenaarde" label="Oudenaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q13122" start="6493" end="6504" title="Dendermonde" label="Dendermonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q10080" start="7027" end="7032" title="Sluys" label="Sluys"/>
<link wikidata="Q323408" start="7649" end="7654" title="Damme" label="Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="7678" end="7684" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959157" start="7942" end="7954" title="Joyous Entry" label="Joyous Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="8747" end="8755" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="8977" end="8990" title="House of York" label="House of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q975476" start="9680" end="9686" title="hennin" label="hennin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126791" start="9805" end="9817" title="votive crown" label="votive crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="9845" end="9856" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908" start="9894" end="9912" title="Aachen Cathedral" label="Church of Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="9931" end="9937" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="10192" end="10209" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q918264" start="10260" end="10272" title="Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom" label="Crown Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="10306" end="10314" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126811" start="10373" end="10398" title="Crown of Princess Blanche" label="Crown of Princess Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q686548" start="10411" end="10426" title="Munich Residenz" label="Munich Residenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106167" start="10486" end="10511" title="Aachen Cathedral Treasury" label="Aachen Cathedral Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207959" start="10735" end="10741" title="masque" label="masque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684917" start="10919" end="10948" title="Procession of the Golden Tree" label="Procession of the Golden Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="11148" end="11156" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="11158" end="11165" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129" start="11170" end="11177" title="Hainaut (province)" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q912069" start="11205" end="11210" title="Knesselare" label="Ursel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="11212" end="11217" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13122" start="11219" end="11230" title="Dendermonde" label="Dendermonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q515710" start="11232" end="11236" title="Asse" label="Asse"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="11238" end="11246" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12992" start="11248" end="11258" title="Oudenaarde" label="Oudenaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="11263" end="11271" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="11476" end="11495" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q238004" start="12289" end="12320" title="Cecily Neville, Duchess of York" label="Cecily, Dowager Duchess of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q313262" start="14167" end="14188" title="Edward of Westminster" label="Edward of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="14325" end="14340" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="15407" end="15418" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="16116" end="16137" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="16189" end="16194" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="16199" end="16207" title="Lorraine (duchy)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="16744" end="16749" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="16800" end="16807" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q229214" start="16888" end="16907" title="Elizabeth Woodville" label="Elizabeth Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q150966" start="17031" end="17044" title="Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="18696" end="18702" title="Philip I of Castile" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q157100" start="19126" end="19134" title="Margaret of Habsburg (1480-1530)" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q700156" start="19760" end="19775" title="Treaty of Arras (1482)" label="Treaty of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q157109" start="19808" end="19827" title="Burgundian Netherlands" label="Burgundian Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="19829" end="19836" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431527" start="19845" end="19863" title="county of Boulogne" label="county of Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="20246" end="20269" title="Free County of Burgundy" label="Free County of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q778266" start="20278" end="20294" title="County of Artois" label="County of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="22282" end="22311" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q207953" start="22419" end="22436" title="Elizabeth of York" label="Elizabeth of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q709506" start="22610" end="22624" title="Lambert Simnel" label="Lambert Simnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q549757" start="22629" end="22643" title="Perkin Warbeck" label="Perkin Warbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="22832" end="22843" title="Continental Europe" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="22844" end="22855" title="mercenaries" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q56283171" start="22955" end="22969" title="Battle of Deal" label="Battle of Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110720726" start="22980" end="23004" title="Siege of Waterford (1495)" label="failed to take Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q94608" start="23625" end="23639" title="William Caxton" label="William Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="23671" end="23679" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="23689" end="23707" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="23726" end="23733" title="Yorkist" label="Yorkist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426109" start="23814" end="23848" title="Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye" label="Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="23886" end="23902" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400558" start="24033" end="24051" title="Huntington Library" label="Huntington Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554717" start="24304" end="24337" title="Getty Tondal" label="&amp;quot;The Visions of Tondal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q676247" start="24354" end="24367" title="Simon Marmion" label="Simon Marmion"/>
<link wikidata="Q731126" start="24389" end="24401" title="Getty Museum" label="Getty Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q565245" start="25900" end="25917" title="Anne Easter Smith" label="Anne Easter Smith"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26169" end="26203" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed: Brotherhood" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed: Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="26242" end="26248" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="26287" end="26296" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="26311" end="26314" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989220" start="26327" end="26350" title="The Shadow of the Tower" label="The Shadow of the Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q289364" start="26375" end="26389" title="Rachel Kempson" label="Rachel Kempson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="26404" end="26409" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q25159357" start="26422" end="26440" title="The White Princess (miniseries)" label="The White Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087190" start="26494" end="26509" title="The White Queen (miniseries)" label="The White Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164069" start="26555" end="26569" title="Joanne Whalley" label="Joanne Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28599256" start="26616" end="26626" title="Maximilian (miniseries)" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26710" end="26722" title="Alix Poisson" label="Alix Poisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q87771" start="26818" end="26833" title="Friedrich Heer" label="Heer, Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q565245" start="27149" end="27166" title="Anne Easter Smith" label="Anne Easter Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71406" wikidata="Q3360414" url="?curid=71406" title="PagePlus">
<text>PagePlus was a desktop publishing (page layout) program developed by Serif for Microsoft Windows. The first version was released in 1991 as the first commercial sub-£100 DTP package for Microsoft Windows. The final release was PagePlus X9, which was released in November 2016. In June 2019 it was officially replaced by Serif with Affinity Publisher.

== History ==

PagePlus was first launched in 1990 and was the first sub-£100 desktop publishing program for Windows 3.0. Three years later, in spring 1993, PagePlus 2 was released and provided full colour printing support. Following this release, a new version of the product was released on a roughly annual basis.

Serif did a complete rewrite of the original program source code for the release of PagePlus version 8. Despite the rewrite, at that time the program name was retained and the version number was simply incremented. Version 8 was able to read data files created in previous versions 1 to 7.

=== Replacement by Affinity Publisher ===

Serif announced that PagePlus X9 was to be the final PagePlus release. The last build issued to date is v19.0.2.22 from 28 April 2017. Serif ceased further development of all &quot;Plus&quot; products to focus efforts on their &#x27;Affinity&#x27; product line.

Serif began rewriting their DTP software, to allow a multi-platform implementation, and allow new methods of internal program operation with more modern Operating Systems and the typical current (2018/9) configuration of PCs.

A public beta of Serif&#x27;s Affinity Publisher (the closest of the Affinity applications to PagePlus functionality) was launched in August 2018, followed by the first full version of the application in June 2019.

== Overview ==

While PagePlus was generally targeted at the &quot;entry level&quot; DTP user, some of the functionality present in the market leading applications (Quark&#x27;s XPress and Adobe&#x27;s InDesign) is present in PagePlus, such as working in the CMYK colour space, OpenType Feature support, and Optical margin alignment (Optical Justification). PagePlus also has the ability to view, create, edit and publish PDF files, and publish E-books in *.epub or *mobi formats suitable for the Kindle store. It also includes support for EPUB3 fixed layout eBooks for textbooks, children&#x27;s books etc.

PagePlus is primarily written in C++ using Visual Studio 2008, with a heavy dependence on the MFC framework. The Windows GDI library was discarded early in development in favour of an in-house composition engine supporting advanced bitmap and typeface operations. The text engine supports Unicode text entry.

== Supported platforms ==

PagePlus was first developed for 16-bit Microsoft Windows v3.0 running on PC/MS DOS but the final releases support Windows XP, Windows Vista (32/64bit), Windows 7 (32/64bit), Windows 8 (32/64bit) and Windows 10 (32/64bit).

== Version history ==

* PagePlus: 1990
* PagePlus 2: 1993
* PagePlus 3: 1994
* PagePlus 4: 1996
* PagePlus 5: 1997 (revised for XP compatibility and reissued in 2002)
* PagePlus 6: 1999
* PagePlus 7: 1 October 2000
* PagePlus 8: 2001
* PagePlus 8: PDF Edition, 9 September 2002
* PagePlus 9: September 2003
* PagePlus 10: 11 October 2004
* PagePlus 11: 3 October 2005
* PagePlus X2: 19 February 2007
* PagePlus X3: 21 April 2008
* PagePlus X4: 11 September 2009
* PagePlus X5: 18 October 2010
* PagePlus X6: 5 December 2011
* PagePlus X7: 3 June 2013
* PagePlus X8: 4 August 2014
* PagePlus X9: 16 November 2015

== See also ==

* Comparison of desktop publishing software
* Desktop publishing
* DrawPlusvector graphics editor
* List of desktop publishing software

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

* PagePlus official user guide

== External links ==
* The CommunityPlus Forums were closed on 5 July 2022
* Alfred&#x27;s Serif Users&#x27; Forums is a fan-based forum for users of the legacy Serif products

=== Reviews ===

* #1 DTP product on TopTenReviews.com
* Affordable Desktop Publishing From Serif – PC Mag
* Comparative Review of Recent Versions
* Review of PagePlus X5 – PC PRO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3360414" start="0" end="8" title="PagePlus" label="PagePlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="15" end="33" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454826" start="69" end="74" title="Serif Europe" label="Serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="186" end="203" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q64767551" start="331" end="349" title="Affinity Publisher" label="Affinity Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q491546" start="461" end="472" title="Windows 3.0" label="Windows 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q64767551" start="1524" end="1542" title="Affinity Publisher" label="Affinity Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q678036" start="1888" end="1894" title="QuarkXPress" label="XPress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="1899" end="1904" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q218924" start="1912" end="1920" title="Adobe InDesign" label="InDesign"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="1969" end="1973" title="CMYK color model" label="CMYK"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="1988" end="1996" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098869" start="2018" end="2042" title="Optical margin alignment" label="Optical margin alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="2132" end="2135" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="2352" end="2355" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q134067" start="2362" end="2380" title="Visual Studio 2008" label="Visual Studio 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q908419" start="2413" end="2416" title="Microsoft Foundation Class Library" label="MFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046656" start="2440" end="2443" title="Graphics Device Interface" label="GDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="2608" end="2615" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2696" end="2713" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="2771" end="2781" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="2783" end="2796" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="2809" end="2818" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="2831" end="2840" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="2856" end="2866" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155857" start="3512" end="3553" title="Comparison of desktop publishing software" label="Comparison of desktop publishing software"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="3556" end="3574" title="Desktop publishing" label="Desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305976" start="3577" end="3585" title="DrawPlus" label="DrawPlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511023" start="3610" end="3645" title="List of desktop publishing software" label="List of desktop publishing software"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71407" wikidata="Q3107" url="?curid=71407" title="Sylt">
<text>Sylt (; ; Söl&#x27;ring North Frisian: ) is an island in northern Germany, part of Nordfriesland district, Schleswig-Holstein, with a distinctively shaped shoreline. It belongs to the North Frisian Islands and is the largest island in North Frisia.
The northernmost island of Germany, it is known for its tourist resorts, notably Westerland, Kampen and Wenningstedt-Braderup, as well as for its sandy beach. It is frequently covered by the media in connection with its exposed situation in the North Sea and its ongoing loss of land during storm tides. Since 1927, Sylt has been connected to the mainland by the Hindenburgdamm causeway. In later years, it has been a resort for the German jet set and tourists in search of occasional celebrity sightings.

== Geography ==
With , Sylt is the fourth-largest German island and the largest German island in the North Sea. Sylt is located from off the mainland, to which it is connected by the Hindenburgdamm. Southeast of Sylt are the islands of Föhr and Amrum, to the north lies the Danish island of Rømø. The island of Sylt extends for in a north-south direction. At its northern point at Königshafen, it is only wide. Its greatest width, from the town of Westerland in the west to the eastern &quot;Nössespitze&quot; near Morsum, measures . On the western and northwestern shore, there is a sandy beach. To the east of Sylt, is the Wadden Sea, which belongs to the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park and mostly falls dry during low tide.

The island&#x27;s shape has constantly shifted over time, a process which is still ongoing today. The northern and southern spits of Sylt are exclusively made up of infertile sand deposits, while the central part with the municipalities of Westerland, Wenningstedt-Braderup and Sylt-Ost consists of a geestland core, which becomes apparent in the form of the Red Cliff of Wenningstedt. The geestland facing the Wadden Sea gradually turns into fertile marshland around Sylt-Ost. Sylt has only been an island since the &quot;Grote Mandrenke&quot; flood of 1362. The so-called &quot;Uwe-Düne&quot; (Uwe Dune) is the island&#x27;s highest elevation with above sea level.

The island in its current form has only existed for about 400 years. Like the mainland geestland, it was formed of moraines from the older ice ages, thus being made up of a till core, which is now apparent in the island&#x27;s west and centre by the cliff, dunes and beach. This sandy core began to erode as it was exposed to a strong current along the island&#x27;s steep basement when the sea level rose 8000 years ago. During the process, sediments were accumulated north and south of the island. The west coast, which was originally situated off today&#x27;s shore, was thus gradually moved eastward, while at the same time the island began to extend to the north and south. After the ice ages, marshland began to form around this geestland core.

In 1141, Sylt is recorded as an island, yet before the &quot;Grote Mandrenke&quot; flood it belonged to a landscape cut by tidal creeks and, at least during low tide, it could be reached on foot. It is only since this flood that the creation of a spit from sediments began to form the current characteristic shape of Sylt. It is the northern and southern edges of Sylt which were, and still are, the subject of greatest change. For example, Listland was separated from the rest of the island in the 14th century and from the later 17th century onwards the &quot;Königshafen&quot; (King&#x27;s Harbour) began to silt up as the &quot;elbow&quot; spit began to form.

In addition to the constant loss of land, the inhabitants during the Little Ice Age were constrained by sand drift. Dunes shifting to the east threatened settlements and arable land and had to be stopped by the planting of marram grass in the 18th century. Consequently, though, material breaking off the island was increasingly washed away and the island&#x27;s extent continued to decrease.

Records of the annual land loss exist since 1870. According to them, Sylt lost an annual of land in the north and in the south from 1870 to 1951. From 1951 to 1984, the rate increased to and respectively, while shorelines at the island&#x27;s very edges at Hörnum and List are even more affected.

Severe storm surges of the last decades have repeatedly endangered Sylt to the point of breaking in two, e.g. Hörnum was temporarily cut off from the island in 1962. Part of the island near Rantum which is only 500 metres (yards) wide is especially threatened.


Measures of protection against the continuous erosion date back to the early 19th century when groynes of wooden poles were constructed. Those were built at right angles into the sea from the coast line. Later they were replaced by metal and eventually by armoured concrete groynes. The constructions did not have the desired effect of stopping the erosion caused by crossways currents. &quot;Leeward erosion&quot;, i.e. erosion on the downwind side of the groynes prevented sustainable accumulation of sand.

In the 1960s, breaking the power of the sea was attempted by installing tetrapods along the groyne bases or by putting them into the sea like groynes. The four-armed structures, built in France and many tons in weight, were too heavy for Sylt&#x27;s beaches and were equally unable to prevent erosion. Therefore, they were removed from the Hörnum west beach in 2005.

Since the early 1970s, the only effective means so far has been flushing sand onto the shore. Dredging vessels are used to pump a mixture of sand and water to a beach where it is spread by bulldozers. Thus storm floods would only erase the artificial accumulation of sand, while the shoreline proper remains intact and erosion is slowed down. This procedure incurs considerable costs. The required budget of an annual €10 million is currently provided by federal German, Schleswig-Holstein state and EU funds. Since 1972, an estimated 35.5 million cubic metres (46.4 million cu. yd.) of sand have been flushed ashore and dumped on Sylt. The measures have so far cost more than €134 million in total, but according to scientific calculations they are sufficient to prevent further loss of land for at least three decades, so the benefits for the island&#x27;s economic power and for the economically underdeveloped region in general would outweigh the costs. In the 1995 study &quot;Klimafolgen für Mensch und Küste am Beispiel der Nordseeinsel Sylt&quot; (Climate impact for Man and Shores as seen on the North Sea island Sylt), it reads: &quot;Hätte Sylt nicht das Image einer attraktiven Ferieninsel, gäbe es den Küstenschutz in der bestehenden Form gewiss nicht&quot; (If Sylt did not have the image of an attractive holiday island, coastal management in its current form would certainly not exist).

The enforcement of a natural reef off Sylt is being discussed as an alternative solution. A first experiment was conducted from 1996 to 2003. A sand drainage as being successfully used on Danish islands is not likely to work on Sylt owing to the underwater slope here.

In parallel to the ongoing sand flushing, the deliberate demolition of groynes has begun amid great effort at certain beach sections where they were proven largely ineffective. This measure also terminated the presumably most famous groyne of Sylt, &quot;Buhne 16&quot; – the namesake of the local naturist beach.

A number of experts, however, fears that Sylt will still have to face considerable losses of land until the mid 21st century. The continuous global warming is thought to result in increasing storm activity, which would result in increased land loss and, as a first impact, might mean the end of property insurance. Measurements showed that, unlike in former times, the wave energy of the sea is no longer lost offshore, today it carries its destructive effects on to the beaches proper. This will result in an annual loss of sand of 1.1 million m³ (1.4 million cu. yd.).
The dunes of the island constitute nature reserves and may only be traversed on marked tracks. So called &quot;wild paths&quot; promote erosion and are not to be followed. Where vegetation is tread upon, no roots are left to hold the sand and it will be removed by wind and water.

The Wadden Sea on the east side between Sylt and the mainland has been a nature reserve and bird sanctuary since 1935 and is part of the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park. The construction of breakwaters in this area will abate sedimentation and is used for land reclamation.

Also the grazing of sheep on the sea dikes and heaths of Sylt eventually serves coastal management, since the animals keep the vegetation short and compress the soil with their hooves. Thus they help create a denser dike surface, which in case of storm surges provides less area for the waves to impact.

=== Flora and fauna ===

The flora of Sylt is shaped by the island&#x27;s original sparseness. Until the mid 19th century, Sylt was an island almost completely devoid of trees except for small areas of forest and bush created by plantations. Today, one can still recognize the man-made origin of the &quot;Friedrichshain&quot; and &quot;Südwäldchen&quot; forests in Westerland where many of the trees stand in rank and file. Also, the now widespread rose &quot;Rosa rugosa&quot;, known as the &quot;Sylt rose&quot; on the island was imported to Sylt. It originates from the Kamchatka peninsula in Siberia. The undemanding rose met ideal conditions on Sylt and spread so quickly that it is now a common sight on the island. Its proliferation is viewed critically from a biological point of view, since it threatens to displace endangered local species, especially on the heaths.

The ample heaths on the eastern side of the island provide habitats for many rare species of plants and animals which are adapted to the extreme conditions such as drought, warmth, wind. About 2,500 animal species and 150 species of plants have so far been recorded. 45% of those plants are on the IUCN Red List. Especially notable are the 600 species of butterflies that live in the heaths, small tortoiseshell, brimstone, painted lady and peacock butterfly among them.

With several thousand individuals in the dune belt of Sylt, the natterjack toad, endangered in Germany, has one of Germany&#x27;s largest populations here. Their spawning places are wet dune slacks and shallow, short-lived pools. For a habitat they prefer sandy areas with vegetation, but the species has also been observed on the top of the Uwe Dune. The main threat for this species on Sylt is road traffic.

The many water birds and other coastal avians that have their hatching grounds on Sylt or use the island for resting on their migrations constitute an ornithological feature. There are two notable hatching areas on Sylt, the &quot;Königshafen&quot; bay with the small island Uthörn in the north and the Rantum basin in the southeast. Birds that hatch on Sylt include black-headed gull, Arctic tern, pied avocet, common redshank, common gull, oystercatcher, northern lapwing, common shelduck and tufted duck. During the migration, Sylt is a resting spot for thousands of brent geese and shelducks, Eurasian wigeons and common eiders, as well as bar-tailed godwits, red knots, dunlins and Eurasian golden plovers. Ringed plover, common snipe, ruff and other species are less common visitors to the island.

Regarding land mammals, there is no significant difference from the neighbouring areas of mainland Nordfriesland. Primarily European hare, rabbit and roe deer can be found and are also hunted as game on the island. When the island was connected to the mainland by the causeway, red fox and European badger also became common.

West of Sylt a breeding area of harbour porpoises is located. In addition, great numbers of harbour seals and grey seals, the latter being rather uncommon in German seas, can be found on sand banks off Sylt.

Numerous associations and societies that care for the exploration and the protection of endangered animals and plants have branches on Sylt. Among them are the Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Verein Jordsand and Wadden Sea Conservation Station. Also the Federal Office for the Environment operates a research station in the dunes at Westerland.

=== Climate ===
On Sylt, a marine climate influenced by the Gulf Stream is predominant. With an average of 2 °C (36°F), winter months are slightly milder than on the mainland, summer months though, with a median of 17 °C (62°F), are somewhat cooler, despite a longer sunshine period. The annual average sunshine period on Sylt is 4.4 hours per day. It is due to the low relief of the shoreline that Sylt had a total of 1,899 hours of sunshine in 2005, 180 hours above the German average. Clouds cannot accumulate as quickly and are generally scattered by the constant westerly or northwesterly winds.

The annual mean temperature is 8.5 °C (47°F). The annually averaged wind speed measures 6.7 m/s (15 mph), predominantly from western directions. The annual rainfall amounts to about 650 millimetres (25½&quot;). Since 1937 weather data are collected at Deutscher Wetterdienst&#x27;s northernmost station on a dune near List, which has meanwhile become automated. A number of commercial meteorological services like Meteomedia AG operate stations in List too.

Sylt features an oceanic climate that is influenced by the Gulf Stream. On average, the winter season is slightly warmer than in mainland Nordfriesland. The summer season, however, is cooler despite longer sunshine periods. The yearly average sunshine period is greater than 4.4 hours per day with some years exceeding the average sunshine for all of Germany. Also precipitation is lower than on the mainland. This is due to the low relief of Sylt&#x27;s shoreline where clouds are not able to accumulate and rain off.



==Settlements==
Sylt is divided into two administrative bodies: the &quot;Amt&quot; Landschaft Sylt administers all municipalities on the island, save for the &quot;Gemeinde Sylt&quot;, which was established in 2009 from the formerly independent municipalities of Westerland, Rantum and Sylt-Ost. As of December 2007, Sylt had 21,190 inhabitants, 9,072 of whom living in Westerland. These numbers do not include owners of summer residences.

A referendum held in May 2008 resulted in a merger of the Sylt-Ost municipality with the town of Westerland on 1 January 2009. Various interest groups hope to merge every island municipality into one governing body.

=== Settlements along the west coast ===
Six municipalities are situated along the west coast of Sylt. List in the very north of the island constitutes Germany&#x27;s northernmost municipality; it retained a certain independence due to its remote location and its long-time adherence to the kingdom of Denmark. On its eastern shore, a harbour is located where, in addition to tourist ships, the &quot;Sylt-Express&quot; ferry-boat sails to Havneby on the Danish island of Rømø. Wenningstedt together with Braderup and Kampen used to form the &quot;Norddörfer&quot; (Northern Villages) municipality, an early intercommunal association, which partly remains today in form of a school union. While Kampen, mainly in the 1950s and 1960s, was famous in Germany for attracting celebrities, Wenningstedt has been known as a &quot;family resort&quot; for more than 100 years. Since 1855, the prominent black and white Kampen Lighthouse has been located between Kampen and Wenningstedt; it is the oldest one on the island. East of there, the &quot;Braderuper Heide&quot; nature reserve is situated. Right south of Wenningstedt are the town limits of the island&#x27;s largest town, Westerland.

After the complete destruction of the village Eidum by a storm surge on 1 November 1436, the survivors founded a new village northeast of their old home: Westerland. The name was first recorded in 1462. In 1865, a seaside spa was founded and, 50 years later, Westerland was granted town privileges. In 1949, it was officially recognised as a health resort. In 2007, the town numbered 9,072 citizens.

South of Westerland, the island extends for about 15 km (10 miles) in the form of a spit, until it is cut by the &quot;Hörnumtief&quot; tidal creek that runs through the Wadden Sea mudflats east of Sylt. Here is the location of Rantum. This village, like no other on Sylt, had to fight sand drift during the past centuries. Many farmsteads and a church had to be abandoned because of shifting dunes moving eastward. Only the planting of marram grass stopped the dunes and put an end to this threat. To the east, there are a few scattered spots of marshland, but the area is mostly dominated by dunes.

Hörnum on the island&#x27;s southern headland is the youngest village. It was founded shortly after 1900, although the uninhabited southern tip of Sylt was said to serve as refuge for pirates and fishermen. The name &quot;Budersand&quot; in the area emanates from that custom, marking a great dune where booths () stood in former times to serve as shelters. This southern headland, called &quot;Odde&quot;, is marked by continuous loss of land. Each year great amounts of sand are washed away by storm floods and coastal management has not yet seen sustainable effects in the area, so that further losses have to be expected.

===Sylt-Ost===
Sylt-Ost (&quot;East Sylt&quot;) is a former municipality which was formed in 1970 out of several small villages on the &quot;Nössehalbinsel&quot; of Sylt. The population (as of 2000) was 5,500. The villages included Tinnum, Munkmarsch, Archsum, Morsum and Keitum. In 2009, Sylt-Ost merged with Westerland and Rantum to form &quot;Gemeinde Sylt&quot;.

==History==
Geographically, Sylt was originally part of Jutland (today Schleswig-Holstein and mainland Denmark), with evidence of human habitation going back to 3000 BC at Denghoog. The first settlements of Frisians appeared during the 8th century and 9th century. In 1386, Sylt was divided between the Duke of Schleswig and the King of Denmark; except for the village of List, Sylt became part of the Duchy of Schleswig in 1435.

During the 17th and 18th century, whaling, fishing and oyster breeding increased the wealth of the population. At this time, Keitum became the capital of the island, and a place for rich captains to settle down. In the 19th century, tourism began. Westerland replaced Keitum as the capital. During World War I, Sylt became a military outpost. On 25 March 1916, British seaplanes bombed the German airship sheds on Sylt. The main connection for tourists was boats from Højer. Since Højer was ceded to Denmark in 1920, a rail causeway to the mainland was built in 1927, the Hindenburgdamm, named after Paul von Hindenburg. During World War II, Sylt became a fortress, with concrete bunkers built below the dunes at the shore, some of which are still visible today. Lager Sylt, the concentration camp on Alderney was named after the island. Rudolf Höss hid on the island after Nazi Germany&#x27;s defeat, but he was later captured and brought to trial in Poland.
Today, Sylt is mainly a tourist destination, famous for its sandy beaches and healthy climate. The west beach has a number of surf schools and also a nude section. The PWA World Tour Windsurf World Cup Sylt, established in 1984, is annually held at Westerland&#x27;s beach front. Sylt is also popular for second home owners, and many German celebrities who own vacation homes on &quot;the island&quot;.

===The &quot;Freikörperkultur&quot; and nude bathing===

At the beginning of the 20th century, the bathing beaches on Sylt were segregated by sex into &quot;ladies&#x27; bath&quot; (&quot;Damenbad&quot;) and &quot;men&#x27;s bath&quot; (&quot;Herrenbad&quot;); one bathed in long bathing dresses of that time period. From the beginning of the 20th century - starting from the Free German Youth camp Klappholttal and the intellectuals and artists in the village of Kampen - a social movement developed that lived a beach life without clothing (part of the German &quot;Freikörperkultur - FKK&quot; and &quot;Lebensreform&quot; movement). The first official nude bathing beach in Germany was opened on Sylt in 1920. Nude bathing and sunbathing (also erroneously referred to as &quot;nudist&quot; or &quot;nudism&quot;) spread over the entire island. &quot;Sylt&quot; was associated with nude bathing and the ideal environment for supporters of the &quot;Freikörperkultur (FKK)&quot;. Since the 1960s, there have been designated nudist beaches (marked &quot;FKK-Strand&quot;) with names such as &quot;Abyssinia&quot;, &quot;Samoa&quot; or &quot;Zanzibar&quot; on the entire west beach. The most famous nudist beach on Sylt became the &quot;Groyne 16&quot; (&quot;Buhne 16&quot;) in Kampen through regular reports in the tabloid media. Today the boundaries between nude and textile beaches are becoming more and more blurred. While nude beaches have lost some of their popularity, it is no longer unusual or sensational to bathe or sunbathe on &quot;normal&quot; beaches with no clothes on.

== Culture ==
Sylt is a part of the Frisian Islands. It has its own local dialect, Söl&#x27;ring, which is the indigenous speech of Sylt. Söl&#x27;ring is a dialect of insular North Frisian, with elements of Danish, Dutch and English. The island has a museum called &quot;Altfriesisches Haus&quot; (Sölring Museen, Altfriesisches Haus in Keitum).

Today, only a small fraction of the population still speak Söl&#x27;ring. A law to promote the language (&quot;Friesisch-Gesetz&quot;) was passed in 2004. The northernmost part of the island, &quot;Listland&quot;, was traditionally Danish-speaking.

As in many areas in Schleswig-Holstein on New Year&#x27;s Eve, groups of children go masked from house to house, reciting poems. This is known as &quot;Rummelpottlaufen&quot;, and as a reward, children receive sweets or money.

Sylt also features many Frisian-style houses with thatched roofs.

Since the mid-18th century, the vowel in the name of the island has been represented as &quot;y&quot; for unknown reasons, while older spellings are &quot;Sildt&quot; and &quot;Silt&quot;, allegedly derived from Danish &quot;sild&quot; &quot;herring&quot;, or maybe related to English silt.

Sylt is mentioned in a pangram, a sentence that uses every letter in the German alphabet, including every umlaut (ä, ö, ü) plus the ß: &quot;Victor jagt zwölf Boxkämpfer quer über den großen Sylter Deich&quot; (&quot;Victor chases twelve boxers across the Great Levee of Sylt&quot;).

=== Sylt in painting ===
Among the first painters who discovered Sylt as a theme were Eugen Dücker and Eugen Bracht. Franz Korwan followed them.
The painter Andreas Dirks was born in Tinnum on Sylt in 1865. He studied at the Düsseldorf Art Academy and in Weimar, lived in Düsseldorf since 1895, accepted a professorship there in 1916 and at the same time maintained a studio in Westerland.
Ulrich Schulte-Wülwer described him as &quot;... the strongest artistic talent that the island has produced&quot;. Carl Arp came to Sylt in 1903.
Painters like Emil Nolde, Erich Heckel, Anita Rée and Albert Aereboe moved to Sylt. Contemporary artists include the painters and sculptors Rainer Fetting and Ingo Kühl, who live in Berlin and on Sylt.

==Notable people==

* Dirk Meinerts Hahn (born 1804 in Westerland, Sylt – 1860) best known as the captain of the ship &quot;Zebra&quot; that he captained to South Australia
* Cornelius Jensen (1814 in Sylt – 1886) a Danish sea captain for 20 years; arriving in San Francisco in 1848, he became a rancher, a vintner and served as a California politician.
* Henriette Hirschfeld-Tiburtius (1834 in Sylt – 1911) the first female dentist in Germany
* Gustav Jenner (1865 in Keitum – 1920) a German composer, conductor and musical scholar and the only formal composition pupil of Johannes Brahms
* Hermann von der Lieth-Thomsen (1867–1942 in Sylt) a German military aviation pioneer, lived in Sylt from 1928
* Margarete Boie (1880 – 1946) a German author in the 1920s incorporating the history, landscape and people of Sylt
* Anita Rée (1885 – 1933) a German-Jewish painter, lived and worked here
*Heinz Reinefarth (1903 – 1979) a German SS commander during World War II and government official in West Germany after the war. During the Warsaw Uprising of August 1944 his troops committed numerous atrocities. After the war Reinefarth became the mayor of Westerland and member of the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag
* Boy Lornsen (1922 in Keitum – 1995) a German sculptor and author of children&#x27;s literature
* Dora Heldt (born Bärbel Schmidt, 1961 in Sylt) a German author

==Transport==

Sylt is connected to the German mainland by the Hindenburgdamm, a causeway with a railway line on top. The passenger trains connect Westerland (Sylt) to Niebüll or Klanxbüll, and the Deutsche Bahn&#x27;s &quot;Syltshuttle&quot; as well as RDC&#x27;s &quot;Autozug Sylt&quot;, allow the transfer of cars and trucks between Westerland and Niebüll. There are also car ferry services to the nearby Danish island of Rømø, which offers a road connection to the mainland. Sylt Airport at Westerland serves the region.

==In other media==
The island was used during the filming of &quot;The Ghost Writer,&quot; as an alternate location for Martha&#x27;s Vineyard, due to the film&#x27;s director, Roman Polanski being unable to travel to the United States, due to an outstanding arrest warrant for rape. The ferry between the islands of Sylt and Rømø features prominently in the film.

==See also==

*Üüs Söl’ring Lön’, insular anthem
*Heinz Reinefarth, a Nazi-German military officer. The &quot;Butcher of Warsaw&quot; became mayor of Westerland after World War II.
*St. Niels 
*Uthlande

==References==

==External links==
*Sylt IPTV
*Sylt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3107" start="0" end="4" title="Sylt" label="Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28181" start="10" end="37" title="Sylt North Frisian" label="Söl&amp;#x27;ring North Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="66" end="73" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937" start="83" end="96" title="Nordfriesland" label="Nordfriesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="107" end="125" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q27937" start="184" end="205" title="North Frisian Islands" label="North Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421347" start="235" end="247" title="North Frisia" label="North Frisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27998" start="330" end="340" title="Westerland, Germany" label="Westerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27332" start="342" end="348" title="Kampen, Germany" label="Kampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20789" start="353" end="374" title="Wenningstedt-Braderup" label="Wenningstedt-Braderup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="494" end="503" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q657568" start="540" end="551" title="Storm tides of the North Sea" label="storm tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q481593" start="612" end="626" title="Hindenburgdamm" label="Hindenburgdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q698916" start="806" end="819" title="Islands of Germany" label="German island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="857" end="866" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q481593" start="939" end="953" title="Hindenburgdamm" label="Hindenburgdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127" start="992" end="996" title="Föhr" label="Föhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136" start="1001" end="1006" title="Amrum" label="Amrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1030" end="1036" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21191" start="1047" end="1051" title="Rømø" label="Rømø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796356" start="1137" end="1148" title="Königshafen" label="Königshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20629" start="1271" end="1277" title="Morsum" label="Morsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="1381" end="1391" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965925" start="1414" end="1457" title="Wadden Sea National Parks" label="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="1490" end="1494" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q217101" start="1621" end="1626" title="Spit (landform)" label="spits"/>
<link wikidata="Q27998" start="1737" end="1747" title="Westerland, Germany" label="Westerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20789" start="1749" end="1770" title="Wenningstedt-Braderup" label="Wenningstedt-Braderup"/>
<link wikidata="Q697215" start="1775" end="1783" title="Sylt-Ost" label="Sylt-Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859" start="1798" end="1803" title="geest" label="geest"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1948" end="1957" title="marshland" label="marshland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752" start="2020" end="2035" title="Grote Mandrenke" label="Grote Mandrenke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="2147" end="2162" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859" start="2252" end="2257" title="geest" label="geest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="2280" end="2287" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="2304" end="2312" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="2338" end="2342" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="2464" end="2469" title="erosion" label="erode"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="2607" end="2615" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752" start="2978" end="2993" title="Grote Mandrenke" label="Grote Mandrenke"/>
<link wikidata="Q27250" start="3040" end="3051" title="tidal creek" label="tidal creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q217101" start="3164" end="3168" title="spit (landform)" label="spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="3651" end="3665" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130" start="3805" end="3817" title="marram grass" label="marram grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q56114960" start="3998" end="4007" title="land loss" label="land loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="4537" end="4559" title="Coastal management" label="Measures of protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q153084" start="4632" end="4638" title="groyne" label="groyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="4930" end="4937" title="Windward and leeward" label="Leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q679780" start="5119" end="5128" title="Tetrapod (structure)" label="tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="5509" end="5517" title="Dredging" label="Dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="5833" end="5834" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="6848" end="6852" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="7545" end="7559" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="8010" end="8024" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="8261" end="8271" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533036" start="8349" end="8363" title="bird sanctuary" label="bird sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="8525" end="8541" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="8878" end="8883" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q634975" start="9310" end="9321" title="Rosa rugosa" label="Rosa rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="9423" end="9432" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="9446" end="9453" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="9738" end="9744" title="Heath (habitat)" label="heaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="10026" end="10039" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="10083" end="10094" title="butterfly" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q157609" start="10120" end="10139" title="small tortoiseshell" label="small tortoiseshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206474" start="10141" end="10150" title="common brimstone" label="brimstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q158603" start="10152" end="10164" title="painted lady" label="painted lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q158699" start="10169" end="10186" title="Aglais io" label="peacock butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q622886" start="10264" end="10279" title="natterjack toad" label="natterjack toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303681" start="10620" end="10630" title="water bird" label="water bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="10737" end="10747" title="Migratory bird" label="migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="10762" end="10776" title="Ornithology" label="ornithological"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664" start="10886" end="10892" title="Uthörn" label="Uthörn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="10978" end="10995" title="black-headed gull" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q26800" start="10997" end="11008" title="Arctic tern" label="Arctic tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q26147" start="11010" end="11021" title="pied avocet" label="pied avocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18859" start="11023" end="11038" title="common redshank" label="common redshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q26427" start="11040" end="11051" title="common gull" label="common gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25928" start="11053" end="11066" title="Eurasian oystercatcher" label="oystercatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q25392" start="11068" end="11084" title="northern lapwing" label="northern lapwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25761" start="11086" end="11101" title="common shelduck" label="common shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26444" start="11106" end="11117" title="tufted duck" label="tufted duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050" start="11181" end="11192" title="Brent goose" label="brent geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106837" start="11208" end="11223" title="Eurasian wigeon" label="Eurasian wigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696" start="11229" end="11241" title="common eider" label="common eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q18864" start="11255" end="11272" title="bar-tailed godwit" label="bar-tailed godwit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27124" start="11275" end="11283" title="red knot" label="red knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26650" start="11286" end="11292" title="dunlin" label="dunlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21148" start="11298" end="11320" title="Eurasian golden plover" label="Eurasian golden plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816" start="11323" end="11336" title="Ringed plover" label="Ringed plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q25692" start="11338" end="11350" title="common snipe" label="common snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28122714" start="11352" end="11356" title="Ruff (bird)" label="ruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="11431" end="11437" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838" start="11540" end="11553" title="European hare" label="European hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="11555" end="11561" title="European rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="11566" end="11574" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="11694" end="11701" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="11706" end="11721" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="11775" end="11791" title="harbour porpoise" label="harbour porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="11835" end="11847" title="harbour seal" label="harbour seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="11853" end="11862" title="grey seal" label="grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q536656" start="12112" end="12166" title="Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research" label="Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252380" start="12188" end="12219" title="Wadden Sea Conservation Station" label="Wadden Sea Conservation Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="12349" end="12363" title="marine climate" label="marine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="12382" end="12393" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q325859" start="13176" end="13198" title="Deutscher Wetterdienst" label="Deutscher Wetterdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160" start="13242" end="13246" title="List, Germany" label="List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125126" start="13338" end="13351" title="Meteomedia AG" label="Meteomedia AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="13400" end="13415" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="13442" end="13453" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q399445" start="13979" end="13982" title="Amt (administrative division)" label="Amt"/>
<link wikidata="Q20701" start="13989" end="14004" title="Landschaft Sylt" label="Landschaft Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21008" start="14070" end="14083" title="Sylt (municipality)" label="Gemeinde Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27998" start="14169" end="14179" title="Westerland, Germany" label="Westerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21039" start="14181" end="14187" title="Rantum" label="Rantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q697215" start="14192" end="14200" title="Sylt-Ost" label="Sylt-Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q697215" start="14405" end="14413" title="Sylt-Ost" label="Sylt-Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160" start="14667" end="14671" title="List, Schleswig-Holstein" label="List"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="14866" end="14873" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q984648" start="15004" end="15011" title="Havneby" label="Havneby"/>
<link wikidata="Q21191" start="15036" end="15040" title="Rømø" label="Rømø"/>
<link wikidata="Q20789" start="15042" end="15054" title="Wenningstedt-Braderup" label="Wenningstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q523770" start="15069" end="15077" title="Braderup" label="Braderup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27332" start="15082" end="15088" title="Kampen, Germany" label="Kampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q896813" start="15474" end="15491" title="Kampen Lighthouse" label="Kampen Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="16032" end="16047" title="town privileges" label="town privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q21039" start="16379" end="16385" title="Rantum" label="Rantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130" start="16588" end="16600" title="marram grass" label="marram grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q28013" start="16753" end="16759" title="Hörnum" label="Hörnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646" start="17612" end="17618" title="Tinnum" label="Tinnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649" start="17620" end="17630" title="Munkmarsch" label="Munkmarsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648" start="17632" end="17639" title="Archsum" label="Archsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20629" start="17641" end="17647" title="Morsum" label="Morsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20767" start="17652" end="17658" title="Keitum" label="Keitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="17804" end="17811" title="Jutland Peninsula" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="17851" end="17858" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20689" start="17920" end="17928" title="Denghoog" label="Denghoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="18213" end="18220" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="18234" end="18240" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18477" end="18488" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12317764" start="18647" end="18652" title="Højer" label="Højer"/>
<link wikidata="Q481593" start="18751" end="18765" title="Hindenburgdamm" label="Hindenburgdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="18779" end="18798" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18807" end="18819" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="18883" end="18887" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q835080" start="18942" end="18952" title="Lager Sylt" label="Lager Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="18958" end="18976" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179313" start="18980" end="18988" title="Alderney" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76975" start="19017" end="19028" title="Rudolf Höss" label="Rudolf Höss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="19053" end="19065" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19307" end="19321" title="PWA World Tour" label="PWA World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371789" start="19500" end="19513" title="vacation home" label="vacation home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511024" start="19671" end="19688" title="Sex segregation" label="segregated by sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q27332" start="20007" end="20013" title="Kampen (Sylt)" label="Kampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300865" start="20111" end="20127" title="Freikörperkultur" label="Freikörperkultur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411815" start="20150" end="20162" title="Lebensreform" label="Lebensreform"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="20569" end="20575" title="nudist" label="nudist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153084" start="20780" end="20786" title="Groyne" label="Groyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q76936" start="21167" end="21182" title="Frisian Islands" label="Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28181" start="21214" end="21227" title="Söl&amp;#x27;ring" label="Söl&amp;#x27;ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224" start="21307" end="21320" title="North Frisian language" label="North Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="21339" end="21345" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="21347" end="21352" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="21357" end="21364" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="21749" end="21767" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="21771" end="21790" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="22007" end="22021" title="Thatching" label="thatched roofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="22266" end="22273" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="22309" end="22313" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188546" start="22339" end="22346" title="pangram" label="pangram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="22676" end="22681" title="theme (narrative)" label="theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q819516" start="22687" end="22699" title="Eugen Dücker" label="Eugen Dücker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372410" start="22704" end="22716" title="Eugen Bracht" label="Eugen Bracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q17540915" start="22718" end="22730" title="Franz Korwan" label="Franz Korwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646" start="22784" end="22790" title="Tinnum" label="Tinnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380799" start="22991" end="23012" title="Ulrich Schulte-Wülwer" label="Ulrich Schulte-Wülwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441222" start="23106" end="23114" title="Carl Arp" label="Carl Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152788" start="23151" end="23161" title="Emil Nolde" label="Emil Nolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q156700" start="23163" end="23175" title="Erich Heckel" label="Erich Heckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q274026" start="23177" end="23186" title="Anita Rée" label="Anita Rée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637526" start="23191" end="23205" title="Albert Aereboe" label="Albert Aereboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q325900" start="23277" end="23291" title="Rainer Fetting" label="Rainer Fetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q19960214" start="23296" end="23305" title="Ingo Kühl" label="Ingo Kühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280848" start="23362" end="23380" title="Dirk Meinerts Hahn" label="Dirk Meinerts Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171402" start="23515" end="23531" title="Cornelius Jensen" label="Cornelius Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638" start="23696" end="23726" title="Henriette Hirschfeld-Tiburtius" label="Henriette Hirschfeld-Tiburtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q315150" start="23787" end="23800" title="Gustav Jenner" label="Gustav Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q70506" start="23933" end="23962" title="Hermann von der Lieth-Thomsen" label="Hermann von der Lieth-Thomsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894950" start="24045" end="24059" title="Margarete Boie" label="Margarete Boie"/>
<link wikidata="Q274026" start="24161" end="24170" title="Anita Rée" label="Anita Rée"/>
<link wikidata="Q682813" start="24233" end="24249" title="Heinz Reinefarth" label="Heinz Reinefarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="24273" end="24275" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24293" end="24305" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="24333" end="24345" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="24372" end="24387" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24433" end="24443" title="World War II atrocities in Poland#Warsaw Uprising atrocities" label="atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q27998" start="24490" end="24500" title="Westerland, Germany" label="Westerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="24519" end="24537" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="24538" end="24545" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q78174" start="24548" end="24559" title="Boy Lornsen" label="Boy Lornsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q111618" start="24645" end="24655" title="Dora Heldt" label="Dora Heldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q481593" start="24772" end="24786" title="Hindenburgdamm" label="Hindenburgdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="24790" end="24798" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q801596" start="24856" end="24873" title="Westerland (Sylt) station" label="Westerland (Sylt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014" start="24877" end="24884" title="Niebüll" label="Niebüll"/>
<link wikidata="Q522859" start="24888" end="24897" title="Klanxbüll" label="Klanxbüll"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="25085" end="25094" title="Roll-on/roll-off" label="car ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="25118" end="25124" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21191" start="25135" end="25139" title="Rømø" label="Rømø"/>
<link wikidata="Q20755" start="25189" end="25201" title="Sylt Airport" label="Sylt Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q157879" start="25303" end="25319" title="The Ghost Writer (film)" label="The Ghost Writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49148" start="25356" end="25378" title="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard" label="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="25413" end="25427" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079531" start="25617" end="25634" title="Üüs Söl’ring Lön’" label="Üüs Söl’ring Lön’"/>
<link wikidata="Q682813" start="25652" end="25668" title="Heinz Reinefarth" label="Heinz Reinefarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="25723" end="25729" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15129669" start="25784" end="25793" title="St. Niels" label="St. Niels"/>
<link wikidata="Q881841" start="25796" end="25804" title="Uthlande" label="Uthlande"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71410" wikidata="Q310272" url="?curid=71410" title="Frankie Fredericks">
<text>Frank &quot;Frankie&quot; Fredericks (born 2 October 1967) is a former track and field athlete from Namibia. Running in the 100 metres and 200 metres, he won four silver medals at the Olympic Games (two in 1992 and two in 1996), making him Namibia&#x27;s only Olympic medalist until Christine Mboma&#x27;s silver medal at the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo. He also won gold medals at the World Championships, World Indoor Championships, All-Africa Games and Commonwealth Games. He is the world indoor record-holder for 200 metres, with a time of 19.92 seconds set in 1996.

Fredericks has broken 20 seconds for the 200 metres 24 times. He also holds the joint-third-fastest non-winning time for the 200 metres. In August 1996, Fredericks ran 19.68 seconds in the Olympic final in Atlanta, Georgia.

He is also the oldest man to have broken 20 seconds for the 200 metres. On 12 July 2002 in Rome, Fredericks won the 200 metres in a time of 19.99 seconds at the age of 34 years 283 days. He is currently serving as a council member in the IAAF.

On 3 March 2017, Fredericks was implicated in the IAAF corruption scandal, stemming from a large cash payment he received in 2009. The investigation is still to be concluded.

==Education and early life==

Fredericks was born in Windhoek, the only child of Riekie Fredericks, a seamstress, and Andries Kangootui, a farmer. He grew up in the city&#x27;s Katutura township, his parents splitting up while he was little. In 1981 he switched to the Catholic school at Döbra to play competitive soccer. When he received a scholarship to complete his matric at Concordia College Fredericks took up athletics because the soccer was not strong at Concordia. He still played for Black Africa, one of the country&#x27;s top teams.

After school, he took up work at Rössing Uranium Ltd. in Swakopmund and soon got a partial scholarship at Brigham Young University in the US in 1987. There he studied computer science and graduated with an MBA.

During his college career, Fredericks earned numerous All-American citations and won three NCAA championships.

===Athletics career===
In 1990, after his country had become independent of South Africa, Fredericks could participate in international competition. At the World Championships in 1991, Fredericks won a silver medal in the 200 m, finishing behind Michael Johnson, and placed 5th in the 100 m. He then went on to The following year, at the Barcelona 1992 Summer Olympics, Fredericks became Namibia&#x27;s first Olympic medalist when he finished second in both the 100 m and 200 m. He won the silver medal in the men&#x27;s 100-metre dash, with a time of 10.02 seconds, just .06 seconds behind the gold medal winner. In 1993, in Stuttgart, he became the nation&#x27;s first World Champion, winning the 200 m. At the 1994 Commonwealth Games, he won gold in the 200 m and bronze in the 100 m. His time of 19.97 seconds in the 200 metres is the current Commonwealth Games record. At the 1995 World Championships 100 m, after crossing the line he immediately went to help his friend Linford Christie who pulled a muscle in the race and signalled for help. This act of kindness endeared him to many (particularly British) athletics fans.

For the 1996 Summer Olympics, Fredericks was among the title favourites for both the 100 m and 200 m. He reached both finals and again finished second in both. In the 100 m, he was beaten by Donovan Bailey, who set a new World Record, and in the 200 m, he was beaten by Michael Johnson, who also set a new World Record. At the time, Fredericks&#x27;s second-place run was the third-fastest in history, beaten only by Johnson (twice). At the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Frankie once again missed out on the chance of gold in the 100 m; he was beaten by Ato Boldon of Trinidad and Tobago.

Suffering from injuries, Fredericks had to withdraw from the 1999 and 2001 World Championships, and the 2000 Summer Olympics. When he arrived in Abuja to represent Namibia at the 2003 All-Africa Games, he was lauded by Nigerian supporters and came away with a silver medal. He then went on to win the 200 m at the inaugural Afro-Asian Games in 2003. In the 200 m final at the 2004 Summer Olympics, he finished 4th.

After the end of the 2004 outdoor season, Fredericks retired from competition. He had run the 100 m under 10 seconds 27 times.
====Personal bests====

* All information taken from athlete&#x27;s World Athletics profile.
==IOC career==

In 2004 Fredericks became a member of the International Olympic Committee. In 2009 Fredericks became the head of the Athletics Namibia in a controversial leadership contest. In 2012 Fredericks was nominated to be a member of the International Olympic Committee.

Frank Fredericks is a member of the &#x27;Champions for Peace&#x27; club, a group of 54 famous elite athletes committed to serving peace in the world through sport, created by Peace and Sport, a Monaco-based international organisation.

===Bribery investigation===
On 3 March 2017, French newspaper &quot;Le Monde&quot; reported that Fredericks had received US$299,300 from Pamodzi Sports Consulting, a company owned by Papa Massata Diack (the son of disgraced former IAAF head Lamine Diack, who is currently facing corruption charges in France). The payment went to Yemi Limited, a company set up by Fredericks in Seychelles, a tax haven, and was made on 2 Oct. 2009, the same day as Rio was announced as the winning bid for the 2016 Olympics. Fredericks has denied that the payment has anything to do with the Olympic bid, but instead says it was fees paid for consulting services he provided for &quot;relay championships&quot; and marketing programs related to African championships and other IAAF programs.

When the allegation was made Fredericks was the chair of the 2024 Olympic bid evaluation committee. On 6 March 2017, Fredericks stepped down from his position in the IAAF task force that is evaluating if or when to re-admit Russia&#x27;s national sports body RusAF after a widespread doping scandal. On 7 March 2017, the Ethics Commission of the IOC recommended a provisional suspension of Fredericks from his IOC-related duties. Before the IOC Executive meeting Fredericks while maintaining his innocence withdrew from his position as the Chair of the 2024 Olympic bidding process &quot;in the best interests&quot; of the process. Fredericks was replaced as the chair of the 2024 Olympic bidding process by former FIBA secretary general Patrick Baumann.

==Business career==
After his athletic career, Fredericks worked as a business manager. He also founded the Frank Fredericks Foundation in 1999, a non-profit organisation supporting talented athletes.

== See also ==
*List of champions of African athletics
*IAAF doping controversy

== References ==
==External links==
* Frank Fredericks at the International Olympic Committee (IOC)
* Website of the &quot;Frank Fredericks Foundation&quot;
* &quot;Fredericks says goodbye – a career tribute&quot; – IAAF website, 13 October 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q310272" start="0" end="36" title="Frankie Fredericks" label="Frank &amp;quot;Frankie&amp;quot; Fredericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="100" end="107" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="124" end="134" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="139" end="149" title="200 metres" label="200 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="184" end="197" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="206" end="210" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="222" end="226" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520141" start="283" end="298" title="Christine Mboma" label="Christine Mboma"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="326" end="339" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="381" end="400" title="IAAF World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="402" end="428" title="IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics" label="World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q391394" start="430" end="446" title="All-Africa Games" label="All-Africa Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="451" end="469" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="481" end="500" title="List of world records in athletics#Indoor world records" label="world indoor record"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="773" end="780" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="782" end="789" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="1030" end="1034" title="IAAF" label="IAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="1266" end="1274" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362015" start="1390" end="1398" title="Katutura" label="Katutura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270930" start="1501" end="1506" title="Döbra, Namibia" label="Döbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193162" start="1582" end="1588" title="matric" label="matric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158954" start="1592" end="1609" title="Concordia College (Namibia)" label="Concordia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q880049" start="1707" end="1719" title="Black Africa S.C." label="Black Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504704" start="1792" end="1807" title="Rössing Uranium" label="Rössing Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q59698" start="1816" end="1826" title="Swakopmund" label="Swakopmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="1865" end="1889" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="1965" end="1968" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="2025" end="2037" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2062" end="2066" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q190924" start="2329" end="2344" title="Michael Johnson (athlete)" label="Michael Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="2421" end="2430" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="2431" end="2451" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="2471" end="2478" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="2709" end="2718" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116532" start="2796" end="2819" title="1994 Commonwealth Games" label="1994 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9305965" start="2930" end="2955" title="List of Commonwealth Games records in athletics" label="Commonwealth Games record"/>
<link wikidata="Q310019" start="3059" end="3075" title="Linford Christie" label="Linford Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="3222" end="3242" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q311048" start="3405" end="3419" title="Donovan Bailey" label="Donovan Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q190924" start="3484" end="3499" title="Michael Johnson (athlete)" label="Michael Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116581" start="3655" end="3678" title="1998 Commonwealth Games" label="1998 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="3696" end="3704" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311366" start="3789" end="3799" title="Ato Boldon" label="Ato Boldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="3803" end="3822" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="3929" end="3949" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="3970" end="3975" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394814" start="3989" end="4025" title="Namibia at the 2003 All-Africa Games" label="Namibia at the 2003 All-Africa Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112788" start="4139" end="4165" title="2003 Afro-Asian Games" label="inaugural Afro-Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="4201" end="4221" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602861" start="4505" end="4550" title="List of members of the International Olympic Committee" label="member of the International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602861" start="4692" end="4737" title="List of members of the International Olympic Committee" label="member of the International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373808" start="4916" end="4931" title="Peace and Sport" label="Peace and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="5045" end="5053" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639" start="5218" end="5230" title="Lamine Diack" label="Lamine Diack"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="5369" end="5378" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092150" start="6012" end="6017" title="All-Russia Athletic Federation" label="RusAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097518" start="6491" end="6506" title="Patrick Baumann (basketball)" label="Patrick Baumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717473" start="6727" end="6765" title="List of champions of Africa of athletics" label="List of champions of African athletics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6767" end="6790" title="International Association of Athletics Federations#Doping controversy" label="IAAF doping controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="6854" end="6885" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71411" wikidata="Q790365" url="?curid=71411" title="Barcelona (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Barcelona]] is a city in northeastern Spain and the capital city of Catalonia.

Barcelona may also refer to:

== Places ==
===Catalonia===
* County of Barcelona, a historical Catalan county
* Province of Barcelona, one of the four provinces of Catalonia, Spain
** Barcelona (Congress of Deputies constituency), covering the province
** Barcelona (Parliament of Catalonia constituency), covering the province
** Barcelona (Senate constituency), covering the province

===Elsewhere===

* Barcelona, Anzoátegui, the capital city of Anzoátegui State in Venezuela
* Barcelona, Arkansas, a community in the United States
* Barcelona, Cornwall, a hamlet in England
* Barcelona, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil 
* Barcelona, Sorsogon, a municipality in the Philippines
* Barcelona Light, a lighthouse in Westfield, New York, United States

==People==
* Count of Barcelona, former ruler of the County of Barcelona
* Danny Barcelona, jazz drummer best known for his work with Louis Armstrong

== Arts, entertainment, and media ==
===Music===
====Groups====
* Barcelona (band), an indie band from Arlington, Virginia
* Barcelona (indie rock band), an indie rock band from Seattle, Washington

====Works====
* &quot;Barcelona&quot;, a song by Stephen Sondheim from the musical &quot;Company&quot;, 1970
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé album), 1988
** &quot;Barcelona&quot; (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé song) (1987), a song on the album
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (Joe Henderson album), 1979
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (BWO song), 2008
* &quot;Barcelona&quot;, a song by D.Kay &amp; Epsilon featuring Stamina MC
* &quot;Barcelona&quot;, a song by Ronnie Lane with Eric Clapton. from the album &quot;See Me&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Barcelona&quot;, a song by Maliq &amp; D&#x27;Essentials with Fariz RM
* &quot;Barcelona&quot;, a song by Nat Shilkret and the Victor Orchestra
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (Pectus song), a song by Pectus (2012)
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (George Ezra song), a song by George Ezra from &quot;Wanted on Voyage&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (Ed Sheeran song), a song by Ed Sheeran from &quot;÷&quot; (2017)

===Other art. entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Barcelona&quot; (film), a 1994 American film is set in Barcelona, Catalonia
* &quot;&quot;, a 2016 Philippine film is set in Barcelona, Catalonia
* Barcelona chair, a chair designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe

==Astronomical bodies==
* Barcelona (meteorite), a meteorite which fell in Catalonia in the year 1704
* 945 Barcelona, an asteroid 

== Sports ==
===FC Barcelona family===
* FC Barcelona, a football club from Barcelona, Catalonia
** FC Barcelona B, the reserve team of FC Barcelona
** FC Barcelona C, was the second reserve team of FC Barcelona
** FC Barcelona Femení, the women&#x27;s football team of FC Barcelona
* FC Barcelona Bàsquet, the men&#x27;s basketball section of FC Barcelona
* FC Barcelona Futsal, the futsal section of FC Barcelona
* FC Barcelona Handbol, the team handball section of FC Barcelona
* FC Barcelona Hoquei, the roller hockey section of FC Barcelona
* FC Barcelona Ice Hockey, the ice hockey section of FC Barcelona
* FC Barcelona Rugby, the rugby section of FC Barcelona
* UB-Barça, the women&#x27;s basketball section of FC Barcelona

===Other uses in sports===
* Barcelona (Tarrafal), a football club in Cape Verde Islands
* Barcelona Dragons (NFL Europe), an American football team in Spain from 1991 to 2003
* Barcelona Dragons (ELF), an American football team in Spain since 2021
* Barcelona Esporte Clube, a football club in Brazil
* Barcelona Sporting Club, a sports club from Guayaquil, Ecuador
* Circuit de Catalunya (&quot;Barcelona&quot;), a motorsport race track in Montmeló, Barcelona, home of Formula One Spanish Grand Prix
* CN Barcelona, a swimming and water polo club from Barcelona, Catalonia
* Real Club de Tenis Barcelona, a private tennis club from Barcelona, Catalonia
* San Felipe Barcelona, a football club in Belize

== Transportation ==
* &quot;Barcelona&quot;, a cruise ship 
* Barcelona Metro, a rapid transit system in Barcelona
* Barcelona–El Prat Airport, an airport in Barcelona, Catalonia
* Rodalies Barcelona, the main commuter and regional rail system in Catalonia
== Science and Technology ==
* Threads (social network), internally codenamed Barcelona before release

==See also==
* Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto, a city in Sicily, Italy
* Barceloneta (disambiguation), various places
* Barcelonne-du-Gers, a town in Béarn, France
* Barcelonnette, a town in southern France</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q790365" start="0" end="13" title="Barcelona (disambiguation)" label="[[Barcelona]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q790365" start="82" end="91" title="Barcelona (disambiguation)" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233672" start="143" end="162" title="County of Barcelona" label="County of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81949" start="194" end="215" title="Province of Barcelona" label="Province of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859840" start="266" end="311" title="Barcelona (Congress of Deputies constituency)" label="Barcelona (Congress of Deputies constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28496610" start="338" end="386" title="Barcelona (Parliament of Catalonia constituency)" label="Barcelona (Parliament of Catalonia constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58214028" start="413" end="444" title="Barcelona (Senate constituency)" label="Barcelona (Senate constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q391221" start="488" end="509" title="Barcelona, Anzoátegui" label="Barcelona, Anzoátegui"/>
<link wikidata="Q18326214" start="563" end="582" title="Barcelona, Arkansas" label="Barcelona, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859837" start="619" end="638" title="Barcelona, Cornwall" label="Barcelona, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011622" start="662" end="692" title="Barcelona, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Barcelona, Rio Grande do Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q174114" start="704" end="723" title="Barcelona, Sorsogon" label="Barcelona, Sorsogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859853" start="761" end="776" title="Barcelona Light" label="Barcelona Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q640868" start="843" end="861" title="Count of Barcelona" label="Count of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q520472" start="905" end="920" title="Danny Barcelona" label="Danny Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246725" start="1047" end="1063" title="Barcelona (band)" label="Barcelona (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q807912" start="1106" end="1133" title="Barcelona (indie rock band)" label="Barcelona (indie rock band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915810" start="1269" end="1276" title="Company (musical)" label="Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q279991" start="1291" end="1359" title="Barcelona (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé album)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q807917" start="1369" end="1436" title="Barcelona (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé song)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602738" start="1467" end="1510" title="Barcelona (Joe Henderson album)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (Joe Henderson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859836" start="1519" end="1551" title="Barcelona (BWO song)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (BWO song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113243" start="1593" end="1598" title="D.Kay" label="D.Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131498" start="1721" end="1727" title="See Me (Ronnie Lane album)" label="See Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743814" start="1776" end="1805" title="Maliq &amp;amp; D&amp;#x27;Essentials" label="Maliq &amp;amp; D&amp;#x27;Essentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625070" start="1855" end="1867" title="Nat Shilkret" label="Nat Shilkret"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411864" start="1895" end="1930" title="Barcelona (Pectus song)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (Pectus song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55516964" start="1958" end="1998" title="Barcelona (George Ezra song)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (George Ezra song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109511026" start="2065" end="2104" title="Barcelona (Ed Sheeran song)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (Ed Sheeran song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078526" start="2198" end="2226" title="Barcelona (film)" label="&amp;quot;Barcelona&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q733154" start="2352" end="2367" title="Barcelona chair" label="Barcelona chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q56458151" start="2441" end="2462" title="Barcelona (meteorite)" label="Barcelona (meteorite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q158171" start="2519" end="2532" title="945 Barcelona" label="945 Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="2589" end="2601" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10467" start="2648" end="2662" title="FC Barcelona B" label="FC Barcelona B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346842" start="2700" end="2714" title="FC Barcelona C" label="FC Barcelona C"/>
<link wikidata="Q522899" start="2763" end="2782" title="FC Barcelona Femení" label="FC Barcelona Femení"/>
<link wikidata="Q54893" start="2833" end="2853" title="FC Barcelona Bàsquet" label="FC Barcelona Bàsquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347994" start="2907" end="2926" title="FC Barcelona Futsal" label="FC Barcelona Futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q378906" start="2965" end="2985" title="FC Barcelona Handbol" label="FC Barcelona Handbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q679869" start="3031" end="3050" title="FC Barcelona Hoquei" label="FC Barcelona Hoquei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166013" start="3096" end="3119" title="FC Barcelona Ice Hockey" label="FC Barcelona Ice Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q585080" start="3162" end="3180" title="FC Barcelona Rugby" label="FC Barcelona Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097736" start="3218" end="3226" title="UB-Barça" label="UB-Barça"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859841" start="3310" end="3330" title="Barcelona (Tarrafal)" label="Barcelona (Tarrafal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q807916" start="3372" end="3402" title="Barcelona Dragons (NFL Europe)" label="Barcelona Dragons (NFL Europe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107122004" start="3459" end="3482" title="Barcelona Dragons (ELF)" label="Barcelona Dragons (ELF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859851" start="3532" end="3555" title="Barcelona Esporte Clube" label="Barcelona Esporte Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q248782" start="3585" end="3608" title="Barcelona Sporting Club" label="Barcelona Sporting Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q171404" start="3650" end="3670" title="Circuit de Catalunya" label="Circuit de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q856354" start="3785" end="3797" title="CN Barcelona" label="CN Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781022" start="3858" end="3886" title="Real Club de Tenis Barcelona" label="Real Club de Tenis Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849296" start="3938" end="3958" title="San Felipe Barcelona" label="San Felipe Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4035" end="4046" title="List_of_cruise_ships#B" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q237189" start="4050" end="4065" title="Barcelona Metro" label="Barcelona Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q56973" start="4105" end="4130" title="Barcelona–El Prat Airport" label="Barcelona–El Prat Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322422" start="4169" end="4187" title="Rodalies Barcelona" label="Rodalies Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q120281745" start="4276" end="4300" title="Threads (social network)" label="Threads (social network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42495" start="4364" end="4389" title="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q526438" start="4417" end="4445" title="Barceloneta (disambiguation)" label="Barceloneta (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q473917" start="4464" end="4482" title="Barcelonne-du-Gers" label="Barcelonne-du-Gers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207577" start="4510" end="4523" title="Barcelonnette" label="Barcelonnette"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71415" wikidata="Q114819" url="?curid=71415" title="Dune (1984 film)">
<text>Dune is a 1984 American epic space opera film written and directed by David Lynch, and based on the 1965 novel of the same name by Frank Herbert. It was filmed at the Churubusco Studios in Mexico City. The soundtrack was composed by the rock band Toto, with a contribution from Brian Eno. Its large ensemble cast includes Kyle MacLachlan (in his film debut), Patrick Stewart, Brad Dourif, Dean Stockwell, Virginia Madsen, José Ferrer, Sean Young, Silvana Mangano, Sting, Linda Hunt, and Max von Sydow.

The setting is the distant future, chronicling the conflict between rival noble families as they battle for control of the extremely harsh desert planet Arrakis, also known as Dune. The planet is the only source of the drug melange (spice), which allows prescience and is vital to space travel, making it the most essential and valuable commodity in the universe. Paul Atreides is the scion and heir of a powerful noble family, whose appointment to the control of Arrakis brings them into conflict with its former overlords, House Harkonnen. Paul is also possibly the Kwisatz Haderach, a messianic figure expected by the Bene Gesserit sisterhood.

After the novel&#x27;s initial success, attempts to adapt &quot;Dune&quot; as a film began in 1971. A lengthy process of development followed throughout the 1970s, during which Arthur P. Jacobs, Alejandro Jodorowsky, and Ridley Scott unsuccessfully tried to bring their visions to the screen. In 1981, executive producer Dino De Laurentiis hired Lynch as director.

The film underperformed at the box office, grossing $30.9 million against a $40–42 million budget. At least four versions have been released worldwide. Lynch largely disowned the finished film and had his name removed or changed to pseudonyms in the credits on certain versions. The film has developed a cult following, but opinion varies between fans of the novel and fans of Lynch&#x27;s films.

==Plot==
In the year 10,191, the known universe is ruled by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV. The most valuable substance in the empire is the spice melange, which extends life and expands consciousness. The spice also allows the Spacing Guild to fold space, allowing safe, instantaneous interstellar travel. The Guild&#x27;s leader demands Shaddam clarify a conspiracy that could jeopardize spice production. Shaddam reveals that he has transferred power and control of the planet Arrakis, the only source of the spice, to House Atreides. However, once the Atreides arrive, they will be attacked by their archenemies, the Harkonnen, alongside Shaddam&#x27;s own Sardaukar troops. Shaddam fears the Atreides due to reports of a secret army that they are amassing.

Lady Jessica, the concubine of Duke Leto Atreides, is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an exclusive sisterhood with advanced physical and mental abilities. As part of a centuries-long breeding program to produce the Kwisatz Haderach, a mental &quot;superbeing&quot; whom the Bene Gesserit would use to their advantage, Jessica was ordered to bear a daughter but disobeyed and bore a son, Paul Atreides. Paul is tested by Reverend Mother Mohiam to assess his impulse control and, to her surprise, passes the test.

The Atreides leave their homeworld Caladan for Arrakis, a barren desert planet populated by gigantic sandworms. The native people of Arrakis, the Fremen, prophesy that a messiah will lead them to freedom and paradise. Duncan Idaho, one of Leto&#x27;s loyalists, tells him that he suspects Arrakis holds vast numbers of Fremen who could prove to be powerful allies. Before Leto can form an alliance with the Fremen, the Harkonnen launch their attack. Leto&#x27;s personal physician who is also secretly a Harkonnen double-agent, Dr. Wellington Yueh, disables the shields, leaving the Atreides defenseless. Idaho is killed, Leto is captured, and nearly the entire House of Atreides is wiped out by the Harkonnen. Baron Harkonnen orders Mentat Piter De Vries to kill Yueh with a poisoned blade. Leto dies in a failed attempt to assassinate the Baron using a poison-gas tooth implanted by Yueh in exchange for sparing the lives of Jessica and Paul, killing Piter instead.

Paul and Jessica survive the attack and escape into the deep desert, where they are given sanctuary by a sietch of Fremen. Paul assumes the Fremen name Muad&#x27;Dib and emerges as the messiah for whom the Fremen have been waiting. He teaches them to use Weirding Modules—sonic weapons developed by House Atreides—and targets spice mining. Over the next two years, spice production is nearly halted due to Paul&#x27;s raids. The Spacing Guild informs the Emperor of the deteriorating situation on Arrakis.

Paul falls in love with young Fremen warrior Chani. Jessica becomes the Fremen&#x27;s Reverend Mother by ingesting the Water of Life, a deadly poison, which she renders harmless by using her Bene Gesserit abilities. As an after-effect of this ritual, Jessica&#x27;s unborn child, Alia, later emerges from the womb with the full powers of an adult Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother. In a prophetic dream, Paul learns of the plot by the Emperor and the Guild to kill him. When Paul&#x27;s dreams suddenly stop, he drinks the Water of Life and has a profound psychedelic trip in the desert. He gains powerful psychic abilities and the ability to control the sandworms, which he realizes are the spice&#x27;s source.

The Emperor amasses a huge invasion fleet above Arrakis to wipe out the Fremen and regain control of the planet. He has the Baron&#x27;s older nephew Glossu &quot;The Beast&quot; Rabban beheaded and summons the Baron to explain why spice mining has stopped. Paul launches a final attack against the Harkonnen and the Emperor&#x27;s Sardaukar at Arrakeen, the capital city. Riding atop sandworms and brandishing sonic weapons, Paul&#x27;s Fremen warriors easily defeat the Emperor&#x27;s legions. Alia assassinates the Baron while Paul confronts the Emperor and fights the Baron&#x27;s younger nephew Feyd-Rautha in a duel to the death. After killing Feyd, Paul demonstrates his newfound powers and fulfills the Fremen prophecy by causing rain to fall on Arrakis. Alia declares him to be the Kwisatz Haderach.

==Cast==

Additionally, Honorato Magalone appears as Otheym, Judd Omen appears as Jamis, and Molly Wryn as Harah. Director David Lynch appears in an uncredited cameo as a spice worker, while Danny Corkill is shown in the onscreen credits as Orlop despite his scenes being deleted from the theatrical release.

== Production ==
===Early attempts and Jodorowsky&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot;===
After the book&#x27;s initial success, producers began attempting to adapt it. In mid-1971, film producer Arthur P. Jacobs optioned the film rights to Frank Herbert&#x27;s 1965 novel &quot;Dune&quot;, on agreement to produce a film within nine years, but died in mid-1973, while plans for the film (including David Lean already attached to direct) were still in development.

The film rights reverted in 1974, when the option was acquired by a French consortium led by Jean-Paul Gibon, with Alejandro Jodorowsky attached to direct. Jodorowsky approached contributors including the progressive rock groups Pink Floyd and Magma for some of the music, Dan O&#x27;Bannon for the visual effects, and artists H. R. Giger, Jean Giraud, and Chris Foss for set and character design. Potential cast included Salvador Dalí as the Emperor, Orson Welles as Baron Harkonnen, Mick Jagger as Feyd-Rautha, Udo Kier as Piter De Vries, David Carradine as Leto Atreides, Jodorowsky&#x27;s son Brontis Jodorowsky as Paul Atreides, and Gloria Swanson. The project was ultimately canceled for several reasons, largely because funding disappeared when the project ballooned to a 10–14 hour epic.

Although their film project never reached production, the work that Jodorowsky and his team put into &quot;Dune&quot; significantly impacted subsequent science-fiction films. In particular, &quot;Alien&quot; (1979), written by O&#x27;Bannon, shared much of the same creative team for the visual design as had been assembled for Jodorowsky&#x27;s film. A documentary, &quot;Jodorowsky&#x27;s Dune&quot; (2013), was made about Jodorowsky&#x27;s failed attempt at an adaptation.

===De Laurentiis&#x27;s first attempt===
In late 1976, Italian producer Dino De Laurentiis purchased the rights for &quot;Dune&quot; from Gibon&#x27;s consortium. De Laurentiis commissioned Herbert to write a new screenplay in 1978; the script Herbert turned in was 175 pages long, the equivalent of nearly three hours of screen time. De Laurentiis then hired director Ridley Scott in 1979, with Rudy Wurlitzer writing the screenplay and H. R. Giger retained from the Jodorowsky production. Scott intended to split the book into two movies. He worked on three drafts of the script, using &quot;The Battle of Algiers&quot; (1966) as a point of reference, before moving on to direct another science-fiction film, &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982). He recalled the pre-production process was slow, and finishing the project would have been even more time-intensive:

===Lynch&#x27;s screenplay and direction===
In 1981, the nine-year film rights were set to expire. De Laurentiis renegotiated the rights from the author, adding to them the rights to the &quot;Dune&quot; sequels, written and unwritten. He then showed the book to Sid Sheinberg, president of MCA, the parent company of Universal City Studios, which approved the book. After seeing &quot;The Elephant Man&quot; (1980), producer Raffaella De Laurentiis decided that David Lynch should direct the movie. Around that time, Lynch received several other directing offers, including &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. De Laurentiis contacted Lynch, who said he had not heard of the book. After reading it and &quot;loving it&quot;, he met with De Laurentiis and agreed to direct the film. Lynch worked on the script for six months with Eric Bergren and Christopher De Vore. The team yielded two drafts of the script and split over creative differences. Lynch then worked on five more drafts. Initially, Lynch had scripted &quot;Dune&quot; across two films, but eventually it was condensed into a single film.

Tom Cruise, Kevin Costner, Lewis Smith, Zach Galligan, Michael Biehn, Kenneth Branagh and Val Kilmer either auditioned or were screen-tested for the role of Paul. Kilmer was the top choice for the role until MacLachlan screen-tested. Aldo Ray was cast as Gurney Halleck, but due to his alcoholism was replaced with Stewart. Glenn Close tested for the role of Lady Jessica, but lost to Annis. Helena Bonham Carter was originally cast as Princess Irulan, but she left due to scheduling conflicts with &quot;A Room with a View&quot;. Madsen said in 2016 that she was signed for three films, as the producers &quot;thought they were going to make &quot;Star Wars&quot; for grown-ups.&quot;

On March 30, 1983, with the 135-page sixth draft of the script, &quot;Dune&quot; finally began shooting. It was shot entirely in Mexico, mostly at Churubusco Studios; De Laurentiis said this was due in part to the favorable exchange rate to get more value for their production budget, and that no studio in Europe had the expansive capabilities they needed for the production. With a budget over $40–42 million, &quot;Dune&quot; required 80 sets built on 16 sound stages, and had a total crew of 1,700, with over 20,000 extras. Many of the exterior shots were filmed in the Samalayuca Dune Fields in Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua. Filming ran for at least six months into September 1983, plagued by various production problems such as failing electricity or communication lines due to the country&#x27;s infrastructure, or health-related problems with their cast and crew.

====Editing====
The rough cut of &quot;Dune&quot; without post-production effects ran over four hours long, but Lynch&#x27;s intended cut of the film (as reflected in the seventh and final draft of the script) was almost three hours long. Universal and the film&#x27;s financiers expected a standard, two-hour cut of the film. Dino De Laurentiis, his daughter Raffaella, and Lynch excised numerous scenes, filmed new scenes that simplified or concentrated plot elements, and added voice-over narrations, plus a new introduction by Virginia Madsen. Contrary to rumor, Lynch made no other version than the theatrical cut.

====Versions====
A television version was aired in 1988 in two parts totaling 186 minutes; it replaced Madsen&#x27;s opening monolog with a much longer description of the setting that used concept art stills. Lynch disavowed this version and had his name removed from the credits. Alan Smithee was credited, a pseudonym used by directors who wish to disavow a film. The extended and television versions additionally credit writer Lynch as Judas Booth. This version (without recap and second credit roll) has previously been released on DVD as &quot;Dune: Extended Edition&quot;.

Several longer versions have been spliced together, particularly for two other versions, one for San Francisco station KTVU, and the other a 178-minute fan edit from scratch by SpiceDiver. The latter cut was officially released by Koch Films (on behalf of current international rights holder Lionsgate) on a deluxe 4K/Blu-ray box set released in Germany in 2021. The KTVU and SpiceDiver versions combine footage from the theatrical and television versions, and downplay the repeated footage in the TV cut. While working on &quot;A Masterpiece In Disarray&quot;, Max Evry discovered a never before-seen deleted scene which was released in restored form in March 2024. The author also reconstructed the film&#x27;s originally planned ending which is more in line with the source text.

Although Universal had approached Lynch for a possible director&#x27;s cut prior to the director&#x27;s death in 2025, Lynch had declined every offer and preferred not to discuss &quot;Dune&quot; in interviews. In 2022, though, during an interview about the remaster of his film &quot;Inland Empire&quot; (2006), he admitted to the surprised interviewer that he was interested in the idea. He offered the caveat that he did not believe it would ever happen, nor that anything in the unused footage would satisfy him enough for a director&#x27;s cut, as he said he was &quot;selling out&quot; during production. Nevertheless, he said enough time had passed that he was at least curious to take another look at the footage.

===Canceled sequels===
When production started, it was anticipated for the film to launch a &quot;Dune&quot; franchise, and plans had been made to film two sequels back-to-back. Many of the props were put into storage after the completion of production in anticipation of future use, MacLachlan had signed for a two-film deal, and Lynch had begun writing a screenplay for the second film. Once &quot;Dune&quot; was released and failed at the box office, the sequel plans were canceled. In January 1985 Lynch stated:

In July 2023, writer Max Evry, doing research for his book, &quot;A Masterpiece in Disarray: David Lynch&#x27;s Dune&quot;, on the first film&#x27;s influence, discovered Lynch&#x27;s half-completed draft treatment for the second film at the Frank Herbert Archives at California State University, Fullerton. Lynch was reached for comment in January 2024 and responded through a representative that he recalled beginning work on a script, but much like the first film, did not want to comment further. Based partly on &quot;Dune Messiah&quot;, Evry described the tentatively-titled &quot;Dune II&quot; as having surpassed the novel&#x27;s narrative approach in the screenplay adaption.

==Release==
===Marketing===
&quot;Dune&quot; premiered in Washington, DC, on December 3, 1984, at the Kennedy Center and was released worldwide on December 14. Prerelease publicity was extensive, because it was based on a bestselling novel, and because it was directed by Lynch, who had had success with &quot;Eraserhead&quot; and &quot;The Elephant Man&quot;. Several magazines followed the production and published articles praising the film before its release, all part of the advertising and merchandising of &quot;Dune&quot;, which also included a documentary for television, and items placed in toy stores.

===Home media===
The film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray by Arrow Films in North America and the United Kingdom on August 31, 2021, a few weeks ahead of the release of &quot;Dune&quot;, the 2021 film adaptation of the book. This release only contains the theatrical cut of the film, as Universal removed the extended cut from circulation in North America following the DVD release going out of print and denied Arrow&#x27;s request to license the cut for this release.

Koch Films has also released what fans consider to be a more definitive multi-disc edition (available only in Germany) containing three of the four versions—theatrical, TV, and SpiceDiver fan edit—plus supplemental materials (some not available on the Arrow release) and the CD soundtrack.

==Reception==
===Box office===
The film opened on December 14, 1984, in 915 theaters, and grossed in its opening weekend, ranking number two in the US box office behind &quot;Beverly Hills Cop&quot;. By the end of its run, &quot;Dune&quot; had grossed . It earned theatrical rentals of $37.9 million worldwide. On an estimated production budget of $40–42 million, the film was considered a box-office disappointment. The film later had more success, and has been called the &quot;&quot;Heaven&#x27;s Gate&quot; of science fiction&quot;.

===Critical response===
&quot;Dune&quot; received mostly negative reviews upon release. Roger Ebert gave one star out of four, and wrote: On &quot;At the Movies&quot; with Gene Siskel and Ebert, Siskel began his review: The film was later listed as the worst film of 1984 and the &quot;biggest disappointment of the year&quot; in their &quot;Stinkers of 1984&quot; episode. Other negative reviews focused on the same issues and on the length of the film.

Janet Maslin of &quot;The New York Times&quot; gave &quot;Dune&quot; a negative review of one star out of five. She said, &quot;Several of the characters in &quot;Dune&quot; are psychic, which puts them in the unique position of being able to understand what goes on in the movie&quot; and explained that the plot was &quot;perilously overloaded, as is virtually everything else about it&quot;.

&quot;Variety&quot; gave &quot;Dune&quot; a less negative review, stating &quot;&quot;Dune&quot; is a huge, hollow, imaginative, and cold sci-fi epic. Visually unique and teeming with incident, David Lynch&#x27;s film holds the interest due to its abundant surface attractions, but won&#x27;t, of its own accord, create the sort of fanaticism which has made Frank Herbert&#x27;s 1965 novel one of the all-time favorites in its genre.&quot; They also commented on how &quot;Lynch&#x27;s adaptation covers the entire span of the novel, but simply setting up the various worlds, characters, intrigues, and forces at work requires more than a half-hour of expository screen time.&quot; They did enjoy the cast and said, &quot;Francesca Annis and Jürgen Prochnow make an outstandingly attractive royal couple, Siân Phillips has some mesmerizing moments as a powerful witch, Brad Dourif is effectively loony, and best of all is Kenneth McMillan, whose face is covered with grotesque growths and who floats around like the Blue Meanie come to life.&quot;

Richard Corliss of &quot;Time&quot; gave &quot;Dune&quot; a negative review, stating, &quot;Most sci-fi movies offer escape, a holiday from homework, but &quot;Dune&quot; is as difficult as a final exam. You have to cram for it. [...] MacLachlan, 25, grows impressively in the role; his features, soft and spoiled at the beginning, take on a he-manly glamour once he assumes his mission. [...] The actors seem hypnotized by the spell Lynch has woven around them—especially the lustrous Francesca Annis, as Paul&#x27;s mother, who whispers her lines with the urgency of erotic revelation. In those moments when Annis is onscreen, &quot;Dune&quot; finds the emotional center that has eluded it in its parade of rococo decor and austere special effects. She reminds us of what movies can achieve when they have a heart, as well as a mind.&quot;

Film scholar Robin Wood called &quot;Dune&quot; &quot;the most obscenely homophobic film I have ever seen&quot;—referring to a scene in which Baron Harkonnen sexually assaults and kills a young man by bleeding him to death—charging it with &quot;managing to associate with homosexuality in a single scene physical grossness, moral depravity, violence, and disease&quot;. Dennis Altman suggested that the film showed how &quot;AIDS references began penetrating popular culture&quot; in the 1980s, asking, &quot;Was it just an accident that in the film &quot;Dune&quot; the homosexual villain had suppurating sores on his face?&quot;

Critic and science-fiction writer Harlan Ellison reviewed the film positively. In his 1989 book of film criticism, &quot;Harlan Ellison&#x27;s Watching&quot;, he says that because critics were denied screenings at the last minute after several reschedules, it made the film community feel nervous and negative towards &quot;Dune&quot; before its release. Ellison later said, &quot;It was a book that shouldn&#x27;t have been shot. It was a script that couldn&#x27;t have been written. It was a directorial job that was beyond anyone&#x27;s doing ... and yet the film was made.&quot; Daniel Snyder also praised elements of the film in a 2014 article which called the movie &quot;a deeply flawed work that failed as a commercial enterprise, but still managed to capture and distill essential portions of one of science fiction&#x27;s densest works.&quot; Snyder stated that Lynch&#x27;s &quot;surreal style&quot; created &quot;a world that felt utterly alien [full of] bizarre dream sequences, rife with images of unborn fetuses and shimmering energies, and unsettling scenery like the industrial hell of the Harkonnen homeworld, [making] the fil[m] actually closer to Kubrick (&quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;) than [George] Lucas. It seeks to put the viewer somewhere unfamiliar while hinting at a greater, hidden story.&quot; Snyder praised the production and stated that Herbert had said he was pleased with Lynch&#x27;s film.

Colin Greenland reviewed &quot;Dune&quot; for &quot;Imagine&quot; magazine, and stated, &quot;Anthony Masters&#x27;s magnificent design features none of the gleaming chrome and sterile plastic we expect of space opera: instead, sinister paraphernalia of cast iron and coiled brass, corridors of dark wood and marble, and the sand, the endless sand...&quot;

Science-fiction historian John Clute argued that though Lynch&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot; &quot;spared nothing to achieve its striking visual effects&quot;, the film adaptation &quot;unfortunately—perhaps inevitably—reduced Herbert&#x27;s dense text to a melodrama&quot;.

The few more favorable reviews praised Lynch&#x27;s noir-baroque approach to the film. Others compare it to other Lynch films that are equally inaccessible, such as &quot;Eraserhead&quot;, and assert that to watch it, the viewer must first be aware of the &quot;Dune&quot; universe.

On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, &quot;Dune&quot; has an approval rating of 36% based on 117 reviews, with an average score of 5.6/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;This truncated adaptation of Frank Herbert&#x27;s sci-fi masterwork is too dry to work as grand entertainment, but David Lynch&#x27;s flair for the surreal gives it some spice.&quot; On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 41 out of 100 based on 20 critic reviews, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;.

As a result of its poor commercial and critical reception, all initial plans for &quot;Dune&quot; sequels were canceled. David Lynch reportedly was working on the screenplay for &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; and was hired to direct both proposed second and third &quot;Dune&quot; films. Lynch later said:

In the introduction for his 1985 short story collection &quot;Eye&quot;, author Frank Herbert discussed the film&#x27;s reception and his participation in the production, complimented Lynch, and listed scenes that were shot but left out of the released version. He wrote, &quot;I enjoyed the film even as a cut and I told it as I saw it: What reached the screen is a visual feast that begins as &quot;Dune&quot; begins and you hear my dialogue all through it. [...] I have my quibbles about the film, of course. Paul was a man &quot;playing&quot; god, not a god who could make it rain. [...] It&#x27;s my opinion that David&#x27;s film of &quot;Dune&quot; will also be alive and well long after people have forgotten the potboilers that come out of corporate boardrooms. This is based partly on the reactions of everyone who worked on the film: They were sad to be parting when it was over and glad they had done it. The wrap party was a rare scene of happy nostalgia.&quot;

Alejandro Jodorowsky, who had earlier been disappointed by the collapse of his own attempt to film &quot;Dune&quot;, later said he had been disappointed and jealous when he learned Lynch was making &quot;Dune&quot;, as he believed Lynch was the only other director capable of doing justice to the novel. At first, Jodorowsky refused to see Lynch&#x27;s film, but his sons coerced him. As the film unfolded, Jodorowsky says he became very happy, seeing that it was a &quot;failure&quot;, but that this was certainly the producers&#x27; fault and not Lynch&#x27;s.

===Accolades===
&quot;Dune&quot; was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound (Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Kevin O&#x27;Connell, and Nelson Stoll).

The film won a 1984 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards for Worst Picture.

==Tie-in media==
===Novelization===
An illustrated junior novelization by Joan D. Vinge, commonly published for movies during the 1970s and 1980s, titled &quot;The Dune Storybook&quot; was released in 1984.

===Toys===
A line of &quot;Dune&quot; action figures from toy company LJN was released to lackluster sales in 1984. Styled after Lynch&#x27;s film, the collection includes figures of Paul Atreides, Baron Harkonnen, Feyd-Rautha, Glossu Rabban, Stilgar, and a Sardaukar warrior, plus a poseable sandworm, several vehicles, weapons, and a set of View-Master stereoscope reels. Figures of Gurney and Lady Jessica previewed in LJN&#x27;s catalog were never produced. In 2006, SOTA Toys produced a Baron Harkonnen action figure for their &quot;Now Playing Presents&quot; line. In October 2019, Funko started a &quot;&quot;Dune&quot; Classic&quot; line of POP! vinyl figures, the first of which was Paul in a stillsuit and Feyd in a blue jumpsuit, styled after the 1984 film. An alternate version of Feyd in his blue loincloth was released for the 2019 New York Comic Con.

===Games===

Several &quot;Dune&quot; games have been styled after Lynch&#x27;s film. Parker Brothers released the board game &quot;Dune&quot; in 1984, and a 1997 collectible card game called &quot;Dune&quot; was followed by the role-playing game &quot;&quot; in 2000. The first licensed &quot;Dune&quot; video game is &quot;Dune&quot; (1992) from Cryo Interactive/Virgin Interactive. Its successor, Westwood Studios&#x27;s &quot;Dune II&quot; (1992), is generally credited for popularizing and setting the template for the real-time strategy genre of PC games. This game was followed by &quot;Dune 2000&quot; (1998), a remake of &quot;Dune II&quot; from Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Virgin Interactive. Its sequel is the 3D video game &quot;&quot; (2001) by Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Electronic Arts.

===Comics===
Marvel Comics published an adaptation of the movie written by Ralph Macchio and illustrated by Bill Sienkiewicz.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Dune&quot; at &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot;
* 
* 2012 interview with Kyle MacLachlan about &quot;Dune&quot; and &quot;Blue Velvet&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="24" end="28" title="Epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="29" end="40" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="70" end="81" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="100" end="127" title="Dune (novel)" label="1965 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="131" end="144" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501058" start="167" end="185" title="Churubusco Studios" label="Churubusco Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755129" start="206" end="216" title="Dune (1984 soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="247" end="251" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="278" end="287" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="299" end="312" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q207506" start="322" end="337" title="Kyle MacLachlan" label="Kyle MacLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="359" end="374" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q329734" start="376" end="387" title="Brad Dourif" label="Brad Dourif"/>
<link wikidata="Q345212" start="389" end="403" title="Dean Stockwell" label="Dean Stockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q229784" start="405" end="420" title="Virginia Madsen" label="Virginia Madsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="422" end="433" title="José Ferrer" label="José Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230736" start="435" end="445" title="Sean Young" label="Sean Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q106919" start="447" end="462" title="Silvana Mangano" label="Silvana Mangano"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="464" end="469" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q232874" start="471" end="481" title="Linda Hunt" label="Linda Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="487" end="500" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="656" end="663" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="727" end="734" title="Melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="840" end="849" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="1028" end="1043" title="House Harkonnen" label="House Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="1071" end="1087" title="Kwisatz Haderach" label="Kwisatz Haderach"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="1124" end="1137" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="1272" end="1283" title="Development (film)" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q18971" start="1328" end="1344" title="Arthur P. Jacobs" label="Arthur P. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="1346" end="1366" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="1372" end="1384" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="1472" end="1490" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="1526" end="1540" title="Box-office bomb" label="underperformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="1821" end="1835" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="1979" end="1995" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="1996" end="2006" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="2063" end="2070" title="Melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="2144" end="2157" title="Spacing Guild" label="Spacing Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="2161" end="2171" title="fold space" label="fold space"/>
<link wikidata="Q834826" start="2202" end="2221" title="interstellar travel" label="interstellar travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="2396" end="2403" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="2438" end="2452" title="House Atreides" label="House Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="2537" end="2546" title="House Harkonnen" label="Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="2577" end="2586" title="Sardaukar" label="Sardaukar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="2679" end="2691" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="2710" end="2728" title="Duke Leto Atreides" label="Duke Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="2751" end="2764" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960291" start="2863" end="2879" title="breeding program" label="breeding program"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="2895" end="2911" title="Kwisatz Haderach" label="Kwisatz Haderach"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="3067" end="3080" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469721" start="3100" end="3122" title="Gaius Helen Mohiam" label="Reverend Mother Mohiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="3228" end="3235" title="Caladan" label="Caladan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037127" start="3258" end="3271" title="desert planet" label="desert planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="3294" end="3303" title="Sandworm (Dune)" label="sandworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="3339" end="3345" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q911563" start="3411" end="3423" title="Duncan Idaho" label="Duncan Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3725" end="3740" title="Wellington Yueh" label="Wellington Yueh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="3904" end="3919" title="Vladimir Harkonnen" label="Baron Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="3927" end="3933" title="Mentat" label="Mentat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="3934" end="3948" title="Piter De Vries" label="Piter De Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="4267" end="4273" title="sietch" label="sietch"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="4314" end="4327" title="Muad&amp;#x27;Dib" label="Muad&amp;#x27;Dib"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="4417" end="4433" title="Weirding Modules" label="Weirding Modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724142" start="4714" end="4719" title="Chani (character)" label="Chani"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="4788" end="4801" title="Water of Life (Dune)" label="Water of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706099" start="4949" end="4953" title="Alia Atreides" label="Alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076521" start="5221" end="5237" title="psychedelic experience" label="psychedelic trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="5529" end="5564" title="Glossu Rabban" label="Glossu &amp;quot;The Beast&amp;quot; Rabban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468873" start="5979" end="5990" title="Feyd-Rautha" label="Feyd-Rautha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="6242" end="6248" title="Otheym" label="Otheym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="6271" end="6276" title="Jamis (Dune)" label="Jamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="6296" end="6301" title="Harah" label="Harah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220242" start="6380" end="6393" title="Danny Corkill" label="Danny Corkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253643" start="6444" end="6468" title="deleted scene" label="his scenes being deleted"/>
<link wikidata="Q18971" start="6682" end="6698" title="Arthur P. Jacobs" label="Arthur P. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="6712" end="6723" title="film rights" label="film rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="6727" end="6740" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="6765" end="6769" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="6885" end="6895" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="7067" end="7087" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="7157" end="7173" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="7181" end="7191" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q914489" start="7196" end="7201" title="Magma (band)" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q498430" start="7225" end="7242" title="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon" label="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="7279" end="7290" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q309240" start="7292" end="7303" title="Jean Giraud" label="Jean Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q957821" start="7309" end="7319" title="Chris Foss" label="Chris Foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="7374" end="7387" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="7404" end="7416" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="7437" end="7448" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q77035" start="7465" end="7473" title="Udo Kier" label="Udo Kier"/>
<link wikidata="Q187038" start="7493" end="7508" title="David Carradine" label="David Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926091" start="7549" end="7567" title="Brontis Jodorowsky" label="Brontis Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q229232" start="7590" end="7604" title="Gloria Swanson" label="Gloria Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="7945" end="7950" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052318" start="8122" end="8144" title="Jodorowsky&amp;#x27;s Dune" label="Jodorowsky&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="8298" end="8316" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="8595" end="8607" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377710" start="8622" end="8636" title="Rudy Wurlitzer" label="Rudy Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q784812" start="8820" end="8841" title="The Battle of Algiers" label="The Battle of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="8943" end="8955" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246861" start="9351" end="9364" title="Sid Sheinberg" label="Sid Sheinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q304509" start="9379" end="9382" title="MCA Inc." label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="9406" end="9428" title="Universal City Studios" label="Universal City Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q272860" start="9474" end="9490" title="The Elephant Man (film)" label="The Elephant Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q512184" start="9514" end="9537" title="Raffaella De Laurentiis" label="Raffaella De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="9669" end="9687" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22102110" start="9913" end="9925" title="Eric Bergren" label="Eric Bergren"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="10187" end="10197" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="10199" end="10212" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q471068" start="10214" end="10225" title="Lewis Smith (actor)" label="Lewis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q139334" start="10227" end="10240" title="Zach Galligan" label="Zach Galligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q241510" start="10242" end="10255" title="Michael Biehn" label="Michael Biehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="10257" end="10272" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="10277" end="10287" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q714010" start="10421" end="10429" title="Aldo Ray" label="Aldo Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q372311" start="10511" end="10522" title="Glenn Close" label="Glenn Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="10579" end="10599" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q203574" start="10692" end="10710" title="A Room with a View (1985 film)" label="A Room with a View"/>
<link wikidata="Q25540859" start="10836" end="10845" title="Star Wars original trilogy" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501058" start="11021" end="11039" title="Churubusco Studios" label="Churubusco Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043814" start="11448" end="11470" title="Samalayuca Dune Fields" label="Samalayuca Dune Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="11474" end="11487" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="11489" end="11498" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="11801" end="11816" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="12224" end="12234" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123841" start="12553" end="12564" title="concept art" label="concept art"/>
<link wikidata="Q734916" start="12645" end="12657" title="Alan Smithee" label="Alan Smithee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="12803" end="12808" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180914" start="12809" end="12814" title="John Wilkes Booth" label="Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q766453" start="13063" end="13067" title="KTVU" label="KTVU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066315" start="13096" end="13104" title="fan edit" label="fan edit"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="13236" end="13245" title="Lionsgate" label="Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="13783" end="13802" title="director&amp;#x27;s cut" label="director&amp;#x27;s cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q862058" start="14013" end="14026" title="Inland Empire (film)" label="Inland Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026925" start="15236" end="15274" title="California State University, Fullerton" label="California State University, Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="15491" end="15503" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="15756" end="15770" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11618" start="15964" end="15974" title="Eraserhead" label="Eraserhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q272860" start="15991" end="16007" title="The Elephant Man (film)" label="The Elephant Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="16310" end="16326" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="Ultra HD Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796124" start="16330" end="16341" title="Arrow Films" label="Arrow Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q60834962" start="16444" end="16448" title="Dune (2021 film)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066315" start="16928" end="16936" title="fan edit" label="fan edit"/>
<link wikidata="Q722267" start="17206" end="17223" title="Beverly Hills Cop" label="Beverly Hills Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="17295" end="17312" title="theatrical rental" label="theatrical rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q148204" start="17517" end="17535" title="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate (film)" label="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="17657" end="17668" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812543" start="17716" end="17729" title="At the Movies (1982 TV program)" label="At the Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="17741" end="17752" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="18025" end="18037" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18047" end="18065" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="18427" end="18434" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q27071" start="19437" end="19448" title="Blue Meanies (Yellow Submarine)" label="Blue Meanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38670" start="19470" end="19485" title="Richard Corliss" label="Richard Corliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="19495" end="19499" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872704" start="20326" end="20336" title="Robin Wood (critic)" label="Robin Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="20386" end="20396" title="Homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188947" start="20684" end="20697" title="Dennis Altman" label="Dennis Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="20739" end="20743" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="20980" end="20994" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658305" start="21067" end="21097" title="Harlan Ellison&amp;#x27;s Watching" label="Harlan Ellison&amp;#x27;s Watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="22113" end="22120" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22128" end="22149" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="22162" end="22176" title="George Lucas" label="[George] Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q742918" start="22377" end="22392" title="Colin Greenland" label="Colin Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002663" start="22429" end="22436" title="Imagine (game magazine)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133864" start="22761" end="22771" title="John Clute" label="John Clute"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="23056" end="23060" title="Film noir" label="noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="23061" end="23068" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="23291" end="23308" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="23309" end="23324" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="23662" end="23672" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="23991" end="24003" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422593" start="24170" end="24173" title="Eye (short story collection)" label="Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="25084" end="25104" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="25703" end="25731" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Academy Award for Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911227" start="25733" end="25744" title="Bill Varney" label="Bill Varney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913255" start="25746" end="25758" title="Steve Maslow" label="Steve Maslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378692" start="25760" end="25780" title="Kevin O&amp;#x27;Connell (sound mixer)" label="Kevin O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885904" start="25786" end="25798" title="Nelson Stoll" label="Nelson Stoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q85725516" start="25817" end="25847" title="1984 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards" label="1984 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="25926" end="25938" title="novelization" label="novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q268371" start="25942" end="25955" title="Joan D. Vinge" label="Joan D. Vinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206072" start="26146" end="26149" title="LJN" label="LJN"/>
<link wikidata="Q188057" start="26419" end="26430" title="View-Master" label="View-Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723296" start="26431" end="26442" title="stereoscope" label="stereoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392128" start="26547" end="26556" title="SOTA Toys" label="SOTA Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509271" start="26664" end="26669" title="Funko" label="Funko"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="26778" end="26787" title="stillsuit" label="stillsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723696" start="26922" end="26940" title="New York Comic Con" label="New York Comic Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501379" start="27029" end="27044" title="Parker Brothers" label="Parker Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="27058" end="27068" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041291" start="27075" end="27079" title="Dune (1984 board game)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="27106" end="27127" title="collectible card game" label="collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314932" start="27141" end="27145" title="Dune (card game)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="27172" end="27189" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265597" start="27268" end="27272" title="Dune (video game)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q71930" start="27291" end="27307" title="Cryo Interactive" label="Cryo Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="27308" end="27326" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q267949" start="27343" end="27359" title="Westwood Studios" label="Westwood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="27373" end="27380" title="Dune II" label="Dune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="27467" end="27485" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="27495" end="27502" title="PC game" label="PC game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153468" start="27537" end="27546" title="Dune 2000" label="Dune 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="27563" end="27569" title="video game remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044011" start="27598" end="27615" title="Intelligent Games" label="Intelligent Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="27671" end="27673" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="27743" end="27758" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="27774" end="27787" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287823" start="27836" end="27849" title="Ralph Macchio (editor)" label="Ralph Macchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q862461" start="27869" end="27885" title="Bill Sienkiewicz" label="Bill Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="27969" end="28004" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71416" wikidata="Q190192" url="?curid=71416" title="Dune (novel)">
<text>Dune is a 1965 epic science fiction novel by American author Frank Herbert, originally published as two separate serials (1963–64 novel Dune World and 1965 novel Prophet of Dune) in &quot;Analog&quot; magazine. It tied with Roger Zelazny&#x27;s &quot;This Immortal&quot; for the Hugo Award for Best Novel and won the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1966. It is the first installment of the &quot;Dune Chronicles&quot;. It is one of the world&#x27;s best-selling science fiction novels.

&quot;Dune&quot; is set in the distant future in a feudal interstellar society, descended from terrestrial humans, in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs. It tells the story of young Paul Atreides, whose family accepts the stewardship of the planet Arrakis. While the planet is an inhospitable and sparsely populated desert wasteland, it is the only source of melange, or &quot;spice&quot;, a drug that extends life and enhances mental abilities. Melange is also necessary for space navigation, which requires a kind of multidimensional awareness and foresight that only the drug provides. As melange can only be produced on Arrakis, control of the planet is a coveted and dangerous undertaking. The story explores the multilayered interactions of politics, religion, ecology, technology, and human emotion as the factions of the empire confront each other in a struggle for the control of Arrakis and its spice.

Herbert wrote five sequels: &quot;Dune Messiah&quot;, &quot;Children of Dune&quot;, &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot;, &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot;, and &quot;&quot;. Following Herbert&#x27;s death in 1986, his son Brian Herbert and author Kevin J. Anderson continued the series in over a dozen additional novels since 1999.

Adaptations of the novel to cinema have been notoriously difficult and complicated. In the 1970s, cult filmmaker Alejandro Jodorowsky attempted to make a film based on the novel. After three years of development, the project was canceled due to a constantly growing budget. In 1984, a film adaptation directed by David Lynch was released to mostly negative responses from critics and failure at the box office, although it later developed a cult following. The book was also adapted into the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries &quot;Frank Herbert&#x27;s Dune&quot; and its 2003 sequel, &quot;Frank Herbert&#x27;s Children of Dune&quot; (the latter of which combines the events of &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; and &quot;Children of Dune&quot;). A second film adaptation, directed by Denis Villeneuve, was released on October 21, 2021, to positive reviews. It grossed $434 million worldwide and went on to be nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture, ultimately winning six. Villeneuve&#x27;s film covers roughly the first half of the original novel; a , which covers the second half of the story, was released on March 1, 2024, to critical acclaim and has grossed $711 million worldwide.

The series has also been used as the basis for several board, role-playing, and video games.

Since 2009, the names of planets from the &quot;Dune&quot; novels have been adopted for the real-life nomenclature of plains and other features on Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan.

==Origins==
After his novel &quot;The Dragon in the Sea&quot; was published in 1957, Herbert traveled to Florence, Oregon, at the north end of the Oregon Dunes. Here, the United States Department of Agriculture was attempting to use poverty grasses to stabilize the sand dunes. Herbert claimed in a letter to his literary agent, Lurton Blassingame, that the moving dunes could &quot;swallow whole cities, lakes, rivers, highways.&quot; Herbert&#x27;s article on the dunes, &quot;They Stopped the Moving Sands&quot;, was never completed (and only published decades later in &quot;The Road to Dune&quot;), but its research sparked Herbert&#x27;s interest in ecology and deserts.

Herbert further drew inspiration from Native American mentors like &quot;Indian Henry&quot; (as Herbert referred to the man to his son; likely a Henry Martin of the Hoh tribe) and Howard Hansen. Both Martin and Hansen grew up on the Quileute reservation near Herbert&#x27;s hometown. According to historian Daniel Immerwahr, Hansen regularly shared his writing with Herbert. &quot;White men are eating the earth,&quot; Hansen told Herbert in 1958, after sharing a piece on the effect of logging on the Quileute reservation. &quot;They&#x27;re gonna turn this whole planet into a wasteland, just like North Africa.&quot; The world could become a &quot;big dune,&quot; Herbert responded in agreement.

Herbert was also interested in the idea of the superhero mystique and messiahs. He believed that feudalism was a natural condition humans fell into, where some led and others gave up the responsibility of making decisions and just followed orders. He found that desert environments have historically given birth to several major religions with messianic impulses. He decided to join his interests together so he could play religious and ecological ideas against each other. In addition, he was influenced by the story of T. E. Lawrence and the &quot;messianic overtones&quot; in Lawrence&#x27;s involvement in the Arab Revolt during World War I. In an early version of &quot;Dune&quot;, the hero was actually very similar to Lawrence of Arabia, but Herbert decided the plot was too straightforward and added more layers to his story.

Herbert drew heavy inspiration also from Lesley Blanch&#x27;s &quot;The Sabres of Paradise&quot; (1960), a narrative history recounting a mid-19th century conflict in the Caucasus between rugged caucasian Muslim tribes and the expanding Russian Empire. Language used on both sides of that conflict become terms in Herbert&#x27;s world—&quot;chakobsa&quot;, a Caucasian hunting language, becomes a battle language of humans spread across the galaxy; &quot;kanly&quot;, a word for blood feud in the 19th century Caucasus, represents a feud between Dune&#x27;s noble Houses; &quot;sietch&quot; and &quot;tabir&quot; are both words for camp borrowed from Ukrainian Cossacks (of the Pontic–Caspian steppe).

Herbert also borrowed some lines which Blanch stated were Caucasian proverbs. &quot;To kill with the point lacked artistry&quot;, used by Blanch to describe the Caucasus peoples&#x27; love of swordsmanship, becomes in Dune &quot;Killing with the tip lacks artistry&quot;, a piece of advice given to a young Paul during his training. &quot;Polish comes from the city, wisdom from the hills&quot;, a Caucasian aphorism, turns into a desert expression: &quot;&quot;Polish comes from the cities, wisdom from the desert&quot;.&quot;

Another significant source of inspiration for &quot;Dune&quot; was Herbert&#x27;s experiences with psilocybin and his hobby of cultivating mushrooms, according to mycologist Paul Stamets&#x27;s account of meeting Herbert in the 1980s:Frank went on to tell me that much of the premise of &quot;Dune&quot;—the magic spice (spores) that allowed the bending of space (tripping), the giant sand worms (maggots digesting mushrooms), the eyes of the Freman (the cerulean blue of &quot;Psilocybe&quot; mushrooms), the mysticism of the female spiritual warriors, the Bene Gesserits (influenced by the tales of Maria Sabina and the sacred mushroom cults of Mexico)—came from his perception of the fungal life cycle, and his imagination was stimulated through his experiences with the use of magic mushrooms.Herbert spent the next five years researching, writing, and revising. He published a three-part serial &quot;Dune World&quot; in the monthly &quot;Analog&quot;, from December 1963 to February 1964. The serial was accompanied by several illustrations that were not published again. After an interval of a year, he published the much slower-paced five-part &quot;The Prophet of Dune&quot; in the January–May 1965 issues. The first serial became &quot;Book One: Dune&quot; in the final published &quot;Dune&quot; novel, and the second serial was divided into &quot;Book Two: Muad&#x27;dib&quot; and &quot;Book Three: The Prophet&quot;. The serialized version was expanded, reworked, and submitted to more than twenty publishers, each of whom rejected it. The novel, &quot;Dune&quot;, was finally accepted and published in August 1965 by Chilton Books, a printing house better known for publishing auto repair manuals. Sterling Lanier, an editor at Chilton, had seen Herbert&#x27;s manuscript and had urged his company to take a risk in publishing the book. However, the first printing, priced at , did not sell well and was poorly received by critics as being atypical of science fiction at the time. Chilton considered the publication of &quot;Dune&quot; a write-off and Lanier was fired. Over the course of time, the book gained critical acclaim, and its popularity spread by word-of-mouth to allow Herbert to start working full time on developing the sequels to &quot;Dune&quot;, elements of which were already written alongside &quot;Dune&quot;.

At first Herbert considered using Mars as setting for his novel, but eventually decided to use a fictional planet instead. His son Brian said that &quot;Readers would have too many preconceived ideas about that planet, due to the number of stories that had been written about it.&quot;

Herbert dedicated his work &quot;to the people whose labors go beyond ideas into the realm of &#x27;real materials&#x27;—to the dry-land ecologists, wherever they may be, in whatever time they work, this effort at prediction is dedicated in humility and admiration.&quot;

==Plot==
Duke Leto Atreides of House Atreides, ruler of the ocean world Caladan, is assigned by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV to serve as fief ruler of the planet Arrakis. Although Arrakis is a harsh and inhospitable desert planet, it is of enormous importance because it is the only planetary source of melange, or the &quot;spice&quot;, a unique and incredibly valuable substance that extends human youth, vitality and lifespan. It is also through the consumption of spice that Spacing Guild Navigators are able to effect safe interstellar travel by having limited ability to see the future. The Emperor is jealous of the Duke&#x27;s rising popularity in the Landsraad, the council of Great Houses, and sees House Atreides as a potential future rival and threat. He conspires with House Harkonnen, the former stewards of Arrakis and the longstanding enemies of the Atreides, to destroy Leto and his family after their arrival. Leto is aware his assignment is a trap of some kind but is compelled to obey the Emperor&#x27;s orders anyway.

Leto&#x27;s concubine Lady Jessica is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an exclusively female group that pursues mysterious political aims and wields seemingly superhuman physical and mental abilities, such as the ability to control their bodies down to the cellular level, and also decide the sex of their children. Though Jessica was instructed by the Bene Gesserit to bear a daughter as part of their breeding program, out of love for Leto she bore a son, Paul. From a young age, Paul is trained in warfare by Leto&#x27;s aides, the elite soldiers Duncan Idaho and Gurney Halleck. Thufir Hawat, the Duke&#x27;s Mentat (human computers, able to store vast amounts of data and perform advanced calculations on demand), has instructed Paul in the ways of political intrigue. Jessica has also trained her son in Bene Gesserit disciplines.

Paul&#x27;s prophetic dreams interest Jessica&#x27;s superior, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam. She subjects Paul to a deadly test. She holds a poisoned needle, the gom jabbar, to his neck, ready to strike should he withdraw his hand from a box which creates extreme pain by nerve induction but causes no physical damage. This is to test Paul&#x27;s ability to endure the pain so as not to die on the tip of the needle; to confirm that his human strengths can overcome his animal instincts. Paul passes by enduring greater pain than any woman who has ever been subjected to the test.

Paul and his parents travel with their household to occupy Arrakeen, the capital on Arrakis formerly held by House Harkonnen. Leto learns of the dangers involved in harvesting the spice, which is protected by giant sandworms, and seeks to negotiate with the planet&#x27;s indigenous Fremen people, seeing them as a valuable ally rather than foes. Soon after the Atreides&#x27; arrival, Harkonnen forces attack, joined by the Emperor&#x27;s ferocious Sardaukar troops in disguise. Leto is betrayed by his personal physician, the Suk doctor Wellington Yueh, who delivers a drugged Leto to the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen and his twisted Mentat, Piter De Vries.

Yueh, who performed the kidnapping of Leto under duress, arranges for Jessica and Paul to escape into the desert. Duncan is killed helping them flee, and they are subsequently presumed dead in a sandstorm by the Harkonnens. Yueh replaces one of Leto&#x27;s teeth with a poison gas capsule, hoping Leto can kill the Baron during their encounter. Piter kills Yueh, and the Baron narrowly avoids the gas (due to his defensive shield), which kills Leto, Piter, and the others in the room. The Baron forces Thufir to take over Piter&#x27;s position by dosing him with a long-lasting, fatal poison and threatening to withhold the regular antidote doses unless he obeys. While he follows the Baron&#x27;s orders, Thufir works secretly to undermine the Harkonnens.

Having fled into the desert, Paul is exposed to high concentrations of spice and has visions through which he realizes he has significant powers (as a result of the Bene Gesserit breeding scheme). He foresees potential futures in which he lives among the Fremen before leading them on a holy war across the known universe. Paul reveals that Jessica is the daughter of the Baron, a secret kept from her by the Bene Gesserit.

Paul and Jessica traverse the desert in search of Fremen people. After being captured by a Fremen band, Paul and Jessica agree to teach the Fremen the Bene Gesserit fighting technique known to the Fremen as the &quot;weirding way&quot; and are accepted into the community of Sietch Tabr. Paul proves his manhood by killing a Fremen man named Jamis in a ritualistic crysknife fight and chooses the Fremen name Muad&#x27;Dib, while Jessica opts to undergo a ritual to become a Reverend Mother by drinking the poisonous Water of Life. Pregnant with Leto&#x27;s daughter, she inadvertently causes the unborn child, Alia, to become infused with the same powers in the womb. Paul takes a Fremen lover, Chani, who bears him a son he names Leto.

Two years pass, and Paul&#x27;s powerful prescience manifests, which confirms for the Fremen that he is their prophesied &quot;Lisan al-Gaib&quot; messiah, a legend planted by the Bene Gesserit&#x27;s Missionaria Protectiva. Paul embraces his father&#x27;s belief that the Fremen could be a powerful fighting force to take back Arrakis, but also sees that if he does not control them, their jihad could consume the entire universe. Word of the new Fremen leader reaches both the Baron and the Emperor as spice production falls due to their increasingly destructive raids. The Baron encourages his brutish nephew Glossu &quot;Beast&quot; Rabban to rule with an iron fist, hoping the contrast with his shrewder nephew Feyd-Rautha will make the latter popular among the people of Arrakis when he eventually replaces Rabban. The Emperor, suspecting the Baron of trying to create troops more powerful than the Sardaukar to seize power, sends spies to monitor activity on Arrakis. Thufir uses the opportunity to sow seeds of doubt in the Baron about the Emperor&#x27;s true plans, putting further strain on their alliance.

Gurney, who survived the Harkonnen coup and became a smuggler, reunites with Paul and Jessica after a Fremen raid on his harvester. Believing Jessica to be a traitor, Gurney threatens to kill her but is stopped by Paul. Paul did not foresee Gurney&#x27;s attack and concludes he must increase his prescience by drinking the Water of Life, which is traditionally fatal to males. Paul falls into unconsciousness for three weeks after drinking the poison, but when he wakes, he has clairvoyance across time and space: he &quot;is&quot; the Kwisatz Haderach, the ultimate goal of the Bene Gesserit breeding program.

Paul senses the Emperor and the Baron are amassing fleets around Arrakis to quell the Fremen rebellion, and prepares the Fremen for a major offensive against the Harkonnen troops. The Emperor arrives with the Baron on Arrakis. The Sardaukar seize a Fremen outpost, killing many including young Leto, while Alia is captured and taken to the Emperor. Under cover of an electric storm, which shorts out the Sardaukar&#x27;s defensive shields, Paul and the Fremen, riding giant sandworms, destroy the capital&#x27;s natural rock fortifications with atomics and attack, while Alia assassinates the Baron and escapes. The Fremen quickly defeat both the Harkonnen and Sardaukar troops, killing Rabban in the process. Thufir is coerced to assassinate Paul, who, out of gratitude for the Mentat&#x27;s service, gives him the opportunity to take anything that Thufir wishes of him. Thufir chooses to succumb to the poison instead.

Paul faces the Emperor, threatening to destroy spice production forever unless Shaddam abdicates the throne. Feyd-Rautha attempts to stop Paul by challenging him to a ritualistic knife fight, during which he attempts to cheat and kill Paul with a poison spur in his belt. Paul gains the upper hand and kills him. The Emperor reluctantly cedes the throne to Paul and promises his daughter Princess Irulan&#x27;s hand in marriage. As Paul takes control of the Empire, he realizes that while he has achieved his goal, he is no longer able to stop the Fremen jihad, as their belief in him is too powerful to restrain.

==Characters==

;House Atreides
* Paul Atreides, the Duke&#x27;s son, and main character of the novel
* Duke Leto Atreides, head of House Atreides
* Lady Jessica, Bene Gesserit and concubine of the Duke, mother of Paul and Alia
* Alia Atreides, Paul&#x27;s younger sister
* Thufir Hawat, Mentat and Master of Assassins to House Atreides
* Gurney Halleck, staunchly loyal troubadour warrior of the Atreides
* Duncan Idaho, Swordmaster for House Atreides, graduate of the Ginaz School
* Wellington Yueh, Suk doctor for the Atreides who is secretly working for House Harkonnen
;House Harkonnen
* Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, head of House Harkonnen
* Piter De Vries, twisted Mentat
* Feyd-Rautha, nephew and heir-presumptive of the Baron
* Glossu &quot;Beast&quot; Rabban, also called Rabban Harkonnen, older nephew of the Baron
* Iakin Nefud, Captain of the Guard

;House Corrino
* Shaddam IV, Padishah Emperor of the Known Universe (the Imperium)
* Princess Irulan, Shaddam&#x27;s eldest daughter and heir, also a historian
* Count Fenring, the Emperor&#x27;s closest friend, advisor, and &quot;errand boy&quot;

;Bene Gesserit
* Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, Proctor Superior of the Bene Gesserit school and the Emperor&#x27;s Truthsayer
* Lady Margot Fenring, Bene Gesserit wife of Count Fenring

;Fremen
* The Fremen, native inhabitants of Arrakis
* Stilgar, Fremen leader of Sietch Tabr
* Chani, Paul&#x27;s Fremen concubine and a Sayyadina (female acolyte) of Sietch Tabr
* Dr. Liet-Kynes, the Imperial Planetologist on Arrakis and father of Chani, as well as a revered figure among the Fremen
* The Shadout Mapes, head housekeeper of imperial residence on Arrakis
* Jamis, Fremen killed by Paul in ritual duel
* Harah, wife of Jamis and later servant to Paul who helps raise Alia among the Fremen
* Reverend Mother Ramallo, religious leader of Sietch Tabr

;Smugglers
* Esmar Tuek, a powerful smuggler and the father of Staban Tuek
* Staban Tuek, the son of Esmar Tuek and a powerful smuggler who befriends and takes in Gurney Halleck and his surviving men after the attack on the Atreides

==Themes and influences==
The &quot;Dune&quot; series is a landmark of science fiction. Herbert deliberately suppressed technology in his &quot;Dune&quot; universe so he could address the politics of humanity, rather than the future of humanity&#x27;s technology. For example, a key pre-history event to the novel&#x27;s present is the &quot;Butlerian Jihad&quot;, in which all robots and computers were destroyed, eliminating these common elements to science fiction from the novel as to allow focus on humanity. &quot;Dune&quot; considers the way humans and their institutions might change over time. Director John Harrison, who adapted &quot;Dune&quot; for Syfy&#x27;s 2000 miniseries, called the novel a universal and timeless reflection of &quot;the human condition and its moral dilemmas&quot;, and said:
But &quot;Dune&quot; has also been called a mix of soft and hard science fiction since &quot;the attention to ecology is hard, the anthropology and the psychic abilities are soft.&quot; Hard elements include the ecology of Arrakis, suspensor technology, weapon systems, and ornithopters, while soft elements include issues relating to religion, physical and mental training, cultures, politics, and psychology.

Herbert said Paul&#x27;s messiah figure was inspired by the Arthurian legend, and that the scarcity of water on Arrakis was a metaphor for oil, as well as air and water itself, and for the shortages of resources caused by overpopulation. Novelist Brian Herbert, his son and biographer, wrote:
Each chapter of &quot;Dune&quot; begins with an epigraph excerpted from the fictional writings of the character Princess Irulan. In forms such as diary entries, historical commentary, biography, quotations and philosophy, these writings set tone and provide exposition, context and other details intended to enhance understanding of Herbert&#x27;s complex fictional universe and themes. They act as foreshadowing and invite the reader to keep reading to close the gap between what the epigraph says and what is happening in the main narrative. The epigraphs also give the reader the feeling that the world they are reading about is epically distanced, since Irulan writes about an idealized image of Paul as if he had already passed into memory. Brian Herbert wrote: &quot;Dad told me that you could follow any of the novel&#x27;s layers as you read it, and then start the book all over again, focusing on an entirely different layer. At the end of the book, he intentionally left loose ends and said he did this to send the readers spinning out of the story with bits and pieces of it still clinging to them, so that they would want to go back and read it again.&quot;

===Middle-Eastern and Islamic references===
Due to the similarities between some of Herbert&#x27;s terms and ideas and actual words and concepts in the Arabic language, as well as the series&#x27; &quot;Islamic undertones&quot; and themes, a Middle-Eastern influence on Herbert&#x27;s works has been noted repeatedly. In his descriptions of the Fremen culture and language, Herbert uses both authentic Arabic words and Arabic-sounding words. For example, one of the names for the sandworm, Shai-hulud, is derived from or . The title of the Fremen housekeeper, the Shadout Mapes, is borrowed from the , the Egyptian term for a device used to raise water. In particular, words related to the messianic religion of the Fremen, first implanted by the Bene Gesserit, are taken from Arabic, including Muad&#x27;Dib (from ), Lisan al-Gaib (from ) Usul (from ), Shari-a (from ), Shaitan (from ), and jinn (from ). It is likely Herbert relied on second-hand resources such as phrasebooks and desert adventure stories to find these Arabic words and phrases for the Fremen. They are meaningful and carefully chosen, and help create an &quot;imagined desert culture that resonates with exotic sounds, enigmas, and pseudo-Islamic references&quot; and has a distinctly Bedouin aesthetic.

As a foreigner who adopts the ways of a desert-dwelling people and then leads them in a military capacity, Paul Atreides bears many similarities to the historical T. E. Lawrence. His 1962 biopic &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot; has also been identified as a potential influence. &quot;The Sabres of Paradise&quot; (1960) has also been identified as a potential influence upon &quot;Dune&quot;, with its depiction of Imam Shamil and the Islamic culture of the Caucasus inspiring some of the themes, characters, events and terminology of &quot;Dune&quot;.

The environment of the desert planet Arrakis was primarily inspired by the environments of the Middle East. Similarly Arrakis as a bioregion is presented as a particular kind of political site. Herbert has made it resemble a desertified petrostate area. The Fremen people of Arrakis were influenced by the Bedouin tribes of Arabia, and the Mahdi prophecy originates from Islamic eschatology. Inspiration is also adopted from medieval historian Ibn Khaldun&#x27;s cyclical history and his dynastic concept in North Africa, hinted at by Herbert&#x27;s reference to Khaldun&#x27;s book Kitāb al-ʿibar (&quot;The Book of Lessons&quot;). The fictionalized version of the &quot;Kitab al-ibar&quot; in &quot;Dune&quot; is a combination of a Fremen religious manual and a desert survival book.

==== Additional language and historic influences ====
In addition to Arabic, &quot;Dune&quot; derives words and names from a variety of other languages, including Navajo, Latin, Dutch (&quot;Landsraad&quot;), Romani, Hebrew (&quot;Kefitzat haderech&quot;, in Hebrew &quot;קפיצת הדרך&quot;, meaning contracting of the path), Serbo-Croatian, Nahuatl, Greek, Persian, Sanskrit (&quot;prana bindu&quot;, &quot;prajna&quot;), Russian, Turkish, Finnish, and Old English. &quot;Bene Gesserit&quot; is part of the Latin legal phrase &quot;quamdiu se bene gesserit&quot; &quot;as long as he shall behave himself well&quot; seen in grants of certain offices (such as judgeships) meaning that the appointee shall remain in office so long as he shall not be guilty of abusing it. Some critics miss the connotation of the phrase, misled by the Latin future perfect &quot;gesserit&quot;, taking it over-literally (and adding an unwarranted passive) to mean &quot;it will have been well borne&quot;, an interpretation which is not well supported by the Bene Gesserit doctrine in the story.

Through the inspiration from &quot;The Sabres of Paradise&quot;, there are also allusions to the tsarist-era Russian nobility and Cossacks. Frank Herbert stated that bureaucracy that lasted long enough would become a hereditary nobility, and a significant theme behind the aristocratic families in &quot;Dune&quot; was &quot;aristocratic bureaucracy&quot; which he saw as analogous to the Soviet Union.

===Environmentalism and ecology===
&quot;Dune&quot; has been called the &quot;first planetary ecology novel on a grand scale&quot;. Herbert hoped it would be seen as an &quot;environmental awareness handbook&quot; and said the title was meant to &quot;echo the sound of &#x27;doom&#x27;&quot;. It was reviewed in the best selling countercultural Whole Earth Catalog in 1968 as a &quot;rich re-readable fantasy with clear portrayal of the fierce environment it takes to cohere a community&quot;.

After the publication of &quot;Silent Spring&quot; by Rachel Carson in 1962, science fiction writers began treating the subject of ecological change and its consequences. &quot;Dune&quot; responded in 1965 with its complex descriptions of Arrakis life, from giant sandworms (for whom water is deadly) to smaller, mouse-like life-forms adapted to live with limited water. &quot;Dune&quot; was followed in its creation of complex and unique ecologies by other science fiction books such as &quot;A Door into Ocean&quot; (1986) and &quot;Red Mars&quot; (1992). Environmentalists have pointed out that &quot;Dune&quot; popularity as a novel depicting a planet as a complex—almost living—thing, in combination with the first images of Earth from space being published in the same time period, strongly influenced environmental movements such as the establishment of the international Earth Day.

While the genre of climate fiction was popularized in the 2010s in response to real global climate change, &quot;Dune&quot; as well as other early science fiction works from authors like J. G. Ballard (&quot;The Drowned World&quot;) and Kim Stanley Robinson (the &quot;Mars&quot; trilogy) have retroactively been considered pioneering examples of the genre.

===Declining empires===
The Imperium in &quot;Dune&quot; contains features of various empires in Europe and the Near East, including the Roman Empire, Holy Roman Empire, and Ottoman Empire. Lorenzo DiTommaso compared &quot;Dune&quot; portrayal of the downfall of a galactic empire to Edward Gibbon&#x27;s &quot;Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,&quot; which argues that Christianity allied with the profligacy of the Roman elite led to the fall of Ancient Rome. In &quot;The Articulation of Imperial Decadence and Decline in Epic Science Fiction&quot; (2007), DiTommaso outlines similarities between the two works by highlighting the excesses of the Emperor on his home planet of Kaitain and of the Baron Harkonnen in his palace. The Emperor loses his effectiveness as a ruler through an excess of ceremony and pomp. The hairdressers and attendants he brings with him to Arrakis are even referred to as &quot;parasites&quot;. The Baron Harkonnen is similarly corrupt and materially indulgent. Gibbon&#x27;s &quot;Decline and Fall&quot; partly blames the fall of Rome on the rise of Christianity. Gibbon claimed that this exotic import from a conquered province weakened the soldiers of Rome and left it open to attack. The Emperor&#x27;s Sardaukar fighters are little match for the Fremen of Dune not only because of the Sardaukar&#x27;s overconfidence and the fact that Jessica and Paul have trained the Fremen in their battle tactics, but because of the Fremen&#x27;s capacity for self-sacrifice. The Fremen put the community before themselves in every instance, while the world outside wallows in luxury at the expense of others.

The decline and long peace of the Empire sets the stage for revolution and renewal by genetic mixing of successful and unsuccessful groups through war, a process culminating in the Jihad led by Paul Atreides, described by Frank Herbert as depicting &quot;war as a collective orgasm&quot; (drawing on Norman Walter&#x27;s 1950 &quot;The Sexual Cycle of Human Warfare&quot;), themes that would reappear in &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; Scattering and Leto II&#x27;s all-female Fish Speaker army.

===Gender dynamics===
Gender dynamics are complex in &quot;Dune&quot;. Herbert offers a multi-layered portrayal of gender roles within the context of a feudal, hierarchical society, particularly through the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. Although the Bene Gesserit tend to hold roles that are traditionally associated with women, such as wives, concubines, and mothers, their characters transcend stereotypes as they play politics and pursue long-term strategic goals. Full gender equality is not depicted in &quot;Dune&quot;, but the Bene Gesserit use specialized training and access to high-ranking men to gain agency and power within the constraints of their environment. Their training in prana-bindu allows them to exert control over their minds and bodies, including over pregnancy, and they are skilled in hand-to-hand combat and use of the Voice to command others. Jessica&#x27;s disobedience in bearing a son instead of daughter and training him in the Bene Gesserit Way is a major plot point that sets in motion the events of the novel. By setting up certain women with leaders of certain Houses in the Imperium, the Bene Gesserit can control bloodlines across generations through their secret breeding program. Even within the male-dominated Imperium, then, the Bene Gesserit wield reproductive power and choose which genetic markers to continue into the future.

Reverend Mother Mohiam uses skills in Truthsaying to act as the Emperor&#x27;s official Truthsayer and advisor. Her role can be considered similar to that of abbesses in the medieval Church. Before Princess Irulan appears as a character who agrees to a political marriage with Paul, she acts as a historian who shapes the reader&#x27;s interpretation of the story and Paul&#x27;s legacy due to the excerpts from her writing that frame each chapter.

Among the Fremen, women have roles as mothers and wives and also exercise agency through combat and religious authority. Fremen women and children have a reputation for being just as violent and dangerous as Fremen men. Chani travels with Stilgar in his military party, armed like the others. After becoming Paul&#x27;s concubine, she kills one of the men who comes to challenge him. Alia leads an attack against the Emperor&#x27;s Sardaukar and kills Baron Harkonnen with a gom jabbar. Women also take on the role of religious leaders. Chani is a Sayyadina who presides over tribal rituals such as Paul&#x27;s worm-riding test, and Reverend Mother Ramallo carries the tribe&#x27;s memories and passes them along to Jessica through the Water of Life ceremony. Within the male-led sietches, Fremen women find different avenues of authority.

The gom jabbar test of humanity is administered by the female Bene Gesserit order but rarely to males. The Bene Gesserit have seemingly mastered the unconscious and can play on the unconscious weaknesses of others using the Voice, yet their breeding program seeks after a male Kwisatz Haderach. Their plan is to produce a male who can &quot;possess complete racial memory, both male and female,&quot; and look into the black hole in the collective unconscious that they fear. A central theme of the book is the connection, in Jessica&#x27;s son, of this female aspect with his male aspect. This aligns with concepts in Jungian psychology, which features conscious/unconscious and taking/giving roles associated with males and females, as well as the idea of the collective unconscious. Paul&#x27;s approach to power consistently requires his upbringing under the matriarchal Bene Gesserit, who operate as a long-dominating shadow government behind all of the great houses and their marriages or divisions. He is trained by Jessica in the Bene Gesserit Way, which includes prana-bindu training in nerve and muscle control and precise perception. Paul also receives Mentat training, thus helping prepare him to be a type of androgynous Kwisatz Haderach, a male Reverend Mother.

In a Bene Gesserit test early in the book, it is implied that people are generally &quot;inhuman&quot; in that they irrationally place desire over self-interest and reason. This applies Herbert&#x27;s philosophy that humans are not created equal, while equal justice and equal opportunity are higher ideals than mental, physical, or moral equality.

===Heroism===
Throughout Paul&#x27;s rise to superhuman status, he follows a plotline common to many stories describing the birth of a hero. He has unfortunate circumstances forced onto him. After a long period of hardship and exile, he confronts and defeats the source of evil in his tale. As such, &quot;Dune&quot; is representative of a general trend beginning in 1960s American science fiction in that it features a character who attains godlike status through scientific means. Eventually, Paul Atreides gains a level of omniscience which allows him to take over the planet and the galaxy, and causes the Fremen of Arrakis to worship him like a god. Author Frank Herbert said in 1979, &quot;The bottom line of the &quot;Dune&quot; trilogy is: beware of heroes. Much better to rely on your own judgment, and your own mistakes.&quot; He wrote in 1985, &quot;&quot;Dune&quot; was aimed at this whole idea of the infallible leader because my view of history says that mistakes made by a leader (or made in a leader&#x27;s name) are amplified by the numbers who follow without question.&quot;

Juan A. Prieto-Pablos says Herbert achieves a new typology with Paul&#x27;s superpowers, differentiating the heroes of &quot;Dune&quot; from earlier heroes such as Superman, van Vogt&#x27;s Gilbert Gosseyn and Henry Kuttner&#x27;s telepaths. Unlike previous superheroes who acquire their powers suddenly and accidentally, Paul&#x27;s are the result of &quot;painful and slow personal progress.&quot; And unlike other superheroes of the 1960s—who are the exception among ordinary people in their respective worlds—Herbert&#x27;s characters grow their powers through &quot;the application of mystical philosophies and techniques.&quot; For Herbert, the ordinary person can develop incredible fighting skills (Fremen, Ginaz swordsmen and Sardaukar) or mental abilities (Bene Gesserit, Mentats, Spacing Guild Navigators).

===Zen and religion===
Early in his newspaper career, Herbert was introduced to Zen by two Jungian psychologists, Ralph and Irene Slattery, who &quot;gave a crucial boost to his thinking&quot;. Zen teachings ultimately had &quot;a profound and continuing influence on [Herbert&#x27;s] work&quot;. Throughout the &quot;Dune&quot; series and particularly in &quot;Dune&quot;, Herbert employs concepts and forms borrowed from Zen Buddhism. The Fremen are referred to as Zensunni adherents, and many of Herbert&#x27;s epigraphs are Zen-spirited. In &quot;&quot;Dune&quot; Genesis&quot;, Frank Herbert wrote:
Brian Herbert called the &quot;Dune&quot; universe &quot;a spiritual melting pot&quot;, noting that his father incorporated elements of a variety of religions, including Buddhism, Sufi mysticism and other Islamic belief systems, Catholicism, Protestantism, Judaism, and Hinduism. He added that Frank Herbert&#x27;s fictional future in which &quot;religious beliefs have combined into interesting forms&quot; represents the author&#x27;s solution to eliminating arguments between religions, each of which claimed to have &quot;the one and only revelation.&quot;

===Asimov&#x27;s &quot;Foundation&quot;===
Tim O&#x27;Reilly suggests that Herbert also wrote &quot;Dune&quot; as a counterpoint to Isaac Asimov&#x27;s &quot;Foundation&quot; series. In his monograph on Frank Herbert, O&#x27;Reilly wrote that &quot;&quot;Dune&quot; is clearly a commentary on the &quot;Foundation&quot; trilogy. Herbert has taken a look at the same imaginative situation that provoked Asimov&#x27;s classic—the decay of a galactic empire—and restated it in a way that draws on different assumptions and suggests radically different conclusions. The twist he has introduced into &quot;Dune&quot; is that the Mule, not the Foundation, is his hero.&quot; According to O&#x27;Reilly, Herbert bases the Bene Gesserit on the scientific shamans of the Foundation, though they use biological rather than statistical science. In contrast to the &quot;Foundation&quot; series and its praise of science and rationality, &quot;Dune&quot; proposes that the unconscious and unexpected are actually what are needed for humanity.

Both Herbert and Asimov explore the implications of prescience (i.e., visions of the future) both psychologically and socially. The &quot;Foundation&quot; series deploys a broadly determinist approach to prescient vision rooted in mathematical reasoning on a macroscopic social level. &quot;Dune&quot;, by contrast, invents a biologically rooted power of prescience that becomes determinist when the user actively relies on it to navigate past an undefined threshold of detail. Herbert&#x27;s eugenically produced and spice-enhanced prescience is also personalized to individual actors whose roles in later books constrain each other&#x27;s visions, rendering the future more or less mutable as time progresses. In what might be a comment on &quot;Foundation&quot;, Herbert&#x27;s most powerfully prescient being in &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; laments the boredom engendered by prescience, and values surprises, especially regarding one&#x27;s death, as a psychological necessity.

However, both works contain a similar theme of the restoration of civilization and seem to make the fundamental assumption that &quot;political maneuvering, the need to control material resources, and friendship or mating bonds will be fundamentally the same in the future as they are now.&quot;

==Critical reception==
&quot;Dune&quot; tied with Roger Zelazny&#x27;s &quot;This Immortal&quot; for the Hugo Award in 1966 and won the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel. Reviews of the novel have been largely positive, and &quot;Dune&quot; is considered by some critics to be the best science fiction book ever written. The novel has been translated into dozens of languages, and has sold almost 20 million copies. &quot;Dune&quot; has been regularly cited as one of the world&#x27;s best-selling science fiction novels.

Arthur C. Clarke described &quot;Dune&quot; as &quot;unique&quot; and wrote, &quot;I know nothing comparable to it except &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;.&quot; Robert A. Heinlein described the novel as &quot;powerful, convincing, and most ingenious.&quot; It was described as &quot;one of the monuments of modern science fiction&quot; by the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, and P. Schuyler Miller called &quot;Dune&quot; &quot;one of the landmarks of modern science fiction ... an amazing feat of creation.&quot; &quot;The Washington Post&quot; described it as &quot;a portrayal of an alien society more complete and deeply detailed than any other author in the field has managed ... a story absorbing equally for its action and philosophical vistas ... An astonishing science fiction phenomenon.&quot; Algis Budrys praised &quot;Dune&quot; for the vividness of its imagined setting, saying &quot;The time lives. It breathes, it speaks, and Herbert has smelt it in his nostrils&quot;. He found that the novel, however, &quot;turns flat and tails off at the end. ... [T]ruly effective villains simply simper and melt; fierce men and cunning statesmen and seeresses all bend before this new Messiah&quot;. Budrys faulted in particular Herbert&#x27;s decision to kill Paul&#x27;s infant son offstage, with no apparent emotional impact, saying &quot;you cannot be so busy saving a world that you cannot hear an infant shriek&quot;. After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed &quot;Dune&quot; as among stories &quot;that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical&quot;.

&quot;The Louisville Times&quot; wrote, &quot;Herbert&#x27;s creation of this universe, with its intricate development and analysis of ecology, religion, politics, and philosophy, remains one of the supreme and seminal achievements in science fiction.&quot; Writing for &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, Jon Michaud praised Herbert&#x27;s &quot;clever authorial decision&quot; to exclude robots and computers (&quot;two staples of the genre&quot;) from his fictional universe, but suggested that this may be one explanation why &quot;Dune&quot; lacks &quot;true fandom among science-fiction fans&quot; to the extent that it &quot;has not penetrated popular culture in the way that &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; and &quot;Star Wars&quot; have&quot;. Tamara I. Hladik wrote that the story &quot;crafts a universe where lesser novels promulgate excuses for sequels. All its rich elements are in balance and plausible—not the patchwork confederacy of made-up languages, contrived customs, and meaningless histories that are the hallmark of so many other, lesser novels.&quot;

On November 5, 2019, the &quot;BBC News&quot; listed &quot;Dune&quot; on its list of the 100 most influential novels.

J. R. R. Tolkien refused to review &quot;Dune&quot;, on the grounds that he disliked it &quot;with some intensity&quot; and thus felt it would be unfair to Herbert, another working author, if he gave an honest review of the book.

==First edition prints and manuscripts==
The first edition of &quot;Dune&quot; is one of the most valuable in science fiction book collecting. Copies have been sold for more than $20,000 at auction.

California State University, Fullerton&#x27;s Pollak Library has several of Herbert&#x27;s draft manuscripts of &quot;Dune&quot; and other works, with the author&#x27;s notes, in their Frank Herbert Archives.

==Sequels and prequels==

After &quot;Dune&quot; proved to be a critical and financial success for Herbert, he was able to devote himself full time to writing additional novels in the series. He had already drafted parts of the second and third while writing &quot;Dune&quot;. The series included &quot;Dune Messiah&quot; (1969), &quot;Children of Dune&quot; (1976), &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; (1981), &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot; (1984), and &quot;&quot; (1985), each sequentially continuing on the narrative from &quot;Dune&quot;. Herbert died on February 11, 1986.

Herbert&#x27;s son, Brian Herbert, had found several thousand pages of notes left by his father that outlined ideas for other narratives related to &quot;Dune&quot;. Brian Herbert enlisted author Kevin J. Anderson to help build out prequel novels to the events of &quot;Dune&quot;. Brian Herbert&#x27;s and Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot; prequels first started publication in 1999, and have led to additional stories that take place between those of Frank Herbert&#x27;s books. The notes for what would have been &quot;Dune 7&quot; also enabled them to publish &quot;Hunters of Dune&quot; (2006) and &quot;Sandworms of Dune&quot; (2007), sequels to Frank Herbert&#x27;s final novel &quot;Chapterhouse: Dune&quot;, which complete the chronological progression of his original series, and wrap up storylines that began in &quot;Heretics of Dune&quot;.

==Adaptations==
&quot;Dune&quot; has been considered an &quot;unfilmable&quot; and &quot;uncontainable&quot; work to adapt from novel to film or other visual medium. Described by &quot;Wired&quot;, &quot;It has four appendices and a glossary of its own gibberish, and its action takes place on two planets, one of which is a desert overrun by worms the size of airport runways. Lots of important people die or try to kill each other, and they&#x27;re all tethered to about eight entangled subplots.&quot; There have been several attempts to achieve this difficult conversion with various degrees of success.

===Early stalled attempts===
In 1971, the production company Apjac International (APJ) (headed by Arthur P. Jacobs) optioned the rights to film &quot;Dune&quot;. As Jacobs was busy with other projects, such as the sequel to &quot;Planet of the Apes&quot;, &quot;Dune&quot; was delayed for another year. Jacobs&#x27; first choice for director was David Lean, but he turned down the offer. Charles Jarrott was also considered to direct. Work was also under way on a script while the hunt for a director continued. Initially, the first treatment had been handled by Robert Greenhut, the producer who had lobbied Jacobs to make the movie in the first place, but subsequently Rospo Pallenberg was approached to write the script, with shooting scheduled to begin in 1974. However, Jacobs died in 1973.
In December 1974, a French consortium led by Jean-Paul Gibon purchased the film rights from APJ, with Alejandro Jodorowsky set to direct. In 1975, Jodorowsky planned to film the story as a 3-hour feature, set to star his own son Brontis Jodorowsky in the lead role of Paul Atreides, Salvador Dalí as Shaddam IV, Padishah Emperor, Amanda Lear as Princess Irulan, Orson Welles as Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, Gloria Swanson as Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, David Carradine as Duke Leto Atreides, Geraldine Chaplin as Lady Jessica, Alain Delon as Duncan Idaho, Hervé Villechaize as Gurney Halleck, Udo Kier as Piter De Vries, and Mick Jagger as Feyd-Rautha. It was at first proposed to score the film with original music by Karlheinz Stockhausen, Henry Cow, and Magma; later on, the soundtrack was to be provided by Pink Floyd. Jodorowsky set up a pre-production unit in Paris consisting of Chris Foss, a British artist who designed covers for science fiction periodicals, Jean Giraud (Moebius), a French illustrator who created and also wrote and drew for &quot;Metal Hurlant&quot; magazine, and H. R. Giger. Moebius began designing creatures and characters for the film, while Foss was brought in to design the film&#x27;s space ships and hardware. Giger began designing the Harkonnen Castle based on Moebius&#x27;s storyboards. Dan O&#x27;Bannon was to head the special effects department.

Dalí was cast as the Emperor. Dalí later demanded to be paid $100,000 per hour; Jodorowsky agreed, but tailored Dalí&#x27;s part to be filmed in one hour, drafting plans for other scenes of the emperor to use a mechanical mannequin as substitute for Dalí. According to Giger, Dalí was &quot;later invited to leave the film because of his pro-Franco statements&quot;. Just as the storyboards, designs, and script were finished, the financial backing dried up. Frank Herbert traveled to Europe in 1976 to find that $2 million of the $9.5 million budget had already been spent in pre-production, and that Jodorowsky&#x27;s script would result in a 14-hour movie (&quot;It was the size of a phone book&quot;, Herbert later recalled). Jodorowsky took creative liberties with the source material, but Herbert said that he and Jodorowsky had an amicable relationship. Jodorowsky said in 1985 that he found the &quot;Dune&quot; story mythical and had intended to re-create it rather than adapt the novel; though he had an &quot;enthusiastic admiration&quot; for Herbert, Jodorowsky said he had done everything possible to distance the author and his input from the project. Although Jodorowsky was embittered by the experience, he said the &quot;Dune&quot; project changed his life, and some of the ideas were used in his and Moebius&#x27;s &quot;The Incal&quot;. O&#x27;Bannon entered a psychiatric hospital after the production failed, then worked on 13 scripts, the last of which became &quot;Alien&quot;. A 2013 documentary, &quot;Jodorowsky&#x27;s Dune&quot;, was made about Jodorowsky&#x27;s failed attempt at an adaptation.

In 1976, Dino De Laurentiis acquired the rights from Gibon&#x27;s consortium. De Laurentiis commissioned Herbert to write a new screenplay in 1978; the script Herbert turned in was 175 pages long, the equivalent of nearly three hours of screen time. De Laurentiis then hired director Ridley Scott in 1979, with Rudy Wurlitzer writing the screenplay and H. R. Giger retained from the Jodorowsky production; Scott and Giger had also just worked together on the film &quot;Alien&quot;, after O&#x27;Bannon recommended the artist. Scott intended to split the novel into two movies. He worked on three drafts of the script, using &quot;The Battle of Algiers&quot; as a point of reference, before moving on to direct another science fiction film, &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982). As he recalls, the pre-production process was slow, and finishing the project would have been even more time-intensive:

But after seven months I dropped out of &quot;Dune&quot;, by then Rudy Wurlitzer had come up with a first-draft script which I felt was a decent distillation of Frank Herbert&#x27;s. But I also realised &quot;Dune&quot; was going to take a lot more work—at least two and a half years&#x27; worth. And I didn&#x27;t have the heart to attack that because my older brother Frank unexpectedly died of cancer while I was prepping the De Laurentiis picture. Frankly, that freaked me out. So I went to Dino and told him the &quot;Dune&quot; script was his.
:—From &quot;Ridley Scott: The Making of his Movies&quot; by Paul M. Sammon

A draft of the screenplay for the Scott version was discovered in 2024 in the Wheaton College archives.

===1984 film by David Lynch===

In 1981, the nine-year film rights were set to expire. De Laurentiis re-negotiated the rights from the author, adding to them the rights to the &quot;Dune&quot; sequels (written and unwritten). After seeing &quot;The Elephant Man&quot;, De Laurentiis&#x27; daughter Raffaella decided that David Lynch should direct the movie. Around that time Lynch received several other directing offers, including &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. He agreed to direct &quot;Dune&quot; and write the screenplay even though he had not read the book, was not familiar with the story, or even been interested in science fiction. Lynch worked on the script for six months with Eric Bergren and Christopher De Vore. The team yielded two drafts of the script before it split over creative differences. Lynch would subsequently work on five more drafts. Production of the work was troubled by problems at the Mexican studio and hampering the film&#x27;s timeline. Lynch ended up producing a nearly three-hour long film, but at demands from Universal Pictures, the film&#x27;s distributor, he cut it back to about two hours, hastily filming additional scenes to make up for some of the cut footage.

This first film of &quot;Dune&quot;, directed by Lynch, was released in 1984, nearly 20 years after the book&#x27;s publication. Though Herbert said the book&#x27;s depth and symbolism seemed to intimidate many filmmakers, he was pleased with the film, saying that &quot;They&#x27;ve got it. It begins as &quot;Dune&quot; does. And I hear my dialogue all the way through. There are some interpretations and liberties, but you&#x27;re gonna come out knowing you&#x27;ve seen &quot;Dune&quot;.&quot; Reviews of the film were negative, saying that it was incomprehensible to those unfamiliar with the book, and that fans would be disappointed by the way it strayed from the book&#x27;s plot. Upon release for television and other forms of home media, Universal opted to reintroduce much of the footage that Lynch had cut, creating an over-three-hour long version with extensive monologue exposition. Lynch was extremely displeased with this move, and demanded that Universal replace his name on these cuts with the pseudonym &quot;Alan Smithee&quot;, and has generally distanced himself from the film since.

===2000 miniseries by John Harrison===

In 2000, John Harrison adapted the novel into &quot;Frank Herbert&#x27;s Dune&quot;, a miniseries that premiered on the Sci-Fi Channel. As of 2004, the miniseries was one of the three highest-rated programs broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel.

===Further film attempts===
In 2008, Paramount Pictures announced that they would produce a new film based on the book, with Peter Berg attached to direct. Producer Kevin Misher, who spent a year securing the rights from the Herbert estate, was to be joined by Richard Rubinstein and John Harrison (of both Sci-Fi Channel miniseries) as well as Sarah Aubrey and Mike Messina. The producers stated that they were going for a &quot;faithful adaptation&quot; of the novel and considered &quot;its theme of finite ecological resources particularly timely&quot;. Science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson and Frank Herbert&#x27;s son Brian Herbert, who had together written multiple &quot;Dune&quot; sequels and prequels since 1999, were attached to the project as technical advisors. In October 2009, Berg dropped out of the project, later saying that it &quot;for a variety of reasons wasn&#x27;t the right thing&quot; for him. Subsequently, with a script draft by Joshua Zetumer, Paramount reportedly sought a new director who could do the film for under $175 million. In 2010, Pierre Morel was signed on to direct, with screenwriter Chase Palmer incorporating Morel&#x27;s vision of the project into Zetumer&#x27;s original draft. By November 2010, Morel left the project. Paramount finally dropped plans for a remake in March 2011.

===Films by Denis Villeneuve===

In November 2016, Legendary Entertainment acquired the film and TV rights for &quot;Dune&quot;. &quot;Variety&quot; reported in December 2016 that Denis Villeneuve was in negotiations to direct the project, which was confirmed in February 2017. In April 2017, Legendary announced that Eric Roth would write the screenplay. Villeneuve explained in March 2018 that his adaptation will be split into two films, with the first installment scheduled to begin production in 2019. Casting includes Timothée Chalamet as Paul Atreides, Dave Bautista as Rabban, Stellan Skarsgård as Baron Harkonnen, Rebecca Ferguson as Lady Jessica, Charlotte Rampling as Reverend Mother Mohiam, Oscar Isaac as Duke Leto Atreides, Zendaya as Chani, Javier Bardem as Stilgar, Josh Brolin as Gurney Halleck, Jason Momoa as Duncan Idaho, David Dastmalchian as Piter De Vries, Chang Chen as Dr. Yueh, and Stephen Henderson as Thufir Hawat. Warner Bros. Pictures distributed the film, which had its initial premiere on September 3, 2021, at the Venice Film Festival, and wide release in both theaters and streaming on HBO Max on October 21, 2021, as part of Warner Bros.&#x27;s approach to handling the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the film industry. The film received &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot; on Metacritic. It has gone on to win multiple awards and was named by the National Board of Review as one of the 10 best films of 2021, as well as the American Film Institute in their annual top 10 list. The film went on to be nominated for ten Academy Awards, winning six, the most wins of the night for any film in contention.

A sequel, &quot;&quot;, was scheduled for release on November 3, 2023, but was released on March 1, 2024, due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. It had its world premiere at the Odeon Luxe Leicester Square, London, on February 15, 2024, and opened in the United States on March 1. It received critical acclaim especially for its visual effects and has grossed over $711 million worldwide, making it the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2024.

=== Audiobooks ===
In 1993, Recorded Books Inc. released a 20-disc audiobook narrated by George Guidall. In 2007, Audio Renaissance released an audio book narrated by Simon Vance with some parts performed by Scott Brick, Orlagh Cassidy, Euan Morton, and other performers.

==Cultural influence==
&quot;Dune&quot; has been widely influential, inspiring numerous novels, music, films, television, games, and comic books. It is considered one of the greatest and most influential science fiction novels of all time, with numerous modern science fiction works such as &quot;Star Wars&quot; owing their existence to &quot; Dune&quot;. &quot; Dune&quot; has also been referenced in numerous other works of popular culture, including &quot;Star Trek&quot;, &quot;Chronicles of Riddick&quot;, &quot;The Kingkiller Chronicle&quot; and &quot;Futurama&quot;. &quot;Dune&quot; was cited as a source of inspiration for Hayao Miyazaki&#x27;s anime film &quot;Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind&quot; (1984) for its post-apocalyptic world.

&quot;Dune&quot; was parodied in 1984&#x27;s &quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Doon&quot; by Ellis Weiner, which William F. Touponce called &quot;something of a tribute to Herbert&#x27;s success on college campuses&quot;, noting that &quot;the only other book to have been so honored is Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;,&quot; which was parodied by &quot;The Harvard Lampoon&quot; in 1969.

===Music===
* In 1977, David Matthews became one of the first artists to dedicate an entire composition to &quot;Dune,&quot; publishing an album of the same name on CTI Records.
* In 1978, French electronic musician Richard Pinhas released the nine-track &quot;Dune&quot;-inspired album &quot;Chronolyse&quot;, which includes the seven-part &quot;Variations sur le thème des Bene Gesserit&quot;.
* In 1979, German electronic music pioneer Klaus Schulze released an LP titled &quot;Dune&quot; featuring motifs and lyrics inspired by the novel.
* A similar musical project, &quot;Visions of Dune&quot;, was released also in 1979 by Zed (a pseudonym of French electronic musician Bernard Sjazner).
* 1981 French zeuhl band Dün released their album &quot;Eros&quot; which was inspired by the Dune novel, also their band name &quot;Dün&quot; was a short form from their temporary name &quot;Dune&quot;.
* Heavy metal band Iron Maiden wrote the song &quot;To Tame a Land&quot; based on the &quot;Dune&quot; story. It appears as the closing track to their 1983 album &quot;Piece of Mind&quot;. The original working title of the song was &quot;Dune&quot;; however, the band was denied permission to use it, with Frank Herbert&#x27;s agents stating &quot;Frank Herbert doesn&#x27;t like rock bands, particularly heavy rock bands, and especially bands like Iron Maiden&quot;.
* &quot;Dune&quot; inspired the German happy hardcore band Dune, who have released several albums with space travel-themed songs.
* The progressive hardcore band Shai Hulud took their name from &quot;Dune&quot;.
* In 1988, New Zealand rock band Shihad chose their name based on &quot;Jihad&quot;, the holy war scene from David Lynch&#x27;s 1984 film.
* &quot;Traveller in Time&quot;, from the 1991 Blind Guardian album &quot;Tales from the Twilight World&quot;, is based mostly on Paul Atreides&#x27; visions of future and past.
* The title of the 1993 Fear Factory album &quot;Fear is The Mindkiller&quot; is a quote from the &quot;litany against fear&quot;.
* The song &quot;Near Fantastica&quot;, from the Matthew Good album &quot;Avalanche&quot;, makes reference to the &quot;litany against fear&quot;, repeating &quot;can&#x27;t feel fear, fear&#x27;s the mind killer&quot; through a section of the song.
* In the Fatboy Slim song &quot;Weapon of Choice&quot;, the line &quot;If you walk without rhythm/You won&#x27;t attract the worm&quot; is a near quotation from the sections of novel in which Stilgar teaches Paul to ride sandworms. Christopher Walken, who would later star in &quot;Dune: Part Two&quot; as Emperor Shaddam IV, appears in the music video.
* &quot;Dune&quot; also inspired the 1999 album &quot;The 2nd Moon&quot; by the German death metal band Golem, which is a concept album about the series.
* The song &quot;The Eyes of Ibad&quot; from Panchiko&#x27;s 2000 EP &quot;D&gt;E&gt;A&gt;T&gt;H&gt;M&gt;E&gt;T&gt;A&gt;L&quot;, takes its name from &quot;Dune&quot;, referencing the blue-in-blue eyes of the Fremen.
* &quot;Dune&quot; influenced Thirty Seconds to Mars on their self-titled debut album.
* The Youngblood Brass Band&#x27;s song &quot;Is an Elegy&quot; on &quot;&quot; references &quot;Muad&#x27;Dib&quot;, &quot;Arrakis&quot; and other elements from the novel.
* The debut album of Canadian musician Grimes, called &quot;Geidi Primes&quot;, is a concept album based on &quot;Dune&quot;.
* In 2015, the Baltimore-based band Tendrills released a psych rock album called &quot;10,191&quot;. The album&#x27;s title, sound, emotionality, and some of its lyrics were inspired by the Dune novels.
* Japanese singer Kenshi Yonezu, released a song titled &quot;Dune&quot;, also known as &quot;Sand Planet&quot;. The song was released on 2017, and it was created using the voice synthesizer Hatsune Miku for her 10th anniversary.
* Sleep&#x27;s 2018 album &quot;The Sciences&quot; features a song, Giza Butler, that references several aspects of &quot;Dune&quot;.
* Tool&#x27;s 2019 album &quot;Fear Inoculum&quot; has a song entitled &quot;Litanie contre la peur (Litany against fear)&quot;.
* &quot;Rare to Wake&quot;, from Shannon Lay&#x27;s album &quot;Geist&quot; (2019), is inspired by &quot;Dune&quot;.
* Heavy Metal band Diamond Head based the song &quot;The Sleeper&quot; and its prelude, both off the album The Coffin Train, on the series.

===Games===

There have been a number of games based on the book, starting with the strategyadventure game &quot;Dune&quot; (1992). The most important game adaptation is &quot;Dune II&quot; (1992), which established the conventions of modern real-time strategy games and is considered to be among the most influential video games of all time.

The online game &quot;Lost Souls&quot; includes &quot;Dune&quot;-derived elements, including sandworms and melange—addiction to which can produce psychic talents. The 2016 game &quot;Enter the Gungeon&quot; features the spice melange as a random item which gives the player progressively stronger abilities and penalties with repeated uses, mirroring the long-term effects melange has on users.

Rick Priestley cites &quot;Dune&quot; as a major influence on his 1987 wargame, &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;.

In 2023, Funcom announced &quot;&quot;, an upcoming massively multiplayer online game set in the universe of &quot;Dune&quot;.

===Space exploration===
The Apollo 15 astronauts named a small crater on Earth&#x27;s Moon after the novel during the 1971 mission, and the name was formally adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1973. Since 2009, the names of planets from the &quot;Dune&quot; novels have been adopted for the real-world nomenclature of plains and other features on Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan, like Arrakis Planitia.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Decker, Kevin S., ed. &quot;Dune and Philosophy: Minds, Monads, and Muad&#x27;Dib&quot;. Hoboken, NJ/Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2023.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Official website for &quot;Dune&quot; and its sequels
* 
* Spark Notes: &quot;Dune&quot;, detailed study guide
* DuneQuotes.com – Collection of quotes from the &quot;Dune&quot; series
* &quot;Dune&quot; by Frank Herbert, reviewed by Ted Gioia (Conceptual Fiction)
* 
* 
*Dune by Frank Herbert – Foreshadowing &amp; Dedication at Fact Behind Fiction
*Frank Herbert by Tim O&#x27;Reilly
*DuneScholar.com – Collection of scholarly essays</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2367164" start="15" end="19" title="Epic (genre)" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="20" end="35" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="61" end="74" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="188" end="194" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="224" end="237" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567510" start="251" end="264" title="This Immortal" label="This Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="279" end="304" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="327" end="354" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="399" end="426" title="Dune (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Dune Chronicles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="547" end="553" title="Feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="659" end="663" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="694" end="707" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="760" end="767" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="871" end="878" title="melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="1444" end="1450" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="1459" end="1471" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q437365" start="1485" end="1501" title="Children of Dune" label="Children of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q401619" start="1515" end="1534" title="God Emperor of Dune" label="God Emperor of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q437353" start="1548" end="1564" title="Heretics of Dune" label="Heretics of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q711137" start="1638" end="1651" title="Brian Herbert" label="Brian Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q339577" start="1663" end="1680" title="Kevin J. Anderson" label="Kevin J. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="1862" end="1882" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1901" end="1907" title="#Early stalled attempts" label="a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="2034" end="2049" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="2062" end="2073" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="2190" end="2204" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="2246" end="2260" title="Syfy" label="Sci-Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q987305" start="2278" end="2303" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072774" start="2337" end="2374" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Children of Dune" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Children of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q60834962" start="2494" end="2509" title="Dune (2021 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="2523" end="2539" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2666" end="2680" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="2692" end="2704" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041291" start="2992" end="3036" title="List of games based on Dune" label="several board, role-playing, and video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="3186" end="3192" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="3205" end="3210" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366944" start="3247" end="3268" title="The Dragon in the Sea" label="The Dragon in the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q862740" start="3318" end="3334" title="Florence, Oregon" label="Florence, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701071" start="3360" end="3372" title="Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area" label="Oregon Dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="3384" end="3423" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235843" start="3446" end="3461" title="poverty grass (disambiguation)" label="poverty grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="3479" end="3489" title="dune" label="sand dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704976" start="3542" end="3560" title="Lurton Blassingame" label="Lurton Blassingame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212482" start="3792" end="3808" title="The Road to Dune" label="The Road to Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3929" end="3944" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623415" start="4056" end="4065" title="Hoh tribe" label="Hoh tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56535" start="4124" end="4132" title="Quileute" label="Quileute"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713876" start="4133" end="4144" title="Quileute Indian Reservation" label="reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64740086" start="4198" end="4214" title="Daniel Immerwahr" label="Daniel Immerwahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="4272" end="4281" title="White people" label="White men"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="4491" end="4503" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="4638" end="4647" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="4648" end="4656" title="Mysticism" label="mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="4661" end="4668" title="messiah" label="messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="4688" end="4697" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="5112" end="5126" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="5205" end="5216" title="Arab Revolt" label="Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5224" end="5235" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q372217" start="5467" end="5480" title="Lesley Blanch" label="Lesley Blanch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966208" start="5533" end="5550" title="narrative history" label="narrative history"/>
<link wikidata="Q382116" start="5581" end="5605" title="Caucasian War" label="conflict in the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5663" end="5677" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817387" start="5767" end="5775" title="chakobsa" label="chakobsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46295" start="5785" end="5794" title="Peoples of the Caucasus" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076173" start="6077" end="6095" title="Ukrainian Cossacks" label="Ukrainian Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="6104" end="6125" title="Pontic–Caspian steppe" label="Pontic–Caspian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="6537" end="6545" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="6757" end="6767" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175" start="6821" end="6831" title="Mycology" label="mycologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q783942" start="6832" end="6844" title="Paul Stamets" label="Paul Stamets"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="6972" end="6977" title="Melange (fictional drug)" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076521" start="7022" end="7030" title="Psychedelic experience" label="tripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="7037" end="7053" title="Sandworm (Dune)" label="giant sand worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q853811" start="7055" end="7061" title="maggot" label="maggot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="7101" end="7107" title="Fremen" label="Freman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313120" start="7113" end="7121" title="cerulean" label="cerulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q850667" start="7130" end="7161" title="Psilocybe" label="&amp;quot;Psilocybe&amp;quot; mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="7216" end="7229" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q442467" start="7259" end="7271" title="María Sabina" label="Maria Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="7439" end="7454" title="Psilocybin mushroom" label="magic mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="7602" end="7608" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099225" start="8289" end="8302" title="Chilton Books" label="Chilton Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345563" start="8370" end="8385" title="Sterling Lanier" label="Sterling Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="9037" end="9041" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="9427" end="9437" title="Ecology" label="ecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="9577" end="9590" title="Leto I Atreides" label="Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="9594" end="9608" title="House Atreides" label="House Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045138" start="9623" end="9634" title="ocean world" label="ocean world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="9663" end="9679" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="9680" end="9690" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="9728" end="9735" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037127" start="9782" end="9795" title="desert planet" label="desert planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q928070" start="9869" end="9876" title="melange (fictional drug)" label="melange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617763" start="10045" end="10058" title="Spacing Guild" label="Spacing Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="10226" end="10235" title="Landsraad" label="Landsraad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="10348" end="10363" title="House Harkonnen" label="House Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="10618" end="10627" title="concubinage" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="10628" end="10640" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="10662" end="10675" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643449" start="10765" end="10775" title="superhuman" label="superhuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="11009" end="11025" title="breeding program (Dune)" label="breeding program"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="11064" end="11068" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q911563" start="11156" end="11168" title="Duncan Idaho" label="Duncan Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q384546" start="11173" end="11187" title="Gurney Halleck" label="Gurney Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="11189" end="11201" title="Thufir Hawat" label="Thufir Hawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="11219" end="11225" title="Mentat" label="Mentat"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="11456" end="11465" title="prophecy" label="prophetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="11511" end="11526" title="Reverend Mother (Dune)" label="Reverend Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469721" start="11527" end="11545" title="Gaius Helen Mohiam" label="Gaius Helen Mohiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="11616" end="11626" title="gom jabbar" label="gom jabbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="12095" end="12103" title="Arrakeen" label="Arrakeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="12251" end="12260" title="sandworm (Dune)" label="sandworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="12319" end="12325" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="12486" end="12495" title="Sardaukar" label="Sardaukar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="12564" end="12574" title="Suk doctor" label="Suk doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="12575" end="12590" title="Wellington Yueh" label="Wellington Yueh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="12633" end="12651" title="Vladimir Harkonnen" label="Vladimir Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="12676" end="12690" title="Piter De Vries" label="Piter De Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827102" start="13738" end="13746" title="holy war" label="holy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="14093" end="14105" title="weirding way" label="weirding way"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="14151" end="14162" title="Sietch Tabr" label="Sietch Tabr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="14241" end="14250" title="crysknife" label="crysknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="14393" end="14406" title="Water of Life (Dune)" label="Water of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706099" start="14487" end="14491" title="Alia Atreides" label="Alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724142" start="14572" end="14577" title="Chani (character)" label="Chani"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="14762" end="14769" title="Mahdi" label="messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="14816" end="14838" title="Missionaria Protectiva" label="Missionaria Protectiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="15006" end="15011" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="15227" end="15258" title="Glossu Rabban" label="Glossu &amp;quot;Beast&amp;quot; Rabban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468873" start="15331" end="15342" title="Feyd-Rautha" label="Feyd-Rautha"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="16270" end="16286" title="Kwisatz Haderach" label="Kwisatz Haderach"/>
<link wikidata="Q639997" start="16891" end="16898" title="Atomics (Dune)" label="atomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407875" start="17656" end="17671" title="Princess Irulan" label="Princess Irulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="17917" end="17930" title="Paul Atreides" label="Paul Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="17992" end="18005" title="Leto I Atreides" label="Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="18015" end="18029" title="House Atreides" label="House Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="18032" end="18044" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="18046" end="18059" title="Bene Gesserit" label="Bene Gesserit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="18064" end="18073" title="Concubinage" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706099" start="18113" end="18126" title="Alia Atreides" label="Alia Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="18157" end="18169" title="Thufir Hawat" label="Thufir Hawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="18171" end="18177" title="Mentat" label="Mentat"/>
<link wikidata="Q384546" start="18222" end="18236" title="Gurney Halleck" label="Gurney Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q911563" start="18291" end="18303" title="Duncan Idaho" label="Duncan Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="18353" end="18365" title="Swordmasters of the Ginaz" label="Ginaz School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="18368" end="18383" title="Wellington Yueh" label="Wellington Yueh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="18385" end="18395" title="Suk School" label="Suk doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="18482" end="18500" title="Vladimir Harkonnen" label="Vladimir Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="18510" end="18525" title="House Harkonnen" label="House Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="18528" end="18542" title="Piter De Vries" label="Piter De Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468873" start="18561" end="18572" title="Feyd-Rautha" label="Feyd-Rautha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="18617" end="18648" title="Glossu Rabban" label="Glossu &amp;quot;Beast&amp;quot; Rabban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="18760" end="18770" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="18772" end="18788" title="Padishah Emperor" label="Padishah Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407875" start="18828" end="18843" title="Princess Irulan" label="Princess Irulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279377" start="18905" end="18918" title="Count Fenring" label="Count Fenring"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="19009" end="19024" title="Reverend Mother (Dune)" label="Reverend Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469721" start="19025" end="19043" title="Gaius Helen Mohiam" label="Gaius Helen Mohiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="19113" end="19123" title="Truthsayer" label="Truthsayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290625" start="19131" end="19145" title="Margot Fenring" label="Margot Fenring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003839" start="19198" end="19204" title="Fremen" label="Fremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="19238" end="19245" title="Stilgar" label="Stilgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="19264" end="19275" title="Sietch Tabr" label="Sietch Tabr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724142" start="19278" end="19283" title="Chani (character)" label="Chani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="19368" end="19378" title="Liet-Kynes" label="Liet-Kynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="19490" end="19503" title="Shadout Mapes" label="Shadout Mapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="19557" end="19562" title="Jamis (Dune)" label="Jamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="19603" end="19608" title="Harah" label="Harah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="19690" end="19713" title="Reverend Mother Ramallo" label="Reverend Mother Ramallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="20053" end="20068" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700383" start="20594" end="20607" title="John Harrison (director)" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="20642" end="20646" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q987305" start="20654" end="20669" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune" label="2000 miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q905770" start="20844" end="20848" title="Soft science fiction" label="soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q725757" start="20853" end="20873" title="hard science fiction" label="hard science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="21265" end="21274" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376358" start="21296" end="21313" title="Water scarcity" label="scarcity of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="21344" end="21347" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="21427" end="21441" title="Human overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q711137" start="21452" end="21465" title="Brian Herbert" label="Brian Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q669777" start="21546" end="21554" title="epigraph (literature)" label="epigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="22821" end="22836" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="22872" end="22879" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452270" start="22880" end="22890" title="Subtext" label="undertones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="22911" end="22925" title="Middle-Eastern" label="Middle-Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="23275" end="23283" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q837176" start="23293" end="23321" title="Shadoof" label="a device used to raise water"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="23924" end="23931" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="24107" end="24121" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="24145" end="24163" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244742" start="24358" end="24369" title="Imam Shamil" label="Imam Shamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="24401" end="24409" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="24592" end="24603" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q101351070" start="24734" end="24744" title="petrostate" label="petrostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="24821" end="24827" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="24837" end="24842" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073559" start="24868" end="24887" title="Islamic eschatology" label="Islamic eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="24941" end="24952" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201198" start="24985" end="25001" title="Asabiyyah" label="dynastic concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="25005" end="25017" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q960651" start="25080" end="25094" title="Kitab al-ibar" label="Kitāb al-ʿibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="25447" end="25453" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="25455" end="25460" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="25462" end="25467" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="25493" end="25499" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="25501" end="25507" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383416" start="25515" end="25532" title="Kefitzat haderech" label="Kefitzat haderech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="25608" end="25622" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="25624" end="25631" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="25633" end="25638" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="25640" end="25647" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="25649" end="25657" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="25705" end="25712" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="25714" end="25721" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="25723" end="25730" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="25736" end="25747" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q971558" start="26469" end="26485" title="Russian nobility" label="Russian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="26490" end="26498" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="26633" end="26645" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26749" end="26761" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="26858" end="26865" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="26939" end="26962" title="Environmentalism" label="environmental awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036192" start="27110" end="27129" title="Whole Earth Catalog" label="Whole Earth Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q591623" start="27291" end="27304" title="Silent Spring" label="Silent Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q100948" start="27314" end="27327" title="Rachel Carson" label="Rachel Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656557" start="27754" end="27771" title="A Door into Ocean" label="A Door into Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q970160" start="27795" end="27803" title="Red Mars" label="Red Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861265" start="27974" end="28006" title="first images of Earth from space" label="first images of Earth from space"/>
<link wikidata="Q124473" start="28139" end="28148" title="Earth Day" label="Earth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635954" start="28170" end="28185" title="climate fiction" label="climate fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="28242" end="28256" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="28338" end="28351" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519711" start="28359" end="28376" title="The Drowned World" label="The Drowned World"/>
<link wikidata="Q130779" start="28388" end="28408" title="Kim Stanley Robinson" label="Kim Stanley Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q970160" start="28414" end="28438" title="Mars trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="28622" end="28631" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="28647" end="28659" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="28661" end="28678" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="28684" end="28698" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="28794" end="28807" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="28821" end="28857" title="Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="28883" end="28895" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="28961" end="28973" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532875" start="30233" end="30247" title="Genetic admixture" label="genetic mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q401619" start="30557" end="30576" title="God Emperor of Dune" label="God Emperor of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="30583" end="30593" title="The Scattering (Dune)" label="Scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165285" start="30624" end="30636" title="Fish Speaker" label="Fish Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="30666" end="30681" title="Gender role" label="Gender dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="32172" end="32178" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q499618" start="33200" end="33213" title="Water of Life (Dune)" label="Water of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="33924" end="33931" title="Carl Jung" label="Jungian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309796" start="34228" end="34245" title="Shadow government (conspiracy)" label="shadow government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542815" start="35033" end="35071" title="monomyth" label="stories describing the birth of a hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="36190" end="36198" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="36200" end="36208" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q957076" start="36216" end="36231" title="Gilbert Gosseyn" label="Gilbert Gosseyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q551710" start="36236" end="36249" title="Henry Kuttner" label="Henry Kuttner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="36925" end="36928" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="36936" end="36943" title="Jungian" label="Jungian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="37268" end="37280" title="Zen Buddhism" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="37312" end="37320" title="Zensunni" label="Zensunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="37619" end="37627" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="37629" end="37643" title="Sufism" label="Sufi mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="37678" end="37689" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="37691" end="37704" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="37706" end="37713" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="37719" end="37727" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="38143" end="38155" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="38163" end="38192" title="Foundation (book series)" label="&amp;quot;Foundation&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="38201" end="38210" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38631" end="38639" title="List of Foundation series characters#The Mule" label="the Mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="40376" end="40389" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567510" start="40403" end="40416" title="This Immortal" label="This Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="40431" end="40441" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="40472" end="40499" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="40853" end="40869" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="40981" end="41002" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="41016" end="41034" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="41204" end="41219" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="41231" end="41249" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="41372" end="41391" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q547414" start="41656" end="41668" title="Algis Budrys" label="Algis Budrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="42328" end="42338" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748854" start="42570" end="42590" title="The Louisville Times" label="The Louisville Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="42840" end="42854" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="43245" end="43266" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="43283" end="43292" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="43666" end="43674" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744564" start="43724" end="43751" title="BBC list of 100 &amp;#x27;most inspiring&amp;#x27; novels" label="100 most influential novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="43754" end="43770" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331189" start="44030" end="44043" title="first edition" label="first edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914943" start="44111" end="44126" title="book collecting" label="book collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026925" start="44185" end="44223" title="California State University, Fullerton" label="California State University, Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="44698" end="44710" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q437365" start="44731" end="44747" title="Children of Dune" label="Children of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q401619" start="44768" end="44787" title="God Emperor of Dune" label="God Emperor of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q437353" start="44808" end="44824" title="Heretics of Dune" label="Heretics of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q711137" start="44989" end="45002" title="Brian Herbert" label="Brian Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q339577" start="45165" end="45182" title="Kevin J. Anderson" label="Kevin J. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="45201" end="45208" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011036" start="45292" end="45317" title="Dune prequel series" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot; prequels"/>
<link wikidata="Q248899" start="45538" end="45553" title="Hunters of Dune" label="Hunters of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q437349" start="45577" end="45594" title="Sandworms of Dune" label="Sandworms of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811956" start="45884" end="45894" title="Unfilmability" label="unfilmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="46007" end="46012" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q18971" start="46529" end="46545" title="Arthur P. Jacobs" label="Arthur P. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="46560" end="46574" title="film rights" label="rights to film"/>
<link wikidata="Q59534" start="46661" end="46679" title="Planet of the Apes (1968 film)" label="Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="46777" end="46787" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q951493" start="46819" end="46834" title="Charles Jarrott" label="Charles Jarrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157353" start="46994" end="47009" title="Robert Greenhut" label="Robert Greenhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442731" start="47102" end="47118" title="Rospo Pallenberg" label="Rospo Pallenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="47329" end="47349" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926091" start="47456" end="47474" title="Brontis Jodorowsky" label="Brontis Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="47510" end="47523" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="47527" end="47537" title="Shaddam IV" label="Shaddam IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q454010" start="47557" end="47568" title="Amanda Lear" label="Amanda Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407875" start="47572" end="47587" title="Princess Irulan" label="Princess Irulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="47589" end="47601" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051419" start="47605" end="47629" title="Baron Vladimir Harkonnen" label="Baron Vladimir Harkonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q229232" start="47631" end="47645" title="Gloria Swanson" label="Gloria Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="47649" end="47664" title="Reverend Mother" label="Reverend Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469721" start="47665" end="47683" title="Gaius Helen Mohiam" label="Gaius Helen Mohiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q187038" start="47685" end="47700" title="David Carradine" label="David Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="47704" end="47722" title="Duke Leto Atreides" label="Duke Leto Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q230636" start="47724" end="47741" title="Geraldine Chaplin" label="Geraldine Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724114" start="47745" end="47757" title="Lady Jessica" label="Lady Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q106529" start="47759" end="47770" title="Alain Delon" label="Alain Delon"/>
<link wikidata="Q911563" start="47774" end="47786" title="Duncan Idaho" label="Duncan Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q954841" start="47788" end="47805" title="Hervé Villechaize" label="Hervé Villechaize"/>
<link wikidata="Q384546" start="47809" end="47823" title="Gurney Halleck" label="Gurney Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q77035" start="47825" end="47833" title="Udo Kier" label="Udo Kier"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="47857" end="47868" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468873" start="47872" end="47883" title="Feyd-Rautha" label="Feyd-Rautha"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="47951" end="47972" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474555" start="47974" end="47983" title="Henry Cow" label="Henry Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q914489" start="47989" end="47994" title="Magma (band)" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="48043" end="48053" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q957821" start="48118" end="48128" title="Chris Foss" label="Chris Foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q309240" start="48200" end="48221" title="Jean Giraud" label="Jean Giraud (Moebius)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503317" start="48290" end="48303" title="Metal Hurlant" label="Metal Hurlant"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="48324" end="48335" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q334667" start="48545" end="48555" title="storyboard" label="storyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q498430" start="48558" end="48575" title="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon" label="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="48963" end="48969" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q92796" start="49960" end="49969" title="The Incal" label="The Incal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="50109" end="50114" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052318" start="50148" end="50170" title="Jodorowsky&amp;#x27;s Dune" label="Jodorowsky&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="50254" end="50272" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="50529" end="50541" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377710" start="50556" end="50570" title="Rudy Wurlitzer" label="Rudy Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q784812" start="50876" end="50897" title="The Battle of Algiers (film)" label="The Battle of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="50992" end="51004" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q747179" start="51845" end="51860" title="Wheaton College (Illinois)" label="Wheaton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q272860" start="52117" end="52133" title="The Elephant Man (film)" label="The Elephant Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q512184" start="52170" end="52179" title="Raffaella De Laurentiis" label="Raffaella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="52193" end="52204" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="52310" end="52328" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22102110" start="52560" end="52572" title="Eric Bergren" label="Eric Bergren"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="52920" end="52938" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="53084" end="53094" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="first film"/>
<link wikidata="Q734916" start="54107" end="54119" title="Alan Smithee" label="Alan Smithee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700383" start="54234" end="54247" title="John Harrison (filmmaker)" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q987305" start="54277" end="54302" title="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="54312" end="54322" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="54345" end="54359" title="Syfy" label="Sci-Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="54503" end="54521" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q183141" start="54591" end="54601" title="Peter Berg" label="Peter Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740222" start="54631" end="54643" title="Kevin Misher" label="Kevin Misher"/>
<link wikidata="Q339577" start="55047" end="55064" title="Kevin J. Anderson" label="Kevin J. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q711137" start="55094" end="55107" title="Brian Herbert" label="Brian Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="55160" end="55166" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="55172" end="55179" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356708" start="55541" end="55553" title="Pierre Morel" label="Pierre Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q621364" start="55849" end="55872" title="Legendary Entertainment" label="Legendary Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="55933" end="55940" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="55978" end="55994" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q942932" start="56116" end="56125" title="Eric Roth" label="Eric Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877770" start="56322" end="56339" title="Timothée Chalamet" label="Timothée Chalamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="56358" end="56371" title="Dave Bautista" label="Dave Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q208667" start="56383" end="56400" title="Stellan Skarsgård" label="Stellan Skarsgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947838" start="56421" end="56437" title="Rebecca Ferguson" label="Rebecca Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q234679" start="56455" end="56473" title="Charlotte Rampling" label="Charlotte Rampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q336788" start="56501" end="56512" title="Oscar Isaac" label="Oscar Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q189489" start="56536" end="56543" title="Zendaya" label="Zendaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q134895" start="56554" end="56567" title="Javier Bardem" label="Javier Bardem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41396" start="56580" end="56591" title="Josh Brolin" label="Josh Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315271" start="56611" end="56622" title="Jason Momoa" label="Jason Momoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203767" start="56640" end="56658" title="David Dastmalchian" label="David Dastmalchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q717432" start="56678" end="56688" title="Chang Chen" label="Chang Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267853" start="56706" end="56723" title="Stephen Henderson (actor)" label="Stephen Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412151" start="56727" end="56739" title="Thufir Hawat" label="Thufir Hawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="56741" end="56762" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="56845" end="56865" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="56918" end="56925" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="57017" end="57034" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="57118" end="57128" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="57189" end="57213" title="National Board of Review" label="National Board of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="57266" end="57289" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="57360" end="57374" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q120637995" start="57562" end="57583" title="2023 SAG-AFTRA strike" label="2023 SAG-AFTRA strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349144" start="57618" end="57645" title="Odeon Luxe Leicester Square" label="Odeon Luxe Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q113367507" start="57843" end="57879" title="2024 in film" label="fourth-highest-grossing film of 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109628" start="57910" end="57924" title="Recorded Books" label="Recorded Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="57949" end="57958" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686499" start="57971" end="57985" title="George Guidall" label="George Guidall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="57996" end="58013" title="Audio Renaissance" label="Audio Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q66572596" start="58049" end="58060" title="Simon Vance" label="Simon Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053543" start="58090" end="58101" title="Scott Brick" label="Scott Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460041" start="58103" end="58117" title="Orlagh Cassidy" label="Orlagh Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405288" start="58119" end="58130" title="Euan Morton" label="Euan Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="58452" end="58461" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="58582" end="58597" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="58615" end="58624" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965349" start="58638" end="58659" title="The Chronicles of Riddick (franchise)" label="Chronicles of Riddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585559" start="58673" end="58697" title="The Kingkiller Chronicle" label="The Kingkiller Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="58714" end="58722" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="58788" end="58802" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="58810" end="58815" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8885676" start="58827" end="58861" title="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)" label="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973968" start="58959" end="58987" title="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Doon" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Doon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366014" start="58997" end="59009" title="Ellis Weiner" label="Ellis Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="59191" end="59198" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="59212" end="59233" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613936" start="59253" end="59265" title="Bored of the Rings" label="was parodied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362081" start="59275" end="59294" title="The Harvard Lampoon" label="The Harvard Lampoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38276538" start="59334" end="59348" title="David Matthews (keyboardist)" label="David Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q507942" start="59476" end="59487" title="CTI Records" label="CTI Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="59507" end="59523" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q775423" start="59527" end="59541" title="Heldon" label="Richard Pinhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168015" start="59750" end="59763" title="Klaus Schulze" label="Klaus Schulze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942212" start="59792" end="59796" title="Dune (Klaus Schulze album)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q196999" start="60020" end="60025" title="zeuhl" label="zeuhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271726" start="60031" end="60034" title="Dün (band)" label="Dün"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395335" start="60062" end="60066" title="Eros (Dün album)" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="60228" end="60239" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q476977" start="60377" end="60390" title="Piece of Mind" label="Piece of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q339906" start="60716" end="60730" title="happy hardcore" label="happy hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265595" start="60736" end="60740" title="Dune (German band)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726843" start="60839" end="60849" title="Shai Hulud (band)" label="Shai Hulud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="60922" end="60928" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q152540" start="61075" end="61089" title="Blind Guardian" label="Blind Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q289883" start="61102" end="61131" title="Tales from the Twilight World" label="Tales from the Twilight World"/>
<link wikidata="Q128010" start="61230" end="61242" title="Fear Factory" label="Fear Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="61310" end="61329" title="litany against fear" label="litany against fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827462" start="61411" end="61420" title="Avalanche (Matthew Good album)" label="Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q641636" start="61457" end="61476" title="litany against fear" label="litany against fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767503" start="61619" end="61635" title="Weapon of Choice (song)" label="Weapon of Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q185051" start="61819" end="61837" title="Christopher Walken" label="Christopher Walken"/>
<link wikidata="Q527484" start="62045" end="62050" title="Golem (band)" label="Golem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="62063" end="62076" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q85352042" start="62140" end="62148" title="Panchiko" label="Panchiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962060" start="62170" end="62216" title="Deathmetal (EP)" label="D&amp;gt;E&amp;gt;A&amp;gt;T&amp;gt;H&amp;gt;M&amp;gt;E&amp;gt;T&amp;gt;A&amp;gt;L"/>
<link wikidata="Q40585" start="62341" end="62363" title="Thirty Seconds to Mars" label="Thirty Seconds to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q224160" start="62373" end="62396" title="30 Seconds to Mars (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432527" start="62404" end="62425" title="Youngblood Brass Band" label="Youngblood Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q939956" start="62495" end="62508" title="Muad&amp;#x27;Dib" label="Muad&amp;#x27;Dib"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="62522" end="62529" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117970" start="62610" end="62616" title="Grimes (musician)" label="Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498611" start="62631" end="62643" title="Geidi Primes" label="Geidi Primes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11604296" start="62918" end="62931" title="Kenshi Yonezu" label="Kenshi Yonezu"/>
<link wikidata="Q552682" start="63091" end="63103" title="Hatsune Miku" label="Hatsune Miku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718244" start="63132" end="63137" title="Sleep (band)" label="Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q52087663" start="63162" end="63174" title="The Sciences (album)" label="The Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="63266" end="63270" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065198" start="63295" end="63308" title="Fear Inoculum" label="Fear Inoculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q87368862" start="63426" end="63437" title="Shannon Lay" label="Shannon Lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="63512" end="63523" title="Heavy metal music" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q552377" start="63529" end="63541" title="Diamond Head (English band)" label="Diamond Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041291" start="63692" end="63715" title="List of games based on Dune" label="games based on the book"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="63735" end="63743" title="Strategy video game" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="63743" end="63757" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265597" start="63764" end="63768" title="Dune (video game)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="63827" end="63834" title="Dune II" label="Dune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="63893" end="63911" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="63969" end="63980" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684255" start="64017" end="64027" title="Lost Souls (online game)" label="Lost Souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q23759338" start="64178" end="64195" title="Enter the Gungeon" label="Enter the Gungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635546" start="64391" end="64405" title="Rick Priestley" label="Rick Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="64462" end="64469" title="wargame" label="wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="64477" end="64493" title="Warhammer 40,000" label="Warhammer 40,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q918638" start="64511" end="64517" title="Funcom" label="Funcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="64554" end="64587" title="massively multiplayer online game" label="massively multiplayer online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="64658" end="64667" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712722" start="64687" end="64699" title="Dune (crater)" label="small crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="64716" end="64720" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="64803" end="64835" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="64993" end="64999" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="65012" end="65017" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q276681" start="65024" end="65040" title="Arrakis Planitia" label="Arrakis Planitia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="71417" wikidata="Q515095" url="?curid=71417" title="Tim Blake Nelson">
<text>Timothy Blake Nelson (born May 11, 1964) is an American actor and script writer. Described as a &quot;modern character actor&quot;, his roles include Delmar O&#x27;Donnell in &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; (2000), Gideon in &quot;Minority Report&quot; (2002), Doctor Steve Pendanski in &quot;Holes&quot; (2003), Doctor Jonathan Jacobo in &quot;Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed&quot; (2004), Danny Dalton Jr. in &quot;Syriana&quot; (2005), Samuel Sterns / The Leader in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Richard Schell in &quot;Lincoln&quot; (2012), the titular character of &quot;The Ballad of Buster Scruggs&quot; (2018) and Henry McCarty in &quot;Old Henry&quot; (2021). He portrayed Wade Tillman / Looking Glass in the HBO limited series &quot;Watchmen&quot; (2019), for which he received a Critics&#x27; Choice Television Awards nomination for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series in 2020.

Nelson&#x27;s directorial credits include &quot;Eye of God&quot; (1997), which was nominated for the Sundance Grand Jury Prize and an Independent Spirit Award; &quot;O&quot; (2001), a modern-day adaptation of &quot;Othello;&quot; and the Holocaust drama &quot;The Grey Zone&quot; (2001). &quot;Eye of God&quot; and &quot;The Grey Zone&quot; were both adapted from Nelson&#x27;s own plays. Nelson has also co-directed music videos for Billy Woods and Kenny Segal including &quot;Babylon by Bus&quot; and &quot;Soft Landing&quot;. He also co-directed the music video for Armand Hammer feat. Pink Siifu&#x27;s &quot;Trauma Mic&quot;.

Nelson recently published his debut novel, &quot;City of Blows&quot; (2023), an epic group portrait of four men grappling for control of a script in a radically changing Hollywood.

==Early life==
Nelson was born to a Jewish family in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the son of Ruth Nelson (&quot;née&quot; Kaiser), a noted Tulsa social activist and philanthropist, and Don Nelson, a geologist and wildcatter. His maternal uncle is businessman George Kaiser.

His maternal grandparents Herman Geo. Kaiser and Kate Kaiser, daughter of businessman Max Samuel, were from Germany, and escaped the Nazis shortly before World War II. They moved to Britain in 1938, where Nelson&#x27;s mother was born, and immigrated to the United States in 1941. His father&#x27;s family were Russian-Jewish emigrants.

Nelson attended the Oklahoma Summer Arts Institute at Quartz Mountain Resort Arts and Conference Center in Lone Wolf, Oklahoma.

Nelson is a 1982 graduate of Holland Hall School in Tulsa, and a graduate of Brown University, where he was a classics major as well as senior orator for his class of 1986. At Brown, he studied under philosopher Martha Nussbaum. He is a member of Phi Beta Kappa society. He won the Workman/Driskoll award for excellence in classical studies. He graduated from Juilliard in 1990, a member of Group 19.

==Career==
Nelson&#x27;s debut play, &quot;Eye of God&quot;, was produced at Seattle Repertory Theatre in 1992. &quot;The Grey Zone&quot; premiered at MCC Theater in New York in 1996, where his 1998 work &quot;Anadarko&quot; was produced. He was a co-star of the sketch comedy show &quot;The Unnaturals&quot;, which ran on HA! (later , and would turn into Comedy Central) between 1989 and 1991, alongside Paul Zaloom, John Mariano and Siobhan Fallon Hogan.

Nelson has appeared as an actor in film, TV and theatre. He had a featured role as Delmar in the film &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; According to directors Joel and Ethan Coen, he was the only one in the cast or crew who had read Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;, a story upon which the film is loosely based. He sang &quot;In the Jailhouse Now&quot; on the film&#x27;s soundtrack (which received a Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 2002). He has had a number of supporting performances in feature films such as &quot;Holes&quot;, &quot;Minority Report&quot;, &quot;Syriana&quot; and &quot;Lincoln&quot;. He also appeared in Marvel Comics adaptations &quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot; and &quot;Fantastic Four&quot;.

Nelson narrated the 2001 audiobook &quot;At the Altar of Speed: The Fast Life and Tragic Death of Dale Earnhardt, Sr&quot;. He appeared on stage extensively off-Broadway in New York at theatres including Manhattan Theater Club, Playwrights Horizons, Manhattan Class Company, Soho Repertory Theater, New York Theatre Workshop, and Central Park&#x27;s Open Air Theater in the Shakespeare plays &quot;Richard III&quot;, &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot;, and &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;.

He has directed film versions of his plays &quot;The Grey Zone&quot; and &quot;Eye of God&quot; (for which he received an Independent Spirit Awards nomination for the Someone to Watch Award), and directed two of his original screenplays: &quot;Kansas&quot; (1998) and &quot;Leaves of Grass&quot; (2009). He directed the film &quot;O&quot;, based on &quot;Othello&quot; and set in a modern-day high school. For &quot;Eye of God&quot;, he received the Tokyo Bronze Prize at the Tokyo International Film Festival (1997) and the American Independent Award at the Seattle International Film Festival (1997); for &quot;O&quot;, the Best Director Award at the Seattle International Film Festival (2001); and for &quot;The Grey Zone&quot;, the National Board of Review&#x27;s Freedom of Expression Award (2002). Holocaust film historian Rich Brownstein, in his 2021 book &quot;Holocaust Cinema Complete: A History and Analysis of 400 Films, with a Teaching Guide,&quot; regards The Grey Zone as the finest Holocaust film ever made. Nelson is on the boards of directors of The Actors Center in New York City and the Soho Rep Theatre.

Nelson guest-starred on the &quot;&quot; season 10 episode &quot;Working Stiffs&quot;. In the episode &quot;My Brother&#x27;s Bomber&quot; (aired September 29, 2015) of the PBS investigative series &quot;Frontline&quot;, he talked about the loss of his friend David Dornstein in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.

In 2018, Nelson played the title character in &quot;The Ballad of Buster Scruggs&quot;, a western anthology film by Joel and Ethan Coen, after receiving the original script 16 years prior, in 2002. The film was released on Netflix on November 16, after a limited theatrical run, and received positive reviews, with many highlighting Nelson&#x27;s performance and his overall segment. He portrayed Ralph Myers in the drama/legal drama &quot;Just Mercy&quot; (2019). In January 2023, he joined the cast of &quot;&quot;, though his role was ultimately cut out of the film.

===Playwright===
Nelson&#x27;s play &quot;Socrates&quot; opened at The Public Theater in 2019, starring Michael Stuhlbarg. It was favorably received by numerous publications, including the &quot;New York Times&quot;.

==Personal life==
Nelson resides in New York City with his wife, Lisa Benavides, and their three sons. One of his sons is Henry Nelson, a film director who directed &quot;Asleep in My Palm&quot;. On May 8, 2009, he was inducted as an honorary member of the University of Tulsa&#x27;s Beta of Oklahoma chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa national collegiate honor society. Nelson currently serves on the Board of Trustees of Bryn Mawr College, the school from which his mother Ruth Nelson graduated in 1958.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
=== Video games ===
=== Music videos ===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q515095" start="0" end="20" title="Tim Blake Nelson" label="Timothy Blake Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q948329" start="109" end="124" title="character actor" label="character actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="181" end="207" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="238" end="253" title="Minority Report (film)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q967018" start="300" end="305" title="Holes (film)" label="Holes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="352" end="384" title="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed" label="Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q687040" start="425" end="432" title="Syriana" label="Syriana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="447" end="473" title="Characters of the Marvel Cinematic Universe: M–Z#Samuel Sterns" label="Samuel Sterns / The Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="481" end="506" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589873" start="508" end="522" title="Richard Schell" label="Richard Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q32433" start="532" end="539" title="Lincoln (film)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q37342034" start="585" end="613" title="The Ballad of Buster Scruggs" label="The Ballad of Buster Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44200" start="631" end="644" title="Henry McCarty" label="Henry McCarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102395" start="654" end="663" title="Old Henry" label="Old Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="727" end="730" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q56153643" start="752" end="760" title="Watchmen (TV series)" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77881738" start="799" end="837" title="10th Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Awards" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002951" start="853" end="892" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series" label="Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q77881738" start="896" end="900" title="25th Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422667" start="951" end="961" title="Eye of God (film)" label="Eye of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598586" start="1004" end="1029" title="Sundance Grand Jury Prize" label="Sundance Grand Jury Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q311836" start="1037" end="1061" title="Independent Spirit Awards" label="Independent Spirit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501773" start="1069" end="1070" title="O (2001 film)" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="1118" end="1125" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="1163" end="1176" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247049" start="1337" end="1348" title="Billy Woods" label="Billy Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995771" start="1353" end="1364" title="Kenny Segal" label="Kenny Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872529" start="1472" end="1485" title="Armand Hammer (music group)" label="Armand Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="1753" end="1759" title="American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="1770" end="1785" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1817" end="1820" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001033" start="1918" end="1928" title="wildcatter" label="wildcatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q557057" start="1964" end="1977" title="George Kaiser" label="George Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913332" start="2066" end="2076" title="Max Samuel" label="Max Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2113" end="2117" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2134" end="2146" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="2291" end="2305" title="Russian Jews" label="Russian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269393" start="2372" end="2421" title="Quartz Mountain Resort Arts and Conference Center" label="Quartz Mountain Resort Arts and Conference Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q654679" start="2425" end="2434" title="Lone Wolf, Oklahoma" label="Lone Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880956" start="2476" end="2495" title="Holland Hall School" label="Holland Hall School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="2524" end="2540" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q235470" start="2659" end="2674" title="Martha Nussbaum" label="Martha Nussbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="2694" end="2708" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="2807" end="2816" title="Juilliard" label="Juilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575474" start="2838" end="2846" title="List of Juilliard School people" label="Group 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442163" start="2926" end="2951" title="Seattle Repertory Theatre" label="Seattle Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="2967" end="2980" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714842" start="3000" end="3011" title="MCC Theater" label="MCC Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636332" start="3172" end="3175" title="Ha! (TV channel)" label="HA!"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="3205" end="3219" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775546" start="3254" end="3265" title="Paul Zaloom" label="Paul Zaloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246726" start="3267" end="3279" title="John Mariano" label="John Mariano"/>
<link wikidata="Q457991" start="3284" end="3304" title="Siobhan Fallon Hogan" label="Siobhan Fallon Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="3415" end="3441" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="3471" end="3490" title="Coen brothers" label="Joel and Ethan Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3545" end="3550" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="3564" end="3571" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012338" start="3639" end="3659" title="In the Jailhouse Now" label="In the Jailhouse Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="3714" end="3748" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q967018" start="3837" end="3842" title="Holes (film)" label="Holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="3856" end="3871" title="Minority Report (film)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q687040" start="3885" end="3892" title="Syriana" label="Syriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32433" start="3909" end="3916" title="Lincoln (film)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="3944" end="3957" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q466611" start="3976" end="3995" title="The Incredible Hulk (film)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16795448" start="4012" end="4026" title="Fantastic Four (2015 film)" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749316" start="4239" end="4261" title="Manhattan Theater Club" label="Manhattan Theater Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q164980" start="4263" end="4283" title="Playwrights Horizons" label="Playwrights Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060845" start="4365" end="4401" title="Delacorte Theater" label="Central Park&amp;#x27;s Open Air Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="4433" end="4444" title="Richard III (play)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="4458" end="4478" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="4496" end="4526" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="4584" end="4597" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422667" start="4614" end="4624" title="Eye of God (film)" label="Eye of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q311836" start="4657" end="4682" title="Independent Spirit Awards" label="Independent Spirit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964555" start="4702" end="4724" title="Someone to Watch Award" label="Someone to Watch Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810793" start="4809" end="4824" title="Leaves of Grass (film)" label="Leaves of Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501773" start="4866" end="4867" title="O (2001 film)" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="4890" end="4897" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5364" end="5379" title="Rich Brownstein" label="Rich Brownstein"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5404" end="5489" title="Holocaust Cinema Complete: A History and Analysis of 400 Films, with a Teaching Guide" label="Holocaust Cinema Complete: A History and Analysis of 400 Films, with a Teaching Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="5505" end="5518" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894569" start="5865" end="5874" title="Frontline (U.S. TV series)" label="Frontline"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="5944" end="5977" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q216045" start="5983" end="5992" title="Lockerbie" label="Lockerbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37342034" start="6057" end="6085" title="The Ballad of Buster Scruggs" label="The Ballad of Buster Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="6103" end="6112" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="6121" end="6140" title="Coen brothers" label="Joel and Ethan Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56419916" start="6445" end="6455" title="Just Mercy" label="Just Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="6643" end="6661" title="The Public Theater" label="The Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q438445" start="6680" end="6697" title="Michael Stuhlbarg" label="Michael Stuhlbarg"/>
<link wikidata="Q127789928" start="6965" end="6982" title="Asleep in My Palm" label="Asleep in My Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848657" start="7051" end="7070" title="University of Tulsa" label="University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="7110" end="7124" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="7212" end="7229" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr College"/>
</links>
</doc>
