<doc id="276436" wikidata="Q208202" url="?curid=276436" title="Law of the European Union">
<text>European Union law is a system of rules operating within the 27 member states of the European Union (EU). It has grown over time since the 1952 founding of the European Coal and Steel Community, to promote peace, social justice, a social market economy with full employment, and environmental protection. The Treaties of the European Union agreed to by member states form its constitutional structure. EU law is interpreted by, and EU case law is created by, the judicial branch, known collectively as the Court of Justice of the European Union.

Legal Acts of the EU are created by a variety of EU legislative procedures involving the popularly elected European Parliament, the Council of the European Union (which represents member governments), the European Commission (a cabinet which is elected jointly by the Council and Parliament) and sometimes the European Council (composed of heads of state). Only the Commission has the right to propose legislation.

Legal acts include regulations, which are automatically enforceable in all member states; directives, which typically become effective by transposition into national law; decisions on specific economic matters such as mergers or prices which are binding on the parties concerned, and non-binding recommendations and opinions. Treaties, regulations, and decisions have direct effect – they become binding without further action, and can be relied upon in lawsuits. EU laws, especially Directives, also have an indirect effect, constraining judicial interpretation of national laws. Failure of a national government to faithfully transpose a directive can result in courts enforcing the directive anyway (depending on the circumstances), or punitive action by the Commission. Implementing and delegated acts allow the Commission to take certain actions within the framework set out by legislation (and oversight by committees of national representatives, the Council, and the Parliament), the equivalent of executive actions and agency rulemaking in other jurisdictions.

New members may join if they agree to follow the rules of the union, and existing states may leave according to their &quot;own constitutional requirements&quot;. The withdrawal of the United Kingdom resulted in a body of retained EU law copied into UK law.

==History==
After the economic and human devastation of World War II, European civil society was determined to create a lasting union to guarantee world peace through economic, social and political integration.

To &quot;save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice.. brought untold sorrow to mankind&quot;, the United Nations Charter was passed in 1945, and the Bretton Woods Conference set up a new system of integrated World Banking, finance and trade. Also, the Council of Europe, formed by the Treaty of London 1949, adopted a European Convention on Human Rights, overseen by a new transnational court in Strasbourg in 1950. Already in 1946, Winston Churchill, who had been defeated as UK Prime Minister in 1945, had called for a &quot;United States of Europe&quot;, though this did not mean the UK would sever its ties to the Commonwealth. In 1950, the French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman proposed that, beginning with integration of French and German coal and steel production, there should be &quot;an organisation open to the participation of the other countries of Europe&quot;, where &quot;solidarity in production&quot; would make war &quot;not merely unthinkable, but materially impossible&quot;. The 1951 Treaty of Paris created the first European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), signed by France, West Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Italy, with Jean Monnet as its president. Its theory was simply that war would be impossibly costly if ownership and production of every country&#x27;s economy was mixed together. It established an Assembly (now the European Parliament) to represent the people, a Council of Ministers for the member states, a Commission as the executive, and a Court of Justice to interpret the law. In the East, the Soviet Union had installed dictatorial governments, controlling East Germany, and the rest of Eastern Europe. Although Stalin died in 1953 and the new general secretary Nikita Khrushchev had denounced him in 1956, Soviet tanks crushed a democratic Hungarian Revolution of 1956, and repressed every other attempt of its people to win democracy and human rights.
In the West, the decision was made through the 1957 Treaty of Rome to launch the first European Economic Community. It shared the Assembly and Court with the Coal and Steel Community, but set up parallel bodies for the Council and Commission. Based on the Spaak Report of 1956, it sought to break down all barriers to trade in a common market for goods, services, labour and capital, and prevent distortion of competition and regulate areas of common interest like agriculture, energy and transport. A separate treaty was signed for a European Atomic Energy Community to manage nuclear production. In 1961 the United Kingdom, Denmark, Ireland and Norway applied for membership only to be vetoed in 1963 by France&#x27;s Charles de Gaulle. Spain also applied and was rejected as it was still led by the Franco dictatorship. The same year, the Court of Justice proclaimed that the Community constituted a &quot;new legal order of international law&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Case 26/62&quot;&gt;&quot;Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen&quot; (1963) Case 26/62&lt;/ref&gt; The Merger Treaty finally placed the ECSC and Euratom within the EEC. Shortly after, de Gaulle boycotted the commission, which he believed was pressing supranationalism too far. The Luxembourg compromise in 1966 agreed that France (or other countries) could veto issues of &quot;very important national interest&quot;, particularly relating to the Common Agricultural Policy, instead of making decisions by &quot;qualified majority&quot;. But after the May 1968 events in France and de Gaulle&#x27;s resignation, the way was free for the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Denmark to join in 1973. Norway had rejected joining in a 1972 referendum, while the UK confirmed its membership in a 1975 referendum.

Aside from the European Economic Community itself, the European continent underwent a profound transition towards democracy. The dictators of Greece and Portugal were deposed in 1974, and Spain&#x27;s dictator died in 1975, enabling their accession in 1981 and 1986. In 1979, the European Parliament had its first direct elections, reflecting a growing consensus that the EEC should be less a union of member states, and more a union of peoples. The 1986 Single European Act increased the number of treaty issues in which qualified majority voting (rather than consensus) would be used to legislate, as a way to accelerate trade integration. The Schengen Agreement of 1985 (not initially signed by Italy, the UK, Ireland, Denmark or Greece) allowed movement of people without any border checks. Meanwhile, in 1987, the Soviet Union&#x27;s Mikhail Gorbachev announced policies of &quot;transparency&quot; and &quot;restructuring&quot; (&quot;glasnost&quot; and &quot;perestroika&quot;). This revealed the depths of corruption and waste. In April 1989, the People&#x27;s Republic of Poland legalised the Solidarity organisation, which captured 99% of available parliamentary seats in June elections. These elections, in which anti-communist candidates won a striking victory, inaugurated a series of peaceful anti-communist revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe that eventually culminated in the fall of communism. In November 1989, protestors in Berlin began taking down the Berlin Wall, which became a symbol of the collapse of the Iron Curtain, with most of Eastern Europe declaring independence and moving to hold democratic elections by 1991.

The Maastricht Treaty renamed the EEC as the &quot;European Union&quot;, and expanded its powers to include a social chapter, set up a European Exchange Rate Mechanism, and limit government spending. The UK initially opted out of the social provisions, and then monetary union after the 1992 sterling crisis (&quot;Black Wednesday&quot;) where speculators bet against the British currency. Sweden, Finland and Austria joined in 1995, but Norway again chose not to do so after its 1994 referendum, instead remaining part of the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) and thus the European Economic Area (EEA), abiding by most EU law but without any voting rights. At the Treaty of Amsterdam, with a new Labour government, the UK joined the social chapter. A newly confident EU then sought to expand. First, the Treaty of Nice made voting weight more proportionate to population. Second, the Euro currency went into circulation in 2002. Third came the accession of Malta, Cyprus, Slovenia, Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania. Fourth, in 2005 a Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe was proposed. This proposed &quot;constitution&quot; was largely symbolic, but was rejected by referendums in France and the Netherlands. Most of its technical provisions were inserted into the Treaty of Lisbon, without the emotive symbols of federalism or the word &quot;constitution&quot;. In the same year, Bulgaria and Romania joined.

During the subprime mortgage crisis and the 2008 financial crisis, European banks that were invested in derivatives were put under severe pressure. British, French, German, and other governments were forced to turn some banks into partially or wholly state-owned banks. Some governments instead guaranteed their banks&#x27; debts. In turn, the European debt crisis developed when international investment withdrew and Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland saw international bond markets charge unsustainably high interest rates on government debt. Eurozone governments and staff of the European Central Bank believed that it was necessary to save their banks by taking over Greek debt, and impose &quot;austerity&quot; and &quot;structural adjustment&quot; measures on debtor states. This exacerbated further contraction in the economies. In 2011 two new treaties, the European Fiscal Compact and European Stability Mechanism were signed among the nineteen Eurozone states. In 2013, Croatia entered the union. However a further crisis was triggered after the UK&#x27;s Conservative government chose to hold a referendum in 2016, and campaigners for &quot;leave&quot; (or &quot;Brexit&quot;) won 51.89 per cent of votes on a 72.2 per cent turnout. This referendum was politically inconclusive given the UK&#x27;s system of Parliamentary sovereignty, with no agreement after the 2017 election, until the 2019 general election brought a Conservative majority with a manifesto commitment to drive through Brexit. The UK left EU membership in February 2020, with uncertain economic, territorial and social consequences.

==Constitutional law==

 Although the European Union does not have a codified constitution, like every political body it has laws which &quot;constitute&quot; its basic governance structure. The EU&#x27;s primary constitutional sources are the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which have been agreed or adhered to among the governments of all 27 member states. The Treaties establish the EU&#x27;s institutions, list their powers and responsibilities, and explain the areas in which the EU can legislate with Directives or Regulations. The European Commission has the right to propose new laws, formally called the right of legislative initiative. During the ordinary legislative procedure, the Council (which are ministers from member state governments) and the European Parliament (elected by citizens) can make amendments and must give their consent for laws to pass.

The Commission oversees departments and various agencies that execute or enforce EU law. The &quot;European Council&quot; (rather than the Council of the European Union, made up of different government Ministers) is composed of the Prime Ministers or executive presidents of the member states. It appoints the Commissioners and the board of the European Central Bank. The European Court of Justice is the supreme judicial body which interprets EU law, and develops it through precedent. The Court can review the legality of the EU institutions&#x27; actions, in compliance with the Treaties. It can also decide upon claims for breach of EU laws from member states and citizens.

===Treaties===

The Treaty on European Union (TEU) and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) are the two main sources of EU law. Representing agreements between all member states, the TEU focuses more on principles of democracy, human rights, and summarises the institutions, while the TFEU expands on all principles and fields of policy in which the EU can legislate. In principle, the EU treaties are like any other international agreement, which will usually be interpreted according to principles codified by the Vienna Convention 1969. It can be amended by unanimous agreement at any time, but TEU itself, in article 48, sets out an amendment procedure through proposals via the Council and a Convention of national Parliament representatives. Under TEU article 5(2), the &quot;principle of conferral&quot; says the EU can do nothing except the things which it has express authority to do. The limits of its competence are governed by the Court of Justice, and the courts and Parliaments of member states.

As the European Union has grown from 6 to 27 member states, a clear procedure for accession of members is set out in TEU article 49. The European Union is only open to a &quot;European&quot; state which respects the principles of &quot;human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law, and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities&quot;. Countries whose territory is wholly outside the European continent cannot therefore apply. Nor can any country without fully democratic political institutions which ensure standards of &quot;pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail&quot;. Article 50 says any member state can withdraw in accord &quot;with its own constitutional requirements&quot;, by negotiated &quot;arrangements for its withdrawal, taking account of the framework for its future relationship with the Union&quot;. This indicates that the EU is not entitled to demand a withdrawal, and that member states should follow constitutional procedures, for example, through Parliament or a codified constitutional document. Once article 50 is triggered, there is a two-year time limit to complete negotiations, a procedure which would leave a seceding member without any bargaining power in negotiations, because the costs of having no trade treaty would be proportionally greater to the individual state than the remaining EU bloc.

Article 7 allows member states to be suspended for a &quot;clear risk of a serious breach&quot; of values in article 2 (for example, democracy, equality, human rights) with a four-fifths vote of the Council of the European Union, and the consent of the Parliament. Within the treaties&#x27; framework, sub-groups of member states may make further rules that only apply to those member states who want them. For example, the Schengen Agreements of 1985 and 1990 allow people to move without any passport or ID checks anywhere in the EU, but did not apply to the UK or Ireland. During the European debt crisis, the Treaty Establishing the European Stability Mechanism 2012 and the Treaty on Stability, Co-ordination and Governance 2012 (the &quot;Fiscal Compact&quot;) were adopted only for member states who had the Euro (i.e. not Denmark, Sweden, the UK, Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania or Bulgaria). This required, among other things, a pledge to balance the government budget and limit structural deficits to 0.5 per cent of GDP, with fines for non-compliance. The jurisdiction for these rules remains with the Court of Justice.

===Executive institutions===
The European Commission is the main executive body of the European Union. Article 17(1) of the Treaty on European Union states the commission should &quot;promote the general interest of the Union&quot; while Article 17(3) adds that Commissioners should be &quot;completely independent&quot; and not &quot;take instructions from any Government&quot;. Under Article 17(2), &quot;Union legislative acts may only be adopted on the basis of a Commission proposal, except where the Treaties provide otherwise&quot;. This means that the commission has a monopoly on initiating the legislative procedure, although the council or Parliament are the &quot;&quot;de facto&quot; catalysts of many legislative initiatives&quot;.
The commission&#x27;s President ( Ursula von der Leyen) sets the agenda for its work. Decisions are taken by a simple majority vote, often through a &quot;written procedure&quot; of circulating the proposal and adopting it if there are no objections. In response to Ireland&#x27;s initial rejection of the Treaty of Lisbon, it was agreed to keep the system of one Commissioner from each of the member states, including the President and the High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy (currently Josep Borrell) The Commissioner President is elected by the European Parliament by an absolute majority of its members, following the parliamentary elections every five years, on the basis of a proposal by the European Council. The latter must take account of the results of the European elections, in which European political parties announce the name of their candidate for this post. Hence, in 2014, Juncker, the candidate of the European People&#x27;s Party which won the most seats in Parliament, was proposed and elected.

The remaining commissioners are appointed by agreement between the president-elect and each national government, and are then, as a block, subject to a qualified majority vote of the council to approve, and majority approval of the Parliament. The Parliament can only approve or reject the whole commission, not individual commissioners but conducts public hearings with each of them prior to its vote, which in practice often triggers changes to individual appointments or portfolios. TFEU art 248 says the president may reshuffle commissioners, though this is uncommon, without member state approval. A proposal that the commissioners be drawn from the elected Parliament, was not adopted in the Treaty of Lisbon, though in practice several invariable are, relinquishing their seat in order to serve. Commissioners have various privileges, such as being exempt from member state taxes (but not EU taxes), and having immunity from prosecution for doing official acts. Commissioners have sometimes been found to have abused their offices, particularly since the Santer Commission was censured by Parliament in 1999, and it eventually resigned due to corruption allegations. This resulted in one main case, &quot;Commission v Edith Cresson&quot; where the European Court of Justice held that a Commissioner giving her dentist a job, for which he was clearly unqualified, did in fact not break any law. By contrast to the ECJ&#x27;s strictly legalistic approach, a Committee of Independent Experts found that a culture had developed where few Commissioners had &#x27;even the slightest sense of responsibility&#x27;. This led to the creation of the European Anti-fraud Office. In 2012, it investigated the Maltese Commissioner for Health, John Dalli, who quickly resigned after allegations that he received a €60m bribe in connection with a Tobacco Products Directive.

Beyond the commission, the European Central Bank has relative executive autonomy in its conduct of monetary policy for the purpose of managing the euro. It has a six-person board appointed by the European Council, on the Council&#x27;s recommendation. The president of the council and a commissioner can sit in on ECB meetings, but do not have voting rights.

===Legislature===
 
While the Commission has a monopoly on initiating legislation, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union have powers of amendment and veto during the legislative process. According to the Treaty on European Union articles 9 and 10, the EU observes &quot;the principle of equality of its citizens&quot; and is meant to be founded on &quot;representative democracy&quot;. In practice, equality and democracy are still in development because the elected representatives in the Parliament cannot initiate legislation against the commission&#x27;s wishes, citizens of smallest countries have greater voting weight in Parliament than citizens of the largest countries, and &quot;qualified majorities&quot; or consensus of the council are required to legislate. This &quot;democratic deficit&quot; has encouraged numerous proposals for reform, and is usually perceived as a hangover from earlier days of integration led by member states. Over time, the Parliament gradually assumed more voice: from being an unelected assembly, to its first direct elections in 1979, to having increasingly more rights in the legislative process. Citizens&#x27; rights are therefore limited compared to the democratic polities within all European member states: under TEU article 11, citizens and associations have the right to publicise their views and the right to submit an initiative that must be considered by the Commission if it has received at least one million signatures. TFEU article 227 contains a further right for citizens to petition the Parliament on issues which affect them.

Parliament elections, take place every five years, and votes for Members of the European Parliament (MEP) in member states must be organised by proportional representation or a single transferable vote. There are 750 MEPs and their numbers are &quot;degressively proportional&quot; according to member state size. This means – although the council is meant to be the body representing member states – in the Parliament citizens of smaller member states have more voice than citizens in larger member states. MEPs divide, as they do in national Parliaments, along political party lines: the conservative European People&#x27;s Party is currently the largest, and the Party of European Socialists leads the opposition. Parties do not receive public funds from the EU, as the Court of Justice held in &quot;Parti écologiste &quot;Les Verts&quot; v European Parliament&quot; that this was entirely an issue to be regulated by the member states. The Parliament&#x27;s powers include calling inquiries into maladministration or appoint an Ombudsman pending any court proceedings. It can require the Commission respond to questions and by a two-thirds majority can censure the whole Commission (as happened to the Santer Commission in 1999). In some cases, the Parliament has explicit consultation rights, which the Commission must genuinely follow. However its participation in the legislative process still remains limited because no member can actually or pass legislation without the Commission and Council, meaning power (&quot;kratia&quot;) is not in the hands of directly elected representatives of the people (&quot;demos&quot;): in the EU it is not yet true that &quot;the administration is in the hands of the many and not of the few&quot;.
The second main legislative body is the Council of the European Union, which is composed of different ministers of the member states. The heads of government of member states also convene a &quot;European Council&quot; (a distinct body) that the TEU article 15 defines as providing the &#x27;necessary impetus for its development and shall define the general political directions and priorities&#x27;. It meets each six months and its President (currently former Belgian Prime Minister Charles Michel) is meant to &#x27;drive forward its work&#x27;, but it does not itself exercise &#x27;legislative functions&#x27;. The Council does this: in effect this is the governments of the member states, but there will be a different minister at each meeting, depending on the topic discussed (e.g. for environmental issues, the member states&#x27; environment ministers attend and vote; for foreign affairs, the foreign ministers, etc.). The minister must have the authority to represent and bind the member states in decisions. When voting takes place it is weighted inversely to member state size, so smaller member states are not dominated by larger member states. In total there are 352 votes, but for most acts there must be a qualified majority vote, if not consensus. TEU article 16(4) and TFEU article 238(3) define this to mean at least 55 per cent of the Council members (not votes) representing 65 per cent of the population of the EU: currently this means around 74 per cent, or 260 of the 352 votes. This is critical during the legislative process.
To make new legislation, TFEU article 294 defines the &quot;ordinary legislative procedure&quot; that applies for most EU acts. The essence is there are three readings, starting with a Commission proposal, where the Parliament must vote by a majority of all MEPs (not just those present) to block or suggest changes, and the Council must vote by qualified majority to approve changes, but by unanimity to block Commission amendment. Where the different institutions cannot agree at any stage, a &quot;Conciliation Committee&quot; is convened, representing MEPs, ministers and the commission to try to get agreement on a joint text: if this works, it will be sent back to the Parliament and Council to approve by absolute and qualified majority. This means, legislation can be blocked by a majority in Parliament, a minority in the council, and a majority in the commission: it is harder to change EU law than for it to stay the same. A different procedure exists for budgets. For &quot;enhanced cooperation&quot; among a sub-set of at least member states, authorisation must be given by the council. Member state governments should be informed by the Commission at the outset before any proposals start the legislative procedure. The EU as a whole can only act within its power set out in the Treaties. TEU articles 4 and 5 state that powers remain with the member states unless they have been conferred, although there is a debate about the &quot;Kompetenz-Kompetenz&quot; question: who ultimately has the &quot;competence&quot; to define the EU&#x27;s &quot;competence&quot;. Many member state courts believe they decide, other member state Parliaments believe they decide, while within the EU, the Court of Justice believes it has the final say.

===Judiciary===
The judiciary of the EU has played an important role in the development of EU law. It interprets the treaties, and has accelerated economic and political integration. Today the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) is the main judicial body, within which there is a higher Court of Justice that deals with cases that contain more public importance, and a General Court that deals with issues of detail but without general importance, and then a separate Court of Auditors. Under the Treaty on European Union article 19(2) there is one judge from each member state in the Court of Justice and General Court (27 on each at present). Judges should &quot;possess the qualifications required for appointment to the highest judicial offices&quot; (or for the General Court, the &quot;ability required for appointment to high judicial office&quot;). A president is elected by the judges for three years. While TEU article 19(3) says the Court of Justice is the ultimate court to interpret questions of EU law, in practice, most EU law is applied by member state courts (e.g. the English Court of Appeal, the German Bundesgerichtshof, the Belgian Cour du travail, etc.). Member state courts can refer questions to the CJEU for a preliminary ruling. The CJEU&#x27;s duty is to &quot;ensure that in the interpretation and application of the Treaties the law is observed&quot;, although realistically it has the ability to expand and develop the law according to the principles it develops consistently with democratic values. Examples of landmark, and frequently controversial judgments, include &quot;Van Gend en Loos&quot; (holding EU law to created a new legal order, and citizens could sue for treaty rights),&lt;ref name=&quot;1963 Case 26/62&quot;&gt;(1963) Case 26/62&lt;/ref&gt; &quot;Mangold v Helm&quot; (establishing equality as a general principle of EU law), and &quot;Kadi v Commission&quot; (confirming international law had to conform with basic principles of EU law). Until 2016, there was the European Union Civil Service Tribunal, which dealt with EU institutions&#x27; staff issues.

The Statute of the Court and TFEU require judges are appointed only if they have no political occupation, with independence &quot;beyond doubt&quot;. They are selected for renewable six-year terms by &quot;common accord&quot; of governments, with the advice of seven EU or member state judges that the Council and Parliament selects. The Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, article 11, says the court is usually organised into chambers of 3 or 5 judges each. A &quot;grand chamber&quot; of 15 more senior judges sit on questions of &quot;difficulty or importance&quot;, or those requested by member states. The court&#x27;s president and vice-president are elected by other judges for renewable 3-year terms by secret ballot. Judges can only be dismissed if all other judges and Advocates General unanimously agree. Advocates General are appointed by the court to give reasoned submissions on cases, especially involving new points of law. Unlike judges on the Court, they write opinions as themselves, rather than collectively, and often with a command of prose and reason, and while not binding are often followed in practice. In addition, each judge has secretaries or &quot;referendaires&quot; who research and write. Unlike the UK where judges always write their own opinions, &quot;referendaires&quot; often assist drafting the judgments in the Court of Justice. The Court&#x27;s Translation Directorate will translate every final judgment into the 24 official languages of the European Union. The three main kinds of judgments the Court of Justice gives following (1) preliminary rulings, requested by the courts of member states, (2) enforcement actions, brought by the commission or Member States, against the EU, a member state, or any other party that is alleged to violate EU law, and (3) other direct actions, where the EU or member state is involved as a party to the dispute, and gives final rulings. The Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, modelled on the International Court of Justice, begin with submission of written cases to the court, followed by a short oral hearing. In each case a judge is designated to actively manage the hearing (called a &quot;rapporteur&quot;) and draft the judgment (probably with help from &quot;referendaires&quot;). The court always deliberates and votes before the final opinion is written and published. Cases in the General Court can be appealed to the Court of Justice on points of law. While there is no formal appeal procedure from the Court of Justice, in practice its actions are subject to scrutiny by both the supreme courts of member states and the European Court of Human Rights, even if the final balance of power is unresolved.

===Conflict of laws===
Since its founding, the EU has operated among an increasing plurality of member state and globalising legal systems. This has meant both the European Court of Justice and the supreme courts of the states have had to develop principles to resolve conflicts of laws between different systems. Within the EU itself, the Court of Justice&#x27;s view is that if Union law conflicts with a provision of State law, then Union law has primacy. In the first major case in 1964, &quot;Costa v ENEL&quot;, a Milanese lawyer, and former shareholder of an energy company, named Mr Costa refused to pay his electricity bill to Enel, as a protest against the Nationalization of the Italian energy corporations. He claimed the Italian nationalisation law conflicted with the Treaty of Rome, and requested a reference be made to both the Italian Constitutional Court and the Court of Justice under TFEU article 267. The Italian Constitutional Court gave an opinion that because the nationalisation law was from 1962, and the treaty was in force from 1958, Costa had no claim. By contrast, the Court of Justice held that ultimately the Treaty of Rome in no way prevented energy nationalisation, and in any case under the Treaty provisions only the commission could have brought a claim, not Mr Costa. However, in principle, Mr Costa was entitled to plead that the Treaty conflicted with national law, and the court would have a duty to consider his claim to make a reference if there would be no appeal against its decision. The Court of Justice, repeating its view in &quot;Van Gend en Loos&quot;, said member states &quot;have limited their sovereign rights, albeit within limited fields, and have thus created a body of law which binds both their nationals and themselves&quot; on the &quot;basis of reciprocity&quot;. EU law would not &quot;be overridden by domestic legal provisions, however framed... without the legal basis of the community itself being called into question&quot;. This meant any &quot;subsequent unilateral act&quot; of the member state inapplicable. Similarly, in &quot;Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal SpA&quot;, a company, Simmenthal SpA, claimed that a public health inspection fee under an Italian law of 1970 for importing beef from France to Italy was contrary to two Regulations from 1964 and 1968. In &quot;accordance with the principle of the precedence of Community law&quot;, said the Court of Justice, the &quot;directly applicable measures of the institutions&quot; (such as the Regulations in the case) &quot;render automatically inapplicable any conflicting provision of current national law&quot;. This was necessary to prevent a &quot;corresponding denial&quot; of Treaty &quot;obligations undertaken unconditionally and irrevocably by member states&quot;, that could &quot;imperil the very foundations of the&quot; EU. But despite the views of the Court of Justice, the national courts of member states have not accepted the same analysis.

Generally speaking, while all member states recognise that EU law takes primacy over national law where this agreed in the Treaties, they do not accept that the Court of Justice has the final say on foundational constitutional questions affecting democracy and human rights. In the United Kingdom, the basic principle is that Parliament, as the sovereign expression of democratic legitimacy, can decide whether it wishes to expressly legislate against EU law. This, however, would only happen in the case of an express wish of the people to withdraw from the EU. It was held in &quot;R (Factortame Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport&quot; that &quot;whatever limitation of its sovereignty Parliament accepted when it enacted the European Communities Act 1972 was entirely voluntary&quot; and so &quot;it has always been clear&quot; that UK courts have a duty &quot;to override any rule of national law found to be in conflict with any directly enforceable rule of Community law&quot;. In 2014, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom noted that in &quot;R (HS2 Action Alliance Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport&quot;, although the UK constitution is uncodified, there could be &quot;fundamental principles&quot; of common law, and Parliament &quot;did not either contemplate or authorise the abrogation&quot; of those principles when it enacted the European Communities Act 1972. The view of the German Constitutional Court from the &quot;Solange I&quot; and &quot;Solange II&quot; decisions is that if the EU does not comply with its basic constitutional rights and principles (particularly democracy, the rule of law and the social state principles) then it cannot override German law. However, as the nicknames of the judgments go, &quot;so long as&quot; the EU works towards the democratisation of its institutions, and has a framework that protects fundamental human rights, it would not review EU legislation for compatibility with German constitutional principles. Most other member states have expressed similar reservations. This suggests the EU&#x27;s legitimacy rests on the ultimate authority of member states, its factual commitment to human rights, and the democratic will of the people.
As opposed to the member states, the relation of EU law and international law is debated, particularly relating to the European Convention on Human Rights and the United Nations. All individual EU member states are party to both organisations through international treaties. The Treaty on European Union article 6(2) required the EU to accede to the ECHR, but would &quot;not affect the Union&#x27;s competences as defined in the Treaties&quot;. This was thought necessary before the Treaty of Lisbon to ensure that the EU gave adequate protection to human rights, overseen by the external European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. However, in &quot;Opinion 2/13&quot;, after a request by the commission to review their plan to accede, the Court of Justice (in Luxembourg) produced five main reasons why it felt that the accession agreement as it stood was incompatible with the treaties. The reasoning was regarded by a majority of commentators as thinly veiled attempt of the Court of Justice to clutch onto its own power, but it has meant the commission is redrafting a new accession agreement. Under TEU articles 3(5), 21, 34 and 42, the EU must also respect the principles of the United Nations Charter. After the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City, the UN Security Council adopted a resolution to freeze the assets of suspected terrorists, linked to Osama bin Laden. This included a Saudi national, Mr Kadi. Sweden froze his assets pursuant to an EU Regulation, which gave effect to the UN Security Council resolution. In &quot;Kadi v Commission&quot;, Mr Kadi claimed there was no evidence that he was connected to terrorism, and he had not had a fair trial: a fundamental human right. The opinion of AG Maduro recalled Aharon Barak, of the Supreme Court of Israel, that it &quot;is when the cannons roar that we especially need the laws&quot;. The Court of Justice held that even UN member cannot contravene &quot;the principles that form part of the very community legal order&quot;. In effect the EU has developed a rule that within the boundaries of certain jus cogens principles, other courts may take primacy. The content of those core principles remains open to ongoing judicial dialogue among the senior courts in the Union.

==Administrative law==
While constitutional law concerns the European Union&#x27;s governance structure, administrative law binds EU institutions and member state governments to follow the law. Both member states and the Commission have a general legal right or &quot;standing&quot; (&quot;locus standi&quot;) to bring claims against EU institutions and other member states for breach of the treaties. From the EU&#x27;s foundation, the Court of Justice also held that the Treaties allowed citizens or corporations to bring claims against EU and member state institutions for violation of the Treaties and Regulations, if they were properly interpreted as creating rights and obligations. However, under Directives, citizens or corporations were said in 1986 to not be allowed to bring claims against other non-state parties. This meant courts of member states were not bound to apply a Union law where a State law conflicted, even though the member state government could be sued, if it would impose an obligation on another citizen or corporation. These rules on &quot;direct effect&quot; limit the extent to which member state courts are bound to administer EU law. All actions by EU institutions can be subject to judicial review, and judged by standards of proportionality, particularly where general principles of law, or fundamental rights are engaged. The remedy for a claimant where there has been a breach of the law is often monetary damages, but courts can also require specific performance or will grant an injunction, in order to ensure the law is effective as possible.

===Direct effect===

Although it is generally accepted that EU law has primacy, not all EU laws give citizens standing to bring claims: that is, not all EU laws have &quot;direct effect&quot;. In it was held that the provisions of the Treaties (and EU Regulations) are directly effective, if they are (1) clear and unambiguous (2) unconditional, and (3) did not require EU or national authorities to take further action to implement them. Van Gend en Loos, a postal company, claimed that what is now TFEU article 30 prevented the Dutch Customs Authorities charging tariffs, when it imported urea-formaldehyde plastics from Germany to the Netherlands. After a Dutch court made a reference, the Court of Justice held that even though the Treaties did not &quot;expressly&quot; confer a right on citizens or companies to bring claims, they could do so. Historically, international treaties had only allowed states to have legal claims for their enforcement, but the Court of Justice proclaimed &quot;the Community constitutes a new legal order of international law&quot;. Because article 30 clearly, unconditionally and immediately stated that no quantitative restrictions could be placed on trade, without a good justification, Van Gend en Loos could recover the money it paid for the tariff. EU Regulations are the same as Treaty provisions in this sense, because as TFEU article 288 states, they are &#x27;directly applicable in all Member States&#x27;. Member states come under a duty not to replicate Regulations in their own law, in order to prevent confusion. For instance, in &quot;Commission v Italy&quot; the Court of Justice held that Italy had breached a duty under the Treaties, both by failing to operate a scheme to pay farmers a premium to slaughter cows (to reduce dairy overproduction), and by reproducing the rules in a decree with various additions. &quot;Regulations&quot;, held the Court of Justice, &quot;come into force solely by virtue of their publication&quot; and implementation could have the effect of &quot;jeopardising their simultaneous and uniform application in the whole of the Union&quot;. On the other hand, some Regulations may themselves expressly require implementing measures, in which case those specific rules should be followed.
While the Treaties and Regulations will have direct effect (if clear, unconditional and immediate), Directives do not generally give citizens (as opposed to the member state) standing to sue other citizens. In theory, this is because TFEU article 288 says Directives are addressed to the member states and usually &quot;leave to the national authorities the choice of form and methods&quot; to implement. In part this reflects that directives often create minimum standards, leaving member states to apply higher standards. For example, the Working Time Directive requires that every worker has at least 4 weeks paid holidays each year, but most member states require more than 28 days in national law. However, on the current position adopted by the Court of Justice, citizens have standing to make claims based on national laws that implement Directives, but not from Directives themselves. Directives do not have so called &quot;horizontal&quot; direct effect (i.e. between non-state parties). This view was instantly controversial, and in the early 1990s three Advocate Generals persuasively argued that Directives should create rights and duties for all citizens. The Court of Justice refused, but there are five large exceptions.

First, if a Directive&#x27;s deadline for implementation is not met, the member state cannot enforce conflicting laws, and a citizen may rely on the Directive in such an action (so called &quot;vertical&quot; direct effect). So, in &quot;Pubblico Ministero v Ratti&quot; because the Italian government had failed to implement a Directive 73/173/EEC on packaging and labelling solvents by the deadline, it was estopped from enforcing a conflicting national law from 1963 against Mr Ratti&#x27;s solvent and varnish business. A member state could &quot;not rely, as against individuals, on its own failure to perform the obligations which the Directive entails&quot;. Second, a citizen or company can also invoke a Directive as a defence in a dispute with another citizen or company (not just a public authority) which is attempting to enforce a national law that conflicts with a Directive. So, in &quot;CIA Security v Signalson and Securitel&quot; the Court of Justice held that a business called CIA Security could defend itself from allegations by competitors that it had not complied with a Belgian decree from 1991 about alarm systems, on the basis that it had not been notified to the commission as a Directive required. Third, if a Directive gives expression to a &quot;general principle&quot; of EU law, it can be invoked between private non-state parties before its deadline for implementation. This follows from &quot;Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH &amp; Co KG&quot; where the German Civil Code §622 stated that the years people worked under the age of 25 would not count towards the increasing statutory notice before dismissal. Ms Kücükdeveci worked for 10 years, from age 18 to 28, for Swedex GmbH &amp; Co KG before her dismissal. She claimed that the law not counting her years under age 25 was unlawful age discrimination under the Employment Equality Framework Directive. The Court of Justice held that the Directive could be relied on by her because equality was also a general principle of EU law. Fourth, if the defendant is an emanation of the state, even if not central government, it can still be bound by Directives. In &quot;Foster v British Gas plc&quot; the Court of Justice held that Mrs Foster was entitled to bring a sex discrimination claim against her employer, British Gas plc, which made women retire at age 60 and men at 65, if (1) pursuant to a state measure, (2) it provided a public service, and (3) had special powers. This could also be true if the enterprise is privatised, as it was held with a water company that was responsible for basic water provision.

Fifth, national courts have a duty to interpret domestic law &quot;as far as possible in the light of the wording and purpose of the directive&quot;. Textbooks (though not the Court itself) often called this &quot;indirect effect&quot;. In &quot;Marleasing SA v La Comercial SA&quot; the Court of Justice held that a Spanish Court had to interpret its general Civil Code provisions, on contracts lacking cause or defrauding creditors, to conform with the First Company Law Directive article 11, that required incorporations would only be nullified for a fixed list of reasons. The Court of Justice quickly acknowledged that the duty of interpretation cannot contradict plain words in a national statute. But, if a member state has failed to implement a Directive, a citizen may not be able to bring claims against other non-state parties. It must instead sue the member state itself for failure to implement the law. In sum, the Court of Justice&#x27;s position on direct effect means that governments and taxpayers must bear the cost of private parties, mostly corporations, for refusing to follow the law.

===References and remedies===
Litigation often begins and is resolved by member state courts. They interpret and apply EU law, and award remedies of compensation and restitution (remedying loss or stripping gains), injunctions and specific performance (making somebody stop or do something). If, however, the position in EU law appears unclear, member state courts can refer questions to the Court of Justice for a &quot;preliminary ruling&quot; on EU law&#x27;s proper interpretation. TFEU article 267 says court &quot;may&quot; refer &quot;if it considers&quot; this &quot;is necessary to enable it to give judgment&quot;, and &quot;shall bring the matter before the Court&quot; if there is no possibility for further appeal and remedy. Any &quot;court or tribunal of a Member State&quot; can refer. This is widely interpreted. It obviously includes bodies like the UK Supreme Court, a High Court, or an Employment Tribunal. In &quot;Vaassen v Beambtenfonds Mijnbedrijf&quot; the Court of Justice also held that a mining worker pension arbitration tribunal could make a reference. By contrast, and oddly, in &quot;Miles v European Schools&quot; the Court of Justice held that a Complaints Board of European Schools, set up under the international agreement, the European Schools Convention, could not refer because though it was a court, it was not &quot;of a member state&quot; (even though all member states had signed that Convention).
On the other side, courts and tribunals are theoretically under a duty to refer questions. In the UK, for example, Lord Denning MR considered it appropriate to refer if the outcome of a case depended on a correct answer, and the Civil Procedure Rules entitle the High Court to refer at any stage of proceedings. The view of the Court of Justice in the leading case, &quot;CILFIT v Ministry of Health&quot; is that a national court has no duty to refer if the law is an &quot;acte clair&quot; (a clear rule), or &quot;so obvious as to leave no scope for any reasonable doubt as to the manner in which the question raised is to be resolved&quot;. In &quot;Kenny Roland Lyckeskog&quot; the Court of Justice held that the duty to refer existed for the Swedish Court of Appeal, the &quot;hovrätt&quot;, since Sweden&#x27;s Supreme Court (&quot;Högsta domstol&quot;) had to give permission for appeals to continue. The practical difficulty is that judges differ on their views of whether or not the law is clear. In a significant case, &quot;Three Rivers DC v Governor of the Bank of England&quot; the UK House of Lords felt confident that it was clear under the First Banking Directive that depositors did not have direct rights to sue the Bank of England for alleged failure to carry out adequate prudential regulation. Their Lordships highlighted that while some uncertainty might exist, the costs of delay in making a reference outweighed the benefits from total certainty. By contrast, in &quot;ParkingEye Ltd v Beavis&quot;, a majority of the Supreme Court apparently felt able to declare that the law under Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive was &quot;acte clair&quot;, and decline to make a reference, even though a senior Law Lord delivered a powerfully reasoned dissent. However, in addition to a reluctance to make references, a general scepticism has grown among senior member state judiciaries of the mode of reasoning used by the Court of Justice. The UK Supreme Court in &quot;R (HS2 Action Alliance Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport&quot; devoted large parts of its judgment to criticism, in its view, an unpredictable &#x27;teleological&#x27; mode of reasoning which, could decrease confidence in maintaining a dialogue within a plural and transnational judicial system. It added that it might not interpret the European Communities Act 1972 to abridge basic principles and understanding of constitutional functioning – in effect implying that it might decline to follow unreasonable Court of Justice judgments on important issues. Similarly, the German Constitutional Court in the &quot;Outright Monetary Transactions case&quot; referred a question for preliminary ruling on whether the European Central Bank&#x27;s plan to buy Greek and other government bonds on secondary markets, despite the Treaty prohibition on buying them directly, was unlawful. In a highly unusual move, the two most senior judges dissented that the ECB&#x27;s plan could be lawful, while the majority closely guided the Court of Justice on the appropriate mode of reasoning.

If references are made, the Court of Justice will give a preliminary ruling, in order for the member state court to conclude the case and award a remedy. The right to an effective remedy is a general principle of EU law, enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights article 47. Most of the time Regulations and Directives will set out the relevant remedies to be awarded, or they will be construed from the legislation according to the practices of the member state. It could also be that the government is responsible for failure to properly implement a Directive or Regulation, and must therefore pay damages. In &quot;Francovich v Italy&quot;, the Italian government had failed to set up an insurance fund for employees to claim unpaid wages if their employers had gone insolvent, as the Insolvency Protection Directive required. Francovich, the former employee of a bankrupt Venetian firm, was therefore allowed to claim 6 million Lira from the Italian government in damages for his loss. The Court of Justice held that if a Directive would confer identifiable rights on individuals, and there is a causal link between a member state&#x27;s violation of EU and a claimant&#x27;s loss, damages must be paid. The fact that the incompatible law is an Act of Parliament is no defence. So, in &quot;Factortame&quot; it was irrelevant that Parliament had legislated to require a quota of British ownership of fishing vessels in primary legislation. Similarly, in was &quot;Brasserie du Pêcheur v Germany&quot; the German government was liable to a French beer company for damages from prohibiting its imports, which did not comply with the fabled beer purity law. It was not decisive that the German Parliament had not acted willfully or negligently. It was merely necessary that there was (1) a rule intended to confer rights, (2) that a breach was sufficiently serious, and (3) there was a causal link between the breach and damage. The Court of Justice advised a breach is to be regarded as &#x27;sufficiently serious&#x27; by weighing a range of factors, such as whether it was voluntary, or persistent. In &quot;Köbler v Republik Österreich&quot; the Court of Justice added that member state liability could also flow from judges failing to adequately implement the law. On the other hand, it is also clear that EU institutions, such as the commission, may be liable according to the same principles for failure to follow the law. The only institution whose decisions appear incapable of generating a damages claim is the Court of Justice itself.

===Judicial review===
As well as preliminary rulings on the proper interpretation of EU law, an essential function of the Court of Justice is judicial review of the acts of the EU itself. Under Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) article 263(1) the Court can review the legality of any EU legislative of other &quot;act&quot; against the Treaties or general principles, such as those in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. This includes legislation, and most other acts that have legal consequences for people. For example, in &quot;Société anonyme Cimenteries CBR Cementsbedrijven NV v Commission&quot; the commission made a decision to withdraw an assurance to a Dutch cement company that it would be immune from competition law fines, for vertical agreements. The cement company challenged the decision, and the Commission argued this was not really an &quot;act&quot;, and so could not be challenged. The Court of Justice held a challenge could be made, and it was an act, because it &quot;deprived [the cement company] of the advantages of a legal situation... and exposed them to a grave financial risk&quot;. Similarly in &quot;Deutsche Post v Commission&quot; the Commission demanded information on state aid given by Germany to Deutsche Post within 20 days. When both challenged this, the Commission argued that the demand for information could not be an act as there was no sanction. The Court of Justice disagreed, and held judicial review could proceed because the request produced &quot;binding legal effects&quot; since the information supplied or not could be relied upon as evidence in a final decision. By contrast, in &quot;IBM v Commission&quot; the Court of Justice held that a letter from the commission to IBM that it would sue IBM for abusing a dominant position contrary to competition was not a reviewable act, but just a preliminary statement of intent to act. In any case, if a reviewable act of an EU institution is not found compatible with the law, under article 264, it will be declared void.
However, only a limited number of people can bring claims for judicial review. Under TFEU article 263(2), a member state, the Parliament, Council or Commission have automatic rights to seek judicial review. But under article 263(4) a &quot;natural or legal person&quot; must have a &quot;direct and individual concern&quot; about the regulatory act. &quot;Direct&quot; concern means that someone is affected by an EU act without &quot;the interposition of an autonomous will between the decision and its effect&quot;, for instance by a national government body. In &quot;Piraiki-Patraiki v Commission&quot;, a group of Greek textile businesses, who exported cotton products to France, challenged a Commission decision allow France to limit exports. The Commission argued that the exporters were not directly concerned, because France might decide not to limit exports, but the Court of Justice held this possibility was &quot;entirely theoretical&quot;. A challenge could be brought. By contrast in &quot;Municipality of Differdange v Commission&quot; a municipality wanted to challenge the Commissions decision to aid steel firms which reduced production: this would probably reduce its tax collections. But the Court of Justice held that because Luxembourg had discretion, and its decision to reduce capacity was not inevitable, the municipality had no &quot;direct&quot; concern (its complaint was with the Luxembourg government instead). &quot;Individual&quot; concern requires that someone is affected specifically, not as a member of a group. In &quot;Plaumann &amp; Co v Commission&quot; the Court of Justice held that a clementine importer was not individually concerned when the Commission refused permission to Germany to stop import custom duties. This kept it more expensive for Mr Plaumann to import clementines, but it was equally expensive for everyone else. This decision heavily restricted the number of people who could claim for judicial review. In &quot;Unión de Pequeños Agricultores&quot;, Advocate General Jacobs propose a broader test of allowing anyone to claim if there was a &quot;substantial adverse effect&quot; on the claimant&#x27;s interests. Here, a group of Spanish olive oil producers challenged Council Regulation No 1638/98, which withdrew subsidies. Because Regulations are not implemented in national law, but have direct effect, they argued the requirement for individual concern would deny them effective judicial protection. The Court of Justice held that direct actions were still not allowed: if this was unsatisfactory the member states would have to change the treaties. Individual concern is not needed, however under article 263(4), if an act is not legislation, but just a &quot;regulatory act&quot;. In &quot;Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami v Parliament and Council&quot; the Court of Justice affirmed that a Regulation does not count as a &quot;regulatory act&quot; within the Treaty&#x27;s meaning: it is only meant for acts of lesser importance. Here, a Canadian group representing the Inuit wished to challenge a Regulation on seal products, but were not allowed. They would have to show both direct and individual concern as normal. Thus, without a treaty change, EU administrative law remains one of the most restrictive in Europe.

===Human rights and principles===
Although access to judicial review is restricted for ordinary questions of law, the Court of Justice has gradually developed a more open approach to standing for human rights. Human rights have also become essential in the proper interpretation and construction of all EU law. If there are two or more plausible interpretations of a rule, the one which is most consistent with human rights should be chosen. The Treaty of Lisbon 2007 made rights underpin the Court of Justice&#x27;s competence, and required the EU&#x27;s accession to the European Convention on Human Rights, overseen by the external Strasbourg Court. Initially, reflecting its primitive economic nature, the treaties made no reference to rights. However, in 1969 particularly after concern from Germany, the Court of Justice declared in &quot;Stauder v City of Ulm&quot; that &#x27;fundamental human rights&#x27; were &#x27;enshrined in the general principles of Community law&#x27;. This meant that Mr Stauder, who received subsidised butter under an EU welfare scheme only by showing a coupon with his name and address, was entitled to claim that this violated his dignity: he was entitled not to have to go through the humiliation of proving his identity to get food. While those &#x27;general principles&#x27; were not written down in EU law, and simply declared to exist by the court, it accords with a majority philosophical view that &#x27;black letter&#x27; rules, or positive law, necessarily exist for reasons that the society which made them wants: these give rise to principles, which inform the law&#x27;s purpose. Moreover, the Court of Justice has clarified that its recognition of rights was &#x27;inspired&#x27; by member states&#x27; own &#x27;constitutional traditions&#x27;, and international treaties. These include rights found in member state constitutions, bills of rights, foundational Acts of Parliament, landmark court cases, the European Convention on Human Rights, the European Social Charter 1961, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, or the International Labour Organization&#x27;s Conventions. The EU itself must accede to the ECHR, although in &quot;Opinion 2/13&quot; the Court of Justice delayed, because of perceived difficulties in retaining an appropriate balance of competences.
Many of the most important rights were codified in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union in 2000. While the UK has opted out of direct application of the Charter, this has little practical relevance since the Charter merely reflected pre-existing principles and the Court of Justice uses the Charter to interpret all EU law. For example, in &quot;Test-Achats ASBL v Conseil des ministres&quot;, the Court of Justice held that Equal Treatment in Goods and Services Directive 2004 article 5(2), which purported to allow a derogation from equal treatment, so that men and women could be charged different car insurance rates, was unlawful. It contravened the principle of equality in CFREU 2000 articles 21 and 23, and had to be regarded as ineffective after a transition period. By contrast, in &quot;Deutsches Weintor eG v Land Rheinland-Pfalz&quot; wine producers claimed that a direction to stop marketing their brands as &#x27;easily digestible&#x27; (&quot;bekömmlich&quot;) by the state food regulator (acting under EU law) contravened their right to occupational and business freedom under CFREU 2000 articles 15 and 16. The Court of Justice held that in fact, the right to health for consumers in article 35 has also to be taken into account, and was to be given greater weight, particularly given the health effects of alcohol. Some rights in the Charter, however, are not expressed with sufficient clarity to be regarded as directly binding. In &quot;AMS v Union locale des syndicats CGT&quot; a French trade union claimed that the French Labour Code should not exclude casual workers from counting toward the right to set up a work council that an employing entity must inform and consult. They said this contravened the Information and Consultation of Employees Directive and also CFREU article 27. The Court of Justice agreed that the French Labour Code was incompatible with the Directive, but held that article 27 was expressed too generally to create direct rights. On this view, legislation was necessary to make abstract human rights principles concrete, and legally enforceable.

Beyond human rights, the Court of Justice has recognised at least five further &#x27;general principles&#x27; of EU law. The categories of general principles are not closed, and may develop according to the social expectations of people living in Europe.

# Legal certainty requires that judgments should be prospective, open and clear.
# Decision-making must be &quot;proportionate&quot; toward a legitimate aim when reviewing any discretionary act of a government or powerful body, for example, if a government wishes to change an employment law in a neutral way, yet this could have disproportionate negative impact on women rather than men, the government must show a legitimate aim, and that its measures are (1) appropriate or suitable for achieving it, (2) do no more than necessary, and (3) reasonable in balancing the conflicting rights of different parties.
# Equality is regarded as a fundamental principle: this matters particularly for labour rights, political rights, and access to public or private services.
# Right to a fair hearing.
# Professional privilege between lawyers and clients.

==Free movement and trade==
While the &quot;social market economy&quot; concept was only put into EU law by the 2007 Treaty of Lisbon, free movement and trade were central to European development since the Treaty of Rome in 1957. The standard theory of comparative advantage says two countries can both benefit from trade even if one of them has a less productive economy in all respects. Like the North American Free Trade Association, or the World Trade Organization, EU law breaks down barriers to trade, by creating rights to free movement of goods, services, labour and capital. This is meant to reduce consumer prices and raise living standards. Early theorists argued a free trade area would give way to a customs union, which led to a common market, then monetary union, then union of monetary and fiscal policy, and eventually a full union characteristic of a federal state. But in Europe those stages were mixed, and it is unclear whether the &quot;endgame&quot; should be the same as a state. Free trade, without rights to ensure fair trade, can benefit some groups within countries (particularly big business) more than others, and disadvantages people who lack bargaining power in an expanding market, particularly workers, consumers, small business, developing industries, and communities. For this reason, the European has become &quot;not merely an economic union&quot;, but creates binding social rights for people to &quot;ensure social progress and seek the constant improvement of the living and working conditions of their peoples&quot;. The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union articles 28 to 37 establish the principle of free movement of goods in the EU, while articles 45 to 66 require free movement of persons, services and capital. These &quot;four freedoms&quot; were thought to be inhibited by physical barriers (e.g. customs), technical barriers (e.g. differing laws on safety, consumer or environmental standards) and fiscal barriers (e.g. different Value Added Tax rates). Free movement and trade is not meant to be a licence for unrestricted commercial profit. Increasingly, the Treaties and the Court of Justice aim to ensure free trade serves higher values such as public health, consumer protection, labour rights, fair competition, and environmental improvement.

===Goods===
Free movement of goods within the European Union is achieved by a customs union, and the principle of non-discrimination. The EU manages imports from non-member states, duties between member states are prohibited, and imports circulate freely. In addition under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union article 34, &#x27;Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States&#x27;. In &quot;Procureur du Roi v Dassonville&quot; the Court of Justice held that this rule meant all &quot;trading rules&quot; that are &quot;enacted by Member States&quot; which could hinder trade &quot;directly or indirectly, actually or potentially&quot; would be caught by article 34. This meant that a Belgian law requiring Scotch whisky imports to have a certificate of origin was unlikely to be lawful. It discriminated against parallel importers like Mr Dassonville, who could not get certificates from authorities in France, where they bought the Scotch. This &quot;wide test&quot;, to determine what could potentially be an unlawful restriction on trade, applies equally to actions by quasi-government bodies, such as the former &quot;Buy Irish&quot; company that had government appointees. It also means states can be responsible for private actors. For instance, in &quot;Commission v France&quot; French farmer vigilantes were continually sabotaging shipments of Spanish strawberries, and even Belgian tomato imports. France was liable for these hindrances to trade because the authorities &#x27;manifestly and persistently abstained&#x27; from preventing the sabotage.

Generally speaking, if a member state has laws or practices that directly discriminate against imports (or exports under TFEU article 35) then it must be justified under article 36. The justifications include public morality, policy or security, &quot;protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants&quot;, &quot;national treasures&quot; of &quot;artistic, historic or archaeological value&quot; and &quot;industrial and commercial property&quot;. In addition, although not clearly listed, environmental protection can justify restrictions on trade as an overriding requirement derived from TFEU article 11. More generally, it has been increasingly acknowledged that fundamental human rights should take priority over all trade rules. So, in &quot;Schmidberger v Austria&quot; the Court of Justice held that Austria did not infringe article 34 by failing to ban a protest that blocked heavy traffic passing over the A13, Brenner Autobahn, en route to Italy. Although many companies, including Mr Schmidberger&#x27;s German undertaking, were prevented from trading, the Court of Justice reasoned that freedom of association is one of the &#x27;fundamental pillars of a democratic society&#x27;, against which the free movement of goods had to be balanced, and was probably subordinate. If a member state does appeal to the article 36 justification, the measures it takes have to be applied proportionately. This means the rule must be pursue a legitimate aim and (1) be suitable to achieve the aim, (2) be necessary, so that a less restrictive measure could not achieve the same result, and (3) be reasonable in balancing the interests of free trade with interests in article 36.
Often rules apply to all goods neutrally, but may have a greater practical effect on imports than domestic products. For such &quot;indirect&quot; discriminatory (or &quot;indistinctly applicable&quot;) measures the Court of Justice has developed more justifications: either those in article 36, or additional &quot;mandatory&quot; or &quot;overriding&quot; requirements such as consumer protection, improving labour standards, protecting the environment, press diversity, fairness in commerce, and more: the categories are not closed. In the noted case &quot;Rewe-Zentral AG v Bundesmonopol für Branntwein&quot;, the Court of Justice found that a German law requiring all spirits and liqueurs (not just imported ones) to have a minimum alcohol content of 25 per cent was contrary to TFEU article 34, because it had a greater negative effect on imports. German liqueurs were over 25 per cent alcohol, but Cassis de Dijon, which Rewe-Zentrale AG wished to import from France, only had 15 to 20 per cent alcohol. The Court of Justice rejected the German government&#x27;s arguments that the measure proportionately protected public health under TFEU article 36, because stronger beverages were available and adequate labelling would be enough for consumers to understand what they bought. This rule primarily applies to requirements about a product&#x27;s content or packaging. In &quot;Walter Rau Lebensmittelwerke v De Smedt PVBA&quot; the Court of Justice found that a Belgian law requiring all margarine to be in cube shaped packages infringed article 34, and was not justified by the pursuit of consumer protection. The argument that Belgians would believe it was butter if it was not cube shaped was disproportionate: it would &quot;considerably exceed the requirements of the object in view&quot; and labelling would protect consumers &quot;just as effectively&quot;.

In a 2003 case, &quot;Commission v Italy&quot; Italian law required that cocoa products that included other vegetable fats could not be labelled as &quot;chocolate&quot;. It had to be &quot;chocolate substitute&quot;. All Italian chocolate was made from cocoa butter alone, but British, Danish and Irish manufacturers used other vegetable fats. They claimed the law infringed article 34. The Court of Justice held that a low content of vegetable fat did not justify a &quot;chocolate substitute&quot; label. This was derogatory in the consumers&#x27; eyes. A &#x27;neutral and objective statement&#x27; was enough to protect consumers. If member states place considerable obstacles on the use of a product, this can also infringe article 34. So, in a 2009 case, &quot;Commission v Italy&quot;, the Court of Justice held that an Italian law prohibiting motorcycles or mopeds pulling trailers infringed article 34. Again, the law applied neutrally to everyone, but disproportionately affected importers, because Italian companies did not make trailers. This was not a product requirement, but the Court reasoned that the prohibition would deter people from buying it: it would have &quot;a considerable influence on the behaviour of consumers&quot; that &quot;affects the access of that product to the market&quot;. It would require justification under article 36, or as a mandatory requirement.
In contrast to product requirements or other laws that hinder market access, the Court of Justice developed a presumption that &quot;selling arrangements&quot; would be presumed to not fall into TFEU article 34, if they applied equally to all sellers, and affected them in the same manner in fact. In &quot;Keck and Mithouard&quot; two importers claimed that their prosecution under a French competition law, which prevented them selling Picon beer under wholesale price, was unlawful. The aim of the law was to prevent cut throat competition, not to hinder trade. The Court of Justice held, as &quot;in law and in fact&quot; it was an equally applicable &quot;selling arrangement&quot; (not something that alters a product&#x27;s content) it was outside the scope of article 34, and so did not need to be justified. Selling arrangements can be held to have an unequal effect &quot;in fact&quot; particularly where traders from another member state are seeking to break into the market, but there are restrictions on advertising and marketing. In &quot;Konsumentombudsmannen v De Agostini&quot; the Court of Justice reviewed Swedish bans on advertising to children under age 12, and misleading commercials for skin care products. While the bans have remained (justifiable under article 36 or as a mandatory requirement) the Court emphasised that complete marketing bans could be disproportionate if advertising were &quot;the only effective form of promotion enabling [a trader] to penetrate&quot; the market. In &quot;Konsumentombudsmannen v Gourmet AB&quot; the Court suggested that a total ban for advertising alcohol on the radio, TV and in magazines could fall within article 34 where advertising was the only way for sellers to overcome consumers&#x27; &quot;traditional social practices and to local habits and customs&quot; to buy their products, but again the national courts would decide whether it was justified under article 36 to protect public health. Under the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive, the EU harmonised restrictions on restrictions on marketing and advertising, to forbid conduct that distorts average consumer behaviour, is misleading or aggressive, and sets out a list of examples that count as unfair. Increasingly, states have to give mutual recognition to each other&#x27;s standards of regulation, while the EU has attempted to harmonise minimum ideals of best practice. The attempt to raise standards is hoped to avoid a regulatory &quot;race to the bottom&quot;, while allowing consumers access to goods from around the continent.

===Workers===
Since its foundation, the Treaties sought to enable people to pursue their life goals in any country through free movement. Reflecting the economic nature of the project, the European Community originally focused upon free movement of workers: as a &quot;factor of production&quot;. However, from the 1970s, this focus shifted towards developing a more &quot;social&quot; Europe.&lt;ref name=&quot;Case 43/75&quot;&gt;&quot;Defrenne v Sabena&quot; (1976) Case 43/75, [10]&lt;/ref&gt; Free movement was increasingly based on &quot;citizenship&quot;, so that people had rights to empower them to become economically and socially active, rather than economic activity being a precondition for rights. This means the basic &quot;worker&quot; rights in TFEU article 45 function as a specific expression of the general rights of citizens in TFEU articles 18 to 21. According to the Court of Justice, a &quot;worker&quot; is anybody who is economically active, which includes everyone in an employment relationship, &quot;under the direction of another person&quot; for &quot;remuneration&quot;. A job, however, need not be paid in money for someone to be protected as a worker. For example, in &quot;Steymann v Staatssecretaris van Justitie&quot;, a German man claimed the right to residence in the Netherlands, while he volunteered plumbing and household duties in the Bhagwan community, which provided for everyone&#x27;s material needs irrespective of their contributions. The Court of Justice held that Mr Steymann was entitled to stay, so long as there was at least an &quot;indirect quid pro quo&quot; for the work he did. Having &quot;worker&quot; status means protection against all forms of discrimination by governments, and employers, in access to employment, tax, and social security rights. By contrast a citizen, who is &quot;any person having the nationality of a Member State&quot; (TFEU article 20(1)), has rights to seek work, vote in local and European elections, but more restricted rights to claim social security. In practice, free movement has become politically contentious as nationalist political parties have manipulated fears about immigrants taking away people&#x27;s jobs and benefits (paradoxically at the same time). Nevertheless, practically &quot;all available research finds little impact&quot; of &quot;labour mobility on wages and employment of local workers&quot;.
The Free Movement of Workers Regulation articles 1 to 7 set out the main provisions on equal treatment of workers. First, articles 1 to 4 generally require that workers can take up employment, conclude contracts, and not suffer discrimination compared to nationals of the member state. In a famous case, the &quot;Belgian Football Association v Bosman&quot;, a Belgian footballer named Jean-Marc Bosman claimed that he should be able to transfer from R.F.C. de Liège to USL Dunkerque when his contract finished, regardless of whether Dunkerque could afford to pay Liège the habitual transfer fees. The Court of Justice held &quot;the transfer rules constitute[d] an obstacle to free movement&quot; and were unlawful unless they could be justified in the public interest, but this was unlikely. In &quot;Groener v Minister for Education&quot; the Court of Justice accepted that a requirement to speak Gaelic to teach in a Dublin design college could be justified as part of the public policy of promoting the Irish language, but only if the measure was not disproportionate. By contrast in &quot;Angonese v Cassa di Risparmio di Bolzano SpA&quot; a bank in Bolzano, Italy, was not allowed to require Mr Angonese to have a bilingual certificate that could only be obtained in Bolzano. The Court of Justice, giving &quot;horizontal&quot; direct effect to TFEU article 45, reasoned that people from other countries would have little chance of acquiring the certificate, and because it was &quot;impossible to submit proof of the required linguistic knowledge by any other means&quot;, the measure was disproportionate. Second, article 7(2) requires equal treatment in respect of tax. In &quot;Finanzamt Köln Altstadt v Schumacker&quot; the Court of Justice held that it contravened TFEU art 45 to deny tax benefits (e.g. for married couples, and social insurance expense deductions) to a man who worked in Germany, but was resident in Belgium when other German residents got the benefits. By contrast in &quot;Weigel v Finanzlandesdirektion für Vorarlberg&quot; the Court of Justice rejected Mr Weigel&#x27;s claim that a re-registration charge upon bringing his car to Austria violated his right to free movement. Although the tax was &quot;likely to have a negative bearing on the decision of migrant workers to exercise their right to freedom of movement&quot;, because the charge applied equally to Austrians, in absence of EU legislation on the matter it had to be regarded as justified. Third, people must receive equal treatment regarding &quot;social advantages&quot;, although the Court has approved residential qualifying periods. In &quot;Hendrix v Employee Insurance Institute&quot; the Court of Justice held that a Dutch national was not entitled to continue receiving incapacity benefits when he moved to Belgium, because the benefit was &quot;closely linked to the socio-economic situation&quot; of the Netherlands. Conversely, in &quot;Geven v Land Nordrhein-Westfalen&quot; the Court of Justice held that a Dutch woman living in the Netherlands, but working between 3 and 14 hours a week in Germany, did not have a right to receive German child benefits, even though the wife of a man who worked full-time in Germany but was resident in Austria could. The general justifications for limiting free movement in TFEU article 45(3) are &quot;public policy, public security or public health&quot;, and there is also a general exception in article 45(4) for &quot;employment in the public service&quot;.

===Citizens===
Beyond the right of free movement to work, the EU has increasingly sought to guarantee rights of citizens, and rights simply be being a human being. But although the Court of Justice stated that &#x27;Citizenship is destined to be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member States&#x27;, political debate remains on who should have access to public services and welfare systems funded by taxation. As of now, Union citizenship is criticised for being not inclusive enough and having failed to establish a truly borderless space of social solidarity. In 2008, just 8 million people from 500 million EU citizens (1.7 per cent) had in fact exercised rights of free movement, the vast majority workers. According to TFEU article 20, citizenship of the EU derives from nationality of a member state. Article 21 confers general rights to free movement in the EU and to reside freely within limits set by legislation. This applies for citizens and their immediate family members. This triggers four main groups of rights: (1) to enter, depart and return, without undue restrictions, (2) to reside, without becoming an unreasonable burden on social assistance, (3) to vote in local and European elections, and (4) the right to equal treatment with nationals of the host state, but for social assistance only after 3 months of residence.
First, the Citizens Rights Directive 2004 article 4 says every citizen has the right to depart a member state with a valid passport. This has historical importance for central and eastern Europe, when the Soviet Union and the Berlin Wall denied its citizens the freedom to leave. Article 5 gives every citizen a right of entry, subject to national border controls. Schengen Area countries (not the UK and Ireland) abolished the need to show documents, and police searches at borders, altogether. These reflect the general principle of free movement in TFEU article 21. Second, article 6 allows every citizen to stay three months in another member state, whether economically active or not. Article 7 allows stays over three months with evidence of &quot;sufficient resources... not to become a burden on the social assistance system&quot;. Articles 16 and 17 give a right to permanent residence after 5 years without conditions. Third, TEU article 10(3) requires the right to vote in the local constituencies for the European Parliament wherever a citizen lives.
Fourth, and more debated, article 24 requires that the longer an EU citizen stays in a host state, the more rights they have to access public and welfare services, on the basis of equal treatment. This reflects general principles of equal treatment and citizenship in TFEU articles 18 and 20. In a simple case, in &quot;Sala v Freistaat Bayern&quot; the Court of Justice held that a Spanish lady who had lived in Germany for 25 years and had a baby was entitled to child support, without the need for a residence permit, because Germans did not need one. In &quot;Trojani v Centre public d&#x27;aide sociale de Bruxelles&quot;, a French man who lived in Belgium for two years was entitled to the &quot;minimex&quot; allowance from the state for a minimum living wage. In &quot;Grzelczyk v Centre Public d&#x27;Aide Sociale d&#x27;Ottignes-Louvain-la-Neuve&quot; a French student, who had lived in Belgium for three years, was entitled to receive the &quot;minimex&quot; income support for his fourth year of study. Similarly, in &quot;R (Bidar) v London Borough of Ealing&quot; the Court of Justice held that it was lawful to require a French UCL economics student lived in the UK for three years before receiving a student loan, but not that he had to have additional &quot;settled status&quot;. Similarly, in &quot;Commission v Austria&quot;, Austria was not entitled to restrict its university places to Austrian students to avoid &quot;structural, staffing and financial problems&quot; if (mainly German) foreign students applied, unless it proved there was an actual problem. However, in &quot;Dano v Jobcenter Leipzig&quot;, the Court of Justice held that the German government was entitled to deny child support to a Romanian mother who had lived in Germany for three years, but had never worked. Because she lived in Germany for over 3 months, but under five years, she had to show evidence of &quot;sufficient resources&quot;, since the Court reasoned the right to equal treatment in article 24 within that time depended on lawful residence under article 7.

===Establishment and services===
As well as creating rights for &quot;workers&quot; who generally lack bargaining power in the market, the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union also protects the &quot;freedom of establishment&quot; in article 49, and &quot;freedom to provide services&quot; in article 56. In the Court of Justice held that to be &quot;established&quot; means to participate in economic life &quot;on a stable and continuous basis&quot;, while providing &quot;services&quot; meant pursuing activity more &quot;on a temporary basis&quot;. This meant that a lawyer from Stuttgart, who had set up chambers in Milan and was censured by the Milan Bar Council for not having registered, should claim for breach of establishment freedom, rather than service freedom. However, the requirements to be registered in Milan before being able to practice would be allowed if they were non-discriminatory, &quot;justified by imperative requirements in the general interest&quot; and proportionately applied. All people or entities that engage in economic activity, particularly the self-employed, or &quot;undertakings&quot; such as companies or firms, have a right to set up an enterprise without unjustified restrictions. The Court of Justice has held that both a member state government and a private party can hinder freedom of establishment, so article 49 has both &quot;vertical&quot; and &quot;horizontal&quot; direct effect. In &quot;Reyners v Belgium&quot; the Court of Justice held that a refusal to admit a lawyer to the Belgian bar because he lacked Belgian nationality was unjustified. TFEU article 49 says states are exempt from infringing others&#x27; freedom of establishment when they exercise &quot;official authority&quot;. But regulation of an advocate&#x27;s work (as opposed to a court&#x27;s) was not official. By contrast in &quot;Commission v Italy&quot; the Court of Justice held that a requirement for lawyers in Italy to comply with maximum tariffs unless there was an agreement with a client was not a restriction. The Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice held the commission had not proven that this had any object or effect of limiting practitioners from entering the market. Therefore, there was no &quot;prima facie&quot; infringement freedom of establishment that needed to be justified.
In regard to companies, the Court of Justice held in &quot;R (Daily Mail and General Trust plc) v HM Treasury&quot; that member states could restrict a company moving its seat of business, without infringing TFEU article 49. This meant the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; newspaper&#x27;s parent company could not evade tax by shifting its residence to the Netherlands without first settling its tax bills in the UK. The UK did not need to justify its action, as rules on company seats were not yet harmonised. By contrast, in &quot;Centros Ltd v Erhversus-og Selkabssyrelsen&quot; the Court of Justice found that a UK limited company operating in Denmark could not be required to comply with Denmark&#x27;s minimum share capital rules. UK law only required £1 of capital to start a company, while Denmark&#x27;s legislature took the view companies should only be started up if they had 200,000 Danish krone (around €27,000) to protect creditors if the company failed and went insolvent. The Court of Justice held that Denmark&#x27;s minimum capital law infringed Centros Ltd&#x27;s freedom of establishment and could not be justified, because a company in the UK could admittedly provide services in Denmark without being established there, and there were less restrictive means of achieving the aim of creditor protection. This approach was criticised as potentially opening the EU to unjustified regulatory competition, and a race to the bottom in legal standards, like the US state of Delaware, which is argued to attract companies with the worst standards of accountability, and unreasonably low corporate tax. Appearing to meet the concern, in &quot;Überseering BV v Nordic Construction GmbH&quot; the Court of Justice held that a German court could not deny a Dutch building company the right to enforce a contract in Germany, simply because it was not validly incorporated in Germany. Restrictions on freedom of establishment could be justified by creditor protection, labour rights to participate in work, or the public interest in collecting taxes. But in this case denial of capacity went too far: it was an &quot;outright negation&quot; of the right of establishment. Setting a further limit, in &quot;Cartesio Oktató és Szolgáltató bt&quot; the Court of Justice held that because corporations are created by law, they must be subject to any rules for formation that a state of incorporation wishes to impose. This meant the Hungarian authorities could prevent a company from shifting its central administration to Italy, while it still operated and was incorporated in Hungary. Thus, the court draws a distinction between the right of establishment for foreign companies (where restrictions must be justified), and the right of the state to determine conditions for companies incorporated in its territory, although it is not entirely clear why.
The &quot;freedom to provide services&quot; under TFEU article 56 applies to people who give services &quot;for remuneration&quot;, especially commercial or professional activity. For example, in &quot;Van Binsbergen v Bestuur van de Bedrijfvereniging voor de Metaalnijverheid&quot; a Dutch lawyer moved to Belgium while advising a client in a social security case, and was told he could not continue because Dutch law said only people established in the Netherlands could give legal advice. The Court of Justice held that the freedom to provide services applied, it was directly effective, and the rule was probably unjustified: having an address in the member state would be enough to pursue the legitimate aim of good administration of justice. The Court of Justice has held that secondary education falls outside the scope of article 56 because usually the state funds it, but higher education does not. Health care generally counts as a service. In &quot;Geraets-Smits v Stichting Ziekenfonds&quot; Mrs Geraets-Smits claimed she should be reimbursed by Dutch social insurance for costs of receiving treatment in Germany. The Dutch health authorities regarded the treatment unnecessary, so she argued this restricted the freedom (of the German health clinic) to provide services. Several governments submitted that hospital services should not be regarded as economic, and should not fall within article 56. But the Court of Justice held health was a &quot;service&quot; even though the government (rather than the service recipient) paid for the service. National authorities could be justified in refusing to reimburse patients for medical services abroad if the health care received at home was without undue delay, and it followed &quot;international medical science&quot; on which treatments counted as normal and necessary. The Court requires that the individual circumstances of a patient justify waiting lists, and this is also true in the context of the UK&#x27;s National Health Service. Aside from public services, another sensitive field of services are those classified as illegal. &quot;Josemans v Burgemeester van Maastricht&quot; held that the Netherlands&#x27; regulation of cannabis consumption, including the prohibitions by some municipalities on tourists (but not Dutch nationals) going to coffee shops, fell outside article 56 altogether. The Court of Justice reasoned that narcotic drugs were controlled in all member states, and so this differed from other cases where prostitution or other quasi-legal activity was subject to restriction.

If an activity does fall within article 56, a restriction can be justified under article 52, or by overriding requirements developed by the Court of Justice. In &quot;Alpine Investments BV v Minister van Financiën&quot; a business that sold commodities futures (with Merrill Lynch and another banking firms) attempted to challenge a Dutch law that prohibiting cold calling customers. The Court of Justice held the Dutch prohibition pursued a legitimate aim to prevent &quot;undesirable developments in securities trading&quot; including protecting the consumer from aggressive sales tactics, thus maintaining confidence in the Dutch markets. In &quot;Omega Spielhallen GmbH v Bonn&quot; a &quot;laserdrome&quot; business was banned by the Bonn council. It bought fake laser gun services from a UK firm called Pulsar Ltd, but residents had protested against &quot;playing at killing&quot; entertainment. The Court of Justice held that the German constitutional value of human dignity, which underpinned the ban, did count as a justified restriction on freedom to provide services. In &quot;Liga Portuguesa de Futebol v Santa Casa da Misericórdia de Lisboa&quot; the Court of Justice also held that the state monopoly on gambling, and a penalty for a Gibraltar firm that had sold internet gambling services, was justified to prevent fraud and gambling where people&#x27;s views were highly divergent. The ban was proportionate as this was an appropriate and necessary way to tackle the serious problems of fraud that arise over the internet. In the Services Directive a group of justifications were codified in article 16, which the case law has developed.

===Capital===

Free movement of capital was traditionally seen as the fourth freedom, after goods, workers and persons, services and establishment. The original Treaty of Rome required that restrictions on free capital flows only be removed to the extent necessary for the common market. From the Treaty of Maastricht, now in TFEU article 63, &quot;all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited&quot;. This means capital controls of various kinds are prohibited, including limits on buying currency, limits on buying company shares or financial assets, or government approval requirements for foreign investment. By contrast, taxation of capital, including corporate tax, capital gains tax and Financial transaction tax are not affected so long as they do not discriminate by nationality. According to the Capital Movement Directive 1988, Annex I, 13 categories of capital which must move free are covered. In &quot;Baars v Inspecteur der Belastingen Particulieren&quot; the Court of Justice held that for investments in companies, the capital rules, rather than freedom of establishment rules, were engaged if an investment did not enable a &quot;definite influence&quot; through shareholder voting or other rights by the investor. That case held a Dutch Wealth Tax Act 1964 unjustifiably exempted Dutch investments, but not Mr Baars&#x27; investments in an Irish company, from the tax: the wealth tax, or exemptions, had to be applied equally. On the other hand, TFEU article 65(1) does not prevent taxes that distinguish taxpayers based on their residence or the location of an investment (as taxes commonly focus on a person&#x27;s actual source of profit) or any measures to prevent tax evasion. Apart from tax cases, largely following from cases originating in the UK, a series of cases held that government owned golden shares were unlawful. In &quot;Commission v Germany&quot; the Commission claimed the 1960 German Volkswagen Act violated article 63, in that §2(1) restricted any party having voting rights exceeding 20% of the company, and §4(3) allowed a minority of 20% of shares held by the Lower Saxony government to block any decisions. Although this was not an impediment to actual purchase of shares, or receipt of dividends by any shareholder, the Court of Justice&#x27;s Grand Chamber agreed that it was disproportionate for the government&#x27;s stated aim of protecting workers or minority shareholders. Similarly, in &quot;Commission v Portugal&quot; the Court of Justice held that Portugal infringed free movement of capital by retaining golden shares in Portugal Telecom that enabled disproportionate voting rights, by creating a &quot;deterrent effect on portfolio investments&quot; and reducing &quot;the attractiveness of an investment&quot;. This suggested the Court&#x27;s preference that a government, if it sought public ownership or control, should nationalise in full the desired proportion of a company in line with TFEU article 345.

The final stage of completely free movement of capital was thought to require a single currency and monetary policy, eliminating the transaction costs and fluctuations of currency exchange between member states but not between member states and third countries (TFEU article 63). Following a Report of the Delors Commission in 1988, the Treaty of Maastricht made economic and monetary union an objective, first by completing the internal market, second by creating a European System of Central Banks to coordinate common monetary policy, and third by locking exchange rates and introducing a single currency, the euro. Today, 19 member states have adopted the euro, while 9 member states have either determined to opt-out or their accession has been delayed, particularly since the European debt crisis. According to TFEU articles 119 and 127, the objective of the European Central Bank and other central banks ought to be price stability. This has been criticised for apparently being superior to the objective of full employment in the Treaty on European Union article 3.

==Social and market regulations==
While the European Economic Community originally focused on free movement, and dismantling barriers to trade, more EU law today concerns regulation of the &quot;social market economy&quot;. In 1976 the Court of Justice said in &quot;Defrenne v Sabena&quot; the goal was &quot;not merely an economic union&quot;, but to &quot;ensure social progress and seek the constant improvement of the living and working conditions of their peoples&quot;. On this view, stakeholders in each member state might not have the capacity to take advantage of expanding trade in a globalising economy. Groups with greater bargaining power can exploit weaker legal rights in other member states. For example, a corporation could shift production to member states with a lower minimum wage, to increase shareholder profit, even if production costs more and workers are paid less. This would mean an aggregate loss of social wealth, and a &quot;race to the bottom&quot; in human development. To make globalisation fair, the EU establishes a minimum floor of rights for the stakeholders in enterprise: for consumers, workers, investors, shareholders, creditors, and the public. Each field of law is vast, so EU law is designed to be subsidiary to comprehensive rules in each member state. Member states may go beyond the harmonised minimum, acting as &quot;laboratories of democracy&quot;.

EU law makes basic standards of &quot;exit&quot; (where markets operate), rights (enforceable in court), and &quot;voice&quot; (especially through votes) in enterprise. Rules of competition law balance the interests of different groups, generally to favour consumers, for the larger purpose in the Treaty on European Union article 3(3) of a &quot;highly competitive social market economy&quot;. The EU is bound by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union article 345 to &quot;in no way prejudice the rules in Member States governing the system of property ownership&quot;. This means the EU is bound to be neutral to member state&#x27;s choice to take enterprises into public ownership, or to privatise them. While there have been academic proposals for a European Civil Code, and projects to frame non-binding principles of contract and tort, harmonisation has only occurred for conflict of laws and intellectual property.

===Consumer protection===
Protection of European consumers has been a central part of developing the EU internal market. The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union article 169 enables the EU to follow the ordinary legislative procedure to protect consumers &quot;health, safety and economic interests&quot; and promote rights to &quot;information, education and to organise themselves in order to safeguard their interests&quot;. All member states may grant higher protection, and a &quot;high level of consumer protection&quot; is regarded as a fundamental right. Beyond these general principles, and outside specific sectors, there are four main Directives: the Product Liability Directive 1985, Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive 1993, Unfair Commercial Practices Directive 2005 and the Consumer Rights Directive 2011, requiring information and cancellation rights for consumers. As a whole, the law is designed to ensure that consumers in the EU are entitled to the same minimum rights wherever they shop, and largely follows inspiration from theories of consumer protection developed in California and the Consumer Bill of Rights proclaimed by John F. Kennedy in 1962. The Court of Justice has continually affirmed that the need for more consumer rights (than in commercial contracts) both because consumers tend to lack information, and they have less bargaining power.&lt;ref name=&quot;Case C-618/10&quot;&gt;See &quot;Banco Español de Crédito SA v Camino&quot; (2012) Case C-618/10, [39] and &quot;Océano Grupo Editorial and Salvat Editores&quot; (2000) C-240/98 to C-244/98 and [2000] ECR I-4941, [25]&lt;/ref&gt;
The Product Liability Directive 1985 was the first consumer protection measure. It creates strict enterprise liability for all producers and retailers for any harm to consumers from products, as a way to promote basic standards of health and safety. Any producer, or supplier if the ultimate producer is insolvent, of a product is strictly liable to compensate a consumer for any damage caused by a defective product. A &quot;defect&quot; is anything which falls below what a consumer is entitled to expect, and this essentially means that products should be safe for their purpose. A narrow defensive is available if a producer can show that a defect could not be known by any scientific method, thought this has never been successfully invoked, because it is generally thought a profit making enterprise should not be able to externalise the risks of its activities.

The Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive 1993 was the second main measure. Under article 3(1) a term is unfair, and not binding, if it is not &quot;individually negotiated| and &quot;if, contrary to the requirement of good faith, it causes a significant imbalance in the parties&#x27; rights and obligations arising under the contract, to the detriment of the consumer&quot;. The Court of Justice has continually affirmed that the Directive, as recital 16 states, &quot;is based on the idea that the consumer is in a weak position vis-à-vis the seller or supplier, as regards both his bargaining power and his level of knowledge&quot;. Terms which are very skewed, are to be conclusively regarded as contrary to &quot;good faith&quot; and therefore unfair. For example, in &quot;RWE AG v Verbraucherzentrale NRW eV&quot; clauses in gas supply contracts enabling corporation, RWE, to unilaterally vary prices were advised by the Court of Justice to be not sufficiently transparent, and therefore unfair. In &quot;Brusse v Jahani BV&quot; the Court of Justice advised that clauses in a tenancy contract requiring tenants pay €25 per day were likely unfair, and would have to be entirely void without replacement, if they were not substituted with more precise mandatory terms in national legislation. In &quot;Aziz v Caixa d&#x27;Estalvis de Catalunya&quot;, following the financial crisis of 2007–2008, the European Court of Justice advised that even terms regarding repossession of homes in Spain had to be assessed for fairness by national courts. In &quot;Kušionová v SMART Capital a.s.&quot;, the Court of Justice held that consumer law was to be interpreted in the light of fundamental rights, including the right to housing, if a home could be repossessed. Because consumer law operates through Directives, national courts have the final say on applying the general principles set out by the Court of Justice&#x27;s case law.

*Unfair Commercial Practices Directive 2005/29/EC
*Consumer Rights Directive 2011/83/EU
*Payment Services Directive 2007/64/EC
*Late Payments Directive 2011/7/EU

===Labour rights===
While free movement of workers was central to the first European Economic Community agreement, the development of European labour law has been a gradual process. Originally, the Ohlin Report of 1956 recommended that labour standards did not need to be harmonised, although a general principle of anti-discrimination between men and women was included in the early Treaties. Increasingly, the absence of labour rights was seen as inadequate given the capacity for a &quot;race to the bottom&quot; in international trade if corporations can shift jobs and production to countries with low wages. Today, the EU is required under TFEU article 147 to contribute to a &quot;high level of employment by encouraging cooperation between Member States&quot;. This has not resulted in legislation, which usually requires taxation and fiscal stimulus for significant change, while the European Central Bank&#x27;s monetary policy has been acutely controversial during the European debt crisis. Under article 153(1), the EU is able to use the ordinary legislation procedure on a list of labour law fields. This notably excludes wage regulation and collective bargaining. Generally, four main fields of EU regulation of labour rights touch (1) individual labour rights, (2) anti-discrimination regulations, (3) rights to information, consultation, and participation at work, and (4) rights to job security. In virtually all cases, the EU follows the principle that member states can always create rights more beneficial to workers. This is because the fundamental principle of labour law is that employees&#x27; unequal bargaining power justifies substitution of rules in property and contract with positive social rights so that people may earn a living to fully participate in a democratic society. The EU&#x27;s competences generally follow principles codified in the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers 1989, introduced in the &quot;social chapter&quot; of the Treaty of Maastricht. Initially the UK had opted-out, because of opposition by the Conservative Party, but was acceded to when the Labour Party won the 1997 general election in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
The first group of Directives create a range of individual rights in EU employment relationships. The Employment Information Directive 1991 requires that every employee (however defined by member state law) has the right to a written statement of their employment contract. While there is no wage regulation, the Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision Directive 2003 requires that pension benefits are protected through a national insurance fund, that information is provided to beneficiaries, and minimum standards of governance are observed. Most member states go far beyond these requirements, particularly by requiring a vote for employees in who manages their money. Reflecting basic standards in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and ILO Conventions, the Working Time Directive 2003 requires a minimum of 4 weeks (totalling 28 days) paid holidays each year, a minimum of 20-minute paid rest breaks for 6-hour work shifts, limits on night work or time spent on dangerous work, and a maximum 48-hour working week unless a worker individually consents. The Parental Leave Directive 2010 creates a bare minimum of 4 months of unpaid leave for parents (mothers, fathers, or legal guardians) to care for children before they turn 8 years old, and the Pregnant Workers Directive 1992 creates a right for mothers to a minimum of 14 weeks&#x27; paid leave to care for children. Finally, the Safety and Health at Work Directive 1989 requires basic requirements to prevent and insure against workplace risks, with employee consultation and participation, and this is complemented by specialised Directives, ranging from work equipment to dangerous industries. In almost all cases, all member states go significantly beyond this minimum. The objective of transnational regulation is therefore to progressively raise the minimum floor in line with economic development. Second, equality was affirmed by the Court of Justice in &quot;Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH &amp; Co KG&quot; to be a general principle of EU law. Further to this, the Part-time Work Directive 1997, Fixed-term Work Directive 1999 and Temporary Agency Work Directive 2008 generally require that people who do not have ordinary full-time, permanent contracts are treated no less favourably than their colleagues. However, the scope of the protected worker is left to member state law, and the TAWD 2008 only applies to &quot;basic working conditions&quot; (mostly pay, working hours and participation rights) and enabled member states to have a qualifying period. The Race Equality Directive 2000, Equality Framework Directive 2000 and Equal Treatment Directive 2006 prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation, disability, religion or belief, age, race and gender. As well as &quot;direct discrimination&quot;, there is a prohibition on &quot;indirect discrimination&quot; where employers apply a neutral rule to everybody, but this has a disproportionate impact on the protected group. The rules are not consolidated, and on gender pay potentially limited in not enabling a hypothetical comparator, or comparators in outsourced business. Equality rules do not yet apply to child care rights, which only give women substantial time off, and consequently hinder equality in men and women caring for children after birth, and pursuing their careers.
Third, the EU is formally not enabled to legislate on collective bargaining, although the EU, with all member states, is bound by the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights on freedom of association. In &quot;Wilson and Palmer v United Kingdom&quot; the Court held that any detriment for membership of a trade union was incompatible with article 11, and in &quot;Demir and Baykara v Turkey&quot; the Court held &quot;the right to bargain collectively with the employer has, in principle, become one of the essential elements&quot; of article 11. This approach, which includes affirmation of the fundamental right to strike in all democratic member states, has been seen as lying in tension with some of the Court of Justice&#x27;s previous case law, notably &quot;ITWF v Viking Line ABP&quot; and &quot;Laval Un Partneri Ltd v Svenska Byggnadsarbetareforbundet&quot;. These controversial decisions, quickly disapproved by legislative measures, suggested the fundamental right of workers to take collective action was subordinate to business freedom to establish and provide services. More positively, the Information and Consultation Directive 2002 requires that workplaces with over 20 or 50 staff have the right to set up elected work councils with a range of binding rights, the European Works Council Directive 2009 enables work councils transnationally, and the Employee Involvement Directive 2001 requires representation of workers on company boards in some European Companies. If a company transforms from a member state corporation to incorporate under the European Company Regulation 2001, employees are entitled to no less favourable representation than under the member state&#x27;s existing board participation laws. This is practically important as a majority of EU member states require employee representation on company boards. Fourth, minimum job security rights are provided by three Directives. The Collective Redundancies Directive 1998 specifies that minimum periods of notice and consultation occur if more than a set number of jobs in a workplace are at risk. The Transfers of Undertakings Directive 2001 require that staff retain all contractual rights, unless there is an independent economic, technical or organisational reason, if their workplace is sold from one company to another. Last, the Insolvency Protection Directive 2008 requires that employees&#x27; wage claims are protected in case their employer falls insolvent. This last Directive gave rise to &quot;Francovich v Italy&quot;, where the Court of Justice affirmed that member states which fail to implement the minimum standards in EU Directives are liable to pay compensation to employees who should have rights under them.

===Companies and investment===
Like labour regulation, European company law is not a complete system and there is no such thing as a self-standing European corporation. Instead, a series of Directives require minimum standards, usually protecting investors, to be implemented in national corporate laws. The largest in Europe remain member state incorporations, such as the UK &quot;plc&quot;, the German &quot;AG&quot; or the French &quot;SA&quot;. There is however, a &quot;European Company&quot; (or &quot;Societas Europaea&quot;, abbreviated to &quot;SE&quot;) created by the Statute for a European Company Regulation 2001. This sets out basic provisions on the method of registration (e.g. by merger or reincorporation of an existing company) but then states that wherever the SE has its registered office, the law of that member state supplements the rules of the Statute. The Employee Involvement Directive 2001
also adds that, when an SE is incorporated, employees have the default right to retain all existing representation on the board of directors that they have, unless the negotiate by collective agreement a different or better plan than is provided for in existing member state law. Other than this, most important standards in a typical company law are left to member state law, so long as they comply with further minimum requirements in the company law directives. Duties owed by the board of directors to the company and its stakeholders, or the right to bring derivative claims to vindicate constitutional rights, are not generally regulated by EU law. Nor are rights of pre-emption to buy shares, nor rights of any party regarding claims by tort, contract or piercing the corporate veil to hold directors and shareholders accountable. However, Directives do require minimum rights on company formation, capital maintenance, accounting and audit, market regulation, board neutrality in a takeover bid, rules on mergers, and management of cross-border insolvency. The omission of minimum standards is important since the Court of Justice held in &quot;Centros&quot; that freedom of establishment requires companies operate in any member state they choose. This has been argued to risk a &quot;race to the bottom&quot; in standards, although the Court of Justice soon affirmed in &quot;Inspire Art&quot; that companies must still comply with proportionate requirements that are in the &quot;public interest&quot;.

Among the most important governance standards are rights vote for who is on the board of directors for investors of labour and capital. A Draft Fifth Company Law Directive proposed in 1972, which would have required EU-wide rights for employees to vote for boards stalled mainly because it attempted to require two-tier board structures, although most EU member states have codetermination today with unified boards. The Shareholder Rights Directive 2007 requires shareholders be able to make proposals, ask questions at meetings, vote by proxy and vote through intermediaries. This has become increasingly important as most company shares are held by institutional investors (primarily asset managers or banks, depending on the member state) who are holding &quot;other people&#x27;s money&quot;. A large proportion of this money comes from employees and other people saving for retirement, but who do not have an effective voice. Unlike Switzerland after a 2013 people&#x27;s initiative, or the U.S. Dodd-Frank Act 2010 in relation to brokers, the EU has not yet prevented intermediaries casting votes without express instructions of beneficiaries. This concentrates power into a small number of financial institutions, and creates the potential for conflicts of interest where financial institutions sell retirement, banking or products to companies in which they cast votes with other people&#x27;s money. A series of rights for ultimate investors exist in the Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision Directive 2003. This requires duties of disclosure in how a retirement fund is run, funding and insurance to guard against insolvency, but not yet that voting rights are only cast on the instructions of investors. By contrast, the Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities Directive 2009 does suggest that investors in a mutual fund or (&quot;collective investment scheme&quot;) should control the voting rights. The UCITS Directive 2009 is primarily concerned with creating a &quot;passport&quot;. If a firm complies with rules on authorisation, and governance of the management and investment companies in an overall fund structure, it can sell its shares in a collective investment scheme across the EU. This forms a broader package of Directives on securities and financial market regulation, much of which has been shaped by experience in the financial crisis of 2007–2008. Additional rules on remuneration practices, separating depositary bodies in firms from management and investment companies, and more penalties for violations were inserted in 2014. These measures are meant to decrease the risk to investors that an investment goes insolvent. The Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 2004 applies to other businesses selling financial instruments. It requires similar authorisation procedures to have a &quot;passport&quot; to sell in any EU country, and transparency of financial contracts through duties to disclose material information about products being sold, including disclosure of potential conflicts of interest with clients. The Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive 2011 applies to firms with massive quantities of capital, over €100 million, essentially hedge funds and private equity firms. Similarly, it requires authorisation to sell products EU wide, and then basic transparency requirements on products being sold, requirements in remuneration policies for fund managers that are perceived to reduce &quot;risk&quot; or make pay &quot;performance&quot; related. They do not, however, require limits to pay. There are general prohibitions on conflicts of interest, and specialised prohibitions on asset stripping. The Solvency II Directive 2009 is directed particularly at insurance firms, requiring minimum capital and best practices in valuation of assets, again to avoid insolvency. The Capital Requirements Directives contain analogous rules, with a similar goals, for banks. To administer the new rules, the European System of Financial Supervision was established in 2011, and consists of three main branches: the European Securities and Markets Authority in Paris, the European Banking Authority in London and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority in Frankfurt.

===Competition law===
Competition law aims &quot;to prevent competition from being distorted to the detriment of the public interest, individual undertakings and consumers&quot;, especially by limiting big business power. It covers all types of enterprise or &quot;undertaking&quot; regardless of legal form, or &quot;every entity engaged in an economic activity&quot;, but not non-profit organisations based on the principle of solidarity, or bodies carrying out a regulatory function. Employees and trade unions are not undertakings, and are outside the scope of competition law, and so are solo self-employed workers, because on long-standing consensus in international law labour is not a commodity, and workers have structurally unequal bargaining power compared to business and employers. A legal professional body setting regulatory standards was held to be outside competition law, and so were the rules of the International Olympic Committee and the International Swimming Federation in prohibiting drugs, because although drugs might increase &quot;competition&quot;, the &quot;integrity and objectivity of competitive sport&quot; was more important. EU competition law only regulates activities where trade between member states is affected to an &quot;appreciable&quot; degree, but member states may have higher standards that comply with social objectives. The four most important sets of rules relate to monopolies and enterprises with a dominant position, mergers and takeovers, cartels or collusive practices, and state aid.
First, Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union prohibits &quot;abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position&quot;. A &quot;dominant position&quot; is presumed to exist with over a 50% market share, and may exist with a 39.7% market share. There may also be dominance through control of data, or by a group of undertakings acting collectively, and a corporate group will be treated as a &quot;single economic unit&quot; for the purpose of calculating market share. The prohibited categories of &quot;abuse&quot; are unlimited, but article 102 explicitly spells out the bans on (a) &quot;unfair purchase or selling prices&quot;, (b) &quot;limiting production&quot;, (c) &quot;applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions&quot;, and (d) imposing unconnected &quot;supplementary obligations&quot; to contracts. In a leading case on (a) unfair prices, &quot;United Brands Co v Commission&quot; held that, although a banana company had a dominant position in its product and geographic markets (because bananas were not easily substituted with other fruit, and its relevant market share was 40 to 45%), prices 7% higher than rivals were not enough to be an abuse. By contrast prices 25% higher than a company&#x27;s estimated costs were found to be unfair. Unfair pricing also includes predatory pricing, where a company cuts its own selling prices to bankrupt a competitor: there is a presumption of abuse if a company prices &quot;below average variable costs&quot;, namely &quot;those which vary depending on the quantities produced&quot;. There is no requirement to show losses might be recouped. A leading case on (b) limiting production is &quot;AstraZeneca plc v Commission&quot;, where a drug company was fined €60 million for misleading public authorities to secure a longer patent for a medicine it called Losec, so limiting public use. In 2022, in &quot;Google LLC v Commission&quot; the General Court upheld a €4.125 billion fine against Google for the &quot;obstruction of development and distribution of competing Android operating systems&quot; by paying manufacturers to not install any version other than Google&#x27;s own.&lt;ref name=&quot;T-604/18&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Refusal to supply goods or services may also be abusive, as in &quot;Commercial Solvents Corporation v Commission&quot; where the subsidiary of CSC stopped selling an ingredient for a drug to combat tuberculosis to a competitor after it itself entered the drug market. Similarly in &quot;Microsoft Corp v Commission&quot;, Microsoft was fined €497 million for, among other things, refusing to give Sun Microsystems and other competitors information needed to build servers after Microsoft itself entered the server market.
Under the third type of abuse, (c) unlawful discrimination, in &quot;British Airways plc v Commission&quot; it was held that British Airways abused its dominant position by giving some travel agents extra payment to promote its tickets over others. This made &quot;market entry very difficult&quot; and frustrated the ability of &quot;co-contractors to choose between various sources of supply or commercial partners&quot;. Under (d) examples of the abuse of imposing supplementary obligations include the &quot;Microsoft Corp v Commission&quot; case, where Microsoft bundled a pre-installed media player into Windows OS sales, which had the effect of damaging competitor businesses such as RealPlayer. By contrast, in &quot;Intel Corp v Commission&quot;, Intel was fined €1.06 billion by the commission for giving rebates on x86 computer processors if manufacturers bought over 80% of their chips only from Intel. This had the effect of &quot;tying customers to the undertaking in a dominant position&quot;. However the fine was annulled on the ground that the commission had not adequately proven an anti-competitive effect, so in 2023 the Commission imposed a smaller €376 million fine. Second, the Merger Regulation 2004 applies to &quot;concentrations&quot; (any merger or acquisition), that generally have a value of at least €100 million turnover in the EU if it &quot;would significantly impede effective competition&quot; by creating or strengthening a dominant position. While mergers between direct (&quot;horizontal&quot;) competitors are carefully scrutinised upon mandatory notification to the commission, vertical or conglomerate mergers are often allowed where a competitor is not removed. This has led to increasingly large business groups, with ever greater power.
Third, Article 101 of the TFEU prohibits cartels or collusive practices, including competitors engaging in (a) price fixing, (b) limiting production, (c) sharing markets, (d) applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions, and (e) making contracts subject to unconnected obligations. According to Article 101(2) any such agreements between undertakings are automatically void. Article 101(3) establishes exemptions, if the collusion is for distributional or technological innovation, gives consumers a &quot;fair share&quot; of the benefit and does not include unreasonable restraints that risk eliminating competition anywhere. For example, in &quot;Parker ITR Srl v Commission&quot; eleven corporations that manufactured marine hoses for offshore oil rigs were fined €131 million for rigging bids and sharing markets worldwide – they would designate a &quot;bid champion&quot; in each case to raise prices. Secret cartels are often hard to prove, so the courts allow competition regulators to establish collusion where there is no other plausible explanation for price rises. Some agreements among businesses, however, can be highly beneficial. For instance, in a decision on the &quot;Conseil Européen de la Construction d&#x27;Appareils Domestiques&quot;, the Commission held an agreement among washing machine makers to phase out production of low-efficiency machines was lawful, especially since it would lead to &quot;reduced pollution from electricity generation&quot;. Fourth, TFEU article 106(1) requires that the state may not grant special or exclusive rights for undertakings that distort competition, and states that (2) competition law applies to services of general economic interest, unless it obstructs their tasks in law or fact (e.g. in providing public services). Under TFEU art 107(1) no state aid that distorts competition is allowed, but aid is allowed (2) for individual consumers, without discrimination, and (3) for economic development, particularly to tackle underemployment. The Procurement Directive 2014/24/EU, on government procurement in the EU sets standards for open tenders when outsourcing public services to private companies.

===Commerce and intellectual property===

While EU law has not yet developed a civil code for contracts, torts, unjust enrichment, real or personal property, or commerce in general, European legal scholars have drafted common principles, including Principles of European Contract Law and Principles of European Tort Law that are common to member states. In absence of harmonisation, there is a comprehensive system of conflicts of laws to settle the jurisdiction of courts, and the applicable law, for most commercial disputes. The Brussels I Regulation 2012 determines the jurisdiction of courts depending upon where a person is domiciled or has operations. The applicable law for consensual obligations is then determined by the Rome I Regulation, where article 3 states the principle that a choice of law can be made expressly in a contract, unless this affects provisions that cannot be derogated from, such as employment, consumer, tenancy or other rights. The Rome II Regulation determines applicable law in the case of non-consensual obligations, such as torts and unjust enrichment. Under article 4 the general rule is that the law applies where &quot;the damage occurred&quot;, although under article 7 in the case of &quot;environmental damage or damage sustained by persons or property as a result&quot; there is a choice to bring an action under the law of the tortfeasor.

Unlike other property forms, intellectual property rights are comprehensively regulated by a series of directives on copyrights, patents and trademarks. The Copyright Term Directive 2006 article 1 states the principle that copyrights last for 70 years after the death of the author. The Copyright and Information Society Directive 2001 was passed to regulate copyright over the internet, and the effect of article 5 is that internet service providers are not liable for data they transmit even if it infringes copyright. However under article 6, member states must give &quot;adequate legal protection&quot; for copyrights. The Resale Rights Directive creates a right to royalties for authors where works are resold. The Enforcement Directive requires member states have effective remedies and legal processes. Under the European Patent Convention, which is separate from the EU, the general patent term is 20 years from the date that a patent (of an invention) is filed with an official register, and the development of an EU patent attempts to harmonise standards around these norms. The Trade Marks Directive enables a common system of trade mark registration so that, with exceptions, a registered trade mark applies across all EU member states.

==Public regulation==
A major part of EU law, and most of the EU&#x27;s budget, concerns public regulation of enterprise and public services. A basic norm of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU, in article 345, is that the &quot;Treaties shall in no way prejudice the rules in Member States governing the system of property ownership&quot;, meaning the EU remains neutral between private or public ownership, but that it can require common standards. In the cases of education and health, member states generally organise public services and the EU requires free movement. There is a unified European Central Bank that funds private banks, and adopts a common monetary policy for price stability, employment and sustainability. The EU&#x27;s policies on energy, agriculture and forestry, transport and buildings are crucial to end climate damage and shift completely to clean energy that does not heat the planet. Among these, 33% of the entire EU budget is spent on agricultural subsidies to farm corporations and owners. The EU also has an increasing number of policies to raise standards for communications, the internet, data protection, and online media. It has limited involvement in the military and security, but a Common Foreign and Security Policy.

===Education and health===

Education and health are provided mainly by member states, but shaped by common minimum standards in EU law. In the case of education, the European Social Charter, like the Universal Declaration, the International Bill of Human Rights, say that &quot;everyone&quot; has the right to education, and that primary, secondary and higher education should be made &quot;free&quot;, for instance &quot;by reducing or abolishing any fees or charges&quot; and &quot;granting financial assistance&quot;. While the history of education was confined to a wealth elite, today most member states have tuition free university. There are no common rules for university finance or governance, although there is a right to free movement and universities have voluntarily harmonised standards. In 1987, the Erasmus Programme was created to fund students to study in other countries, and with a budget of €30 billion from 2021 to 2027. From 1999, the Bologna Declaration and Process led to the creation of the European Higher Education Area where member state universities adopted a common degree structure (bachelor, master, and doctoral degree) with a goal to have similar expectations in learning outcomes. Member states may not impose different fees on students from other member states or limit their numbers, and this appears to have worked even without a system for countries to reimburse one another if costs differ widely. However, if member states have grants or student loans, &quot;R (Bidar) v London Borough of Ealing&quot; held there may be a minimum residency requirement, such as three years. Most of the world&#x27;s best universities enable majority staff, and significant alumni or student voice in university governance. For instance, the French Education Code requires that universities have a board of management with 24 to 36 members, and 8 to 16 elected by professors, 4 to 6 by non-academic staff, 4 to 6 by students, and 8 external members, and have an academic council elected by staff with powers to set important rules, such as on training or examinations. Secondary, primary, and pre-school are generally free from fees. More successful school systems tend to be well-funded and public, and do not have barriers to children based on wealth, such as private fees for school. Most schools enable staff and parents to vote for representatives on their children&#x27;s school governing bodies.

As in education, there is a universal human right to &#x27;health and well-being&#x27; including &#x27;medical care and necessary social services&#x27;, although human rights law does not say what the best system of health governance is. Among EU member states there are two main traditions of health care provision, based on public service or insurance. First, healthcare may be seen as a public service free at the point of use, with hospitals largely owned by the public health service and doctors publicly funded (the &quot;Beveridge model&quot;.) This is the system, for example, in Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Spain, Italy, Portugal, Greece or Ireland. Second, healthcare can be provided through insurance, where hospitals and doctors are separately owned and run from the service provider (the &quot;Bismarck model&quot;). There is a large spectrum between systems based mainly on public insurance and usually creating public option hospitals or requiring no profit (such as France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Slovenia, the Czech Republic or Estonia) and those that allow substantial private and profit-making insurance and hospital or doctor provision (the Netherlands and Germany). In all cases, health is universal, and subsidised or free wherever people cannot afford insurance premiums, unlike the notorious case of the United States which still does not have universal healthcare. The healthcare outcomes vary greatly between different systems, so that while there is generally higher life expectancy with more investment, healthcare tends to have worse outcomes and costs more where there is more private business or profit. Under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union article 56 there is the right to receive services, with rules codified into the Patients&#x27; Rights Directive 2011. Article 4 requires that people are treated, article 5 requires reimbursement of costs by the person&#x27;s country of origin, article 6 requires national contact points to connect healthcare providers or insurers and patient organisations, but under article 8 member states may require prior authorisation for people to travel abroad for treatment where the costs are high or planning is needed. A European Health Insurance Card is also available for free to receive health across the EU. This system was developed after &quot;R (Watts) v Bedford Primary Care Trust&quot;, where in 2003 Mrs Watts travelled from the UK to France, paid £3900 for a hip replacement operation, and claimed she should be reimbursed. The UK&#x27;s National Health Service waiting lists were 4 to 6 months at the time. The Court of Justice&#x27;s Grand Chamber held that health care counted as a &#x27;service&#x27; under TFEU article 56, and that in principle there was a right to receive those services abroad. However, high demand could justify waiting lists in a national health system, but individual circumstances of the patient had to be assessed. For non-EU nationals, the European Court of Human Rights held in &quot;N v United Kingdom&quot; that it was not inhuman and degrading treatment contrary to ECHR article 3 to deport someone to a country where there were unlikely to live longer than two years without treatment. There is no duty &#x27;through provision of free and unlimited health care to all aliens without a right to stay within its jurisdiction&#x27; to avoid &#x27;too great a burden on the Contracting States.&#x27; However, if someone&#x27;s death would be imminent the European Court of Human Rights has held that a decision to remove would violate ECHR article 3.

===Banking, monetary and fiscal policy===
Banking, monetary and fiscal policy is overseen by the European Central Bank, member states, and the EU Commission. This is vital for European society as it affects the human rights to full employment, to fair wages, housing, and to an adequate standard of living. When the Eurozone and common currency of the euro was established, there was no political agreement to develop a full EU fiscal policy (i.e. tax and spending), so that governments would pool money and lend to countries in trouble, because it was thought that wealthier member states should not have to subsidise poorer member states. However, there was planned to be a common central bank, which would aim to have common interest rates. The ECB, based in Frankfurt, controls monetary policy that underpins the euro. Member states also have central banks (such as the Bundesbank, , Banco de España), and these 19 Eurozone member state central banks have a duty to act compatibly with ECB policy. The ECB has an executive board with a president, vice president and four other members, all appointed by the European Council by qualified majority, after consulting the European Parliament, and the Governing Council of the ECB. The Governing Council is made up of the ECB executive board and member state central banks using the euro, they have 8 year terms, and can be removed only for gross misconduct.
The European Central Bank&#x27;s &#x27;primary objective... shall be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to that objective, it shall support the general economic policies in the Union&#x27;, such as &#x27;balanced economic growth and price stability, a highly competitive social market economy, aiming at full employment and social progress, and a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment.&#x27; There are three main powers to achieve these goals. First, the ECB can require other banks to hold reserves proportionate to their type of lending. Second, it may lend money to other banks, or conduct &#x27;credit operations&#x27;. Third it may &#x27;operate in the financial markets by buying and selling&#x27; securities. For example, in &quot;Gauweiler v Deutscher Bundestag&quot; a German politician claimed that the ECB&#x27;s purchase of Greek government debt on secondary markets violated TFEU article 123, which prohibits directly lending money to member state governments. The Court of Justice rejected that the ECB had engaged in &#x27;economic policy&#x27; (i.e. fiscal transfers) rather than monetary policy decisions, which it was allowed to do. So far the ECB has failed to use these powers to eliminate investment in fossil fuels, despite the inflation that gas, oil and coal cause given their price volality in international markets.

Beyond the central bank, the Credit Institutions Directive 2013 requires authorisation and prudence provisions in other banks in all EU member states. Under the Basel III programme, created by an international banker group, banks must hold more money in reserves based on the risk-profile that it holds, as determined by the member state regulator. More risky assets require more reserves, and the Capital Requirements Regulation 2013 codifies these standards, for instance by mandating that proportionally less in reserves is needed if more government debt is held, but more if mortgage-backed securities are held. To guard against the risk of bank runs, the Deposit Guarantee Directive 2014 creates an EU wide minimum guarantee of €100,000 for bank deposits, so that if anyone&#x27;s bank goes insolvent, the state will pay the deposit up to this amount. There are not yet rules requiring higher reserving and accounting practices for climate risk and of gas, oil or coal reserves become worthless as Europe replaces fossil fuels with renewable energy.
The budget of the European Union is set in 7 year cycles, and in 2022 around €170bn was spent, of which nearly one-third was agricultural policy, including regional development. EU member state government expenditures are far higher as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product, but are constrained by the Fiscal Compact, which requires no more than a 3% budget deficit compared to GDP in any given year, and aiming for surpluses or balanced budgets. As a result of the Eurozone crisis, a Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism created a fund to assist countries with severe fiscal problems. The results of the &quot;strict conditionality&quot; attached to loans (or so called structural adjustment) that required privatisation, cuts to welfare, and wages in Greece, Spain, Portugal or Ireland was particularly negative. The EU&#x27;s main metric for economic performance has been GDP, which adds up market exchange values in firm accounts and government expenditures according to the Gross National Income Regulation 2019, even though this fails to discount polluting and harmful economic activities such as energy and industry that damages the climate, the environment and human health. The EU&#x27;s budget mainly comes from contributions of around 0.7% of GDP per member state, as well as a share of EU value added tax and customs duties. The EU does not yet have a more comprehensive system for preventing tax evasion, or for fair taxation of multinational or financial corporations.

===Electricity and energy===
Like the world, the EU&#x27;s greatest task is to replace fossil fuels with clean energy as fast as technology allows since protection of &quot;life&quot;, and &quot;improvement of the quality of the environment&quot; are fundamental rights, and the highest policy goals of the EU. In international law, there is also &#x27;the inherent right of all peoples to enjoy and utilize fully and freely their natural wealth and resources&#x27; such as clean air, and the right to &#x27;the benefits of scientific progress&#x27;, such as clean energy. The EU&#x27;s overall target is to reduce toxic greenhouse gas emissions by 50–55% by 2030, and be carbon neutral or negative by 2050, and 32% renewable energy by 2030, though a 45% target by 2030 was proposed by the commission and backed by Parliament in 2022. Since the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine it aims to eliminate Russian fossil fuel imports as fast as possible. However laws such as the Hydrocarbons Directive 1994 still enable gas and oil extraction. It requires that licences are awarded based on technical and financial capability, methods, price, and previous conduct, that applicants are treated equally by objective and non-discriminatory criteria, and advertisements for tenders must be public. It has not yet required that existing licensees pay for the pollution and climate damage they have caused, nor sought to end extraction of gas and oil.
A growing number of cases seek to enforce liability on gas, oil and coal polluters. In &quot;Friends of the Earth v Royal Dutch Shell plc&quot;, the Hague District Court held that Shell was bound by the tort provisions of the Dutch Civil Code, Book 6, section 162(2), interpreted in light of the Paris Agreement 2015 article 2(1) and ECHR articles 2 and 8 (rights to life and home), to immediately start cutting all of its emissions by 45% by 2030, whether generated directly by its corporate group (scope 1), indirectly from its purchases (scope 2), or indirectly from its value chain or the purchase and use of its products (scope 3). It emphasised the &#x27;serious and irreversible consequences of dangerous climate change in the Netherlands... pose a threat to the human rights of Dutch residents&#x27;. After this loss, Shell dropped &quot;Royal Dutch&quot; from its name, and moved its headquarters to London. In &quot;Lliuya v RWE AG&quot; Mr Lliuya, who lives in Huaraz, Peru has claimed that RWE AG should pay 0.47% of the costs of flood defences against a melting mountain glacier that increases the size of Lake Palcacocha, because RWE is responsible for 0.47% of historic global greenhouse gas emissions. The Higher Regional Court of Essen gave leave to appeal on whether there is causation of damage, and in 2022 visited the lake. There has also been heightened responsibility on member state governments. In &quot;Urgenda v State of Netherlands&quot; the Dutch Supreme Court held the Dutch government must reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25% before 2020, following the IPCC 2007 minimum recommendations, and that failure to do so would violate the right to life and home in ECHR articles 2 and 8. In the &quot;Klimaschutz case&quot;, the German Constitutional Court held that the German government must speed up its climate protection measures to protect the rights to life, and the environment under the Grundgesetz 1949, articles 2 and 20a. However the EU and member states have so far failed to codify liability to prevent pollution and climate damage by corporations that profit, and the EU Emissions Trading System has failed to adequately price carbon for the damage it causes (prices traded under €98 per metric ton until the end of 2022).
As clean energy from wind, solar or hydro storage replaces pollution from gas, oil and coal, EU law has standards for generation and distribution networks. First, in generation, the Renewable Energy Directive 2018 still enables biomass and biofuel to count toward &quot;renewable&quot; energy statistics based on the argument that trees or plants absorb greenhouse gases when they grow, even though biomass burning (usually in ex-coal plants) releases more greenhouse gases than coal, biomass transport is not clean, forests take decades to replenish, and smoke damages human health. Second, the EU does not yet have a feed-in tariff system, requiring energy grids and retailers to pay a fair price to households or businesses with solar or wind generation, however in &quot;PreussenElektra AG v Schleswag AG&quot; the Court of Justice held that member states could fix any price they chose, so that energy companies would have to reimburse producers for the energy they received. A company now owned by E.ON claimed the feed-in tariff was state aid under TFEU article 107, and should have to pass rules for exemption, as a way to hinder renewable energy funding. The Court rejected this, because although the policy might have &#x27;negative repercussions&#x27; for big energy companies it &#x27;cannot be regarded&#x27; as giving to small producers &#x27;a particular advantage at the expense of the state&#x27;.
The third main set of standards is that the EU requires that electricity or gas enterprises acquire a licence from member state authorities. There must be legal separation into different entities of owners of networks from retailers, although they can be owned by the same enterprise, to ensure transparency of accounting. Then, different enterprises have rights to access infrastructure of network owners on fair and transparent terms, as a way to ensure different member state networks and supplies can become integrated across the EU. Most EU operators are publicly owned, and the Court of Justice in &quot;Netherlands v Essent NV&quot; emphatically rejected that there was any violation of EU law on free movement of capital by a Dutch Act requiring electricity and gas distributors to be publicly owned, that system operators could not be connected by ownership to generators, and limited the level of debt.
The Court of Justice held a public ownership requirement was justified by &#x27;overriding reasons in the public interest&#x27;, &#x27;to protect consumers&#x27; and for the &#x27;security of energy supply&#x27;. It further pointed to the foundational case of &quot;Costa v ENEL&quot;, where the Court held in 1964 that the treaties do &#x27;not prohibit the creation of any state monopolies&#x27; so long as they do not operate commercially and discriminate. The approach of EU law is that even where energy companies are privatised, they still are subject to the same rules as the state on direct effect, because it remains that they are &#x27;providing a public service&#x27;. The evidence suggests &quot;consumers pay lower electricity net-of-tax prices in countries where there are still incumbents owned by national governments.&quot; With the sharp rise in fossil fuel prices that came from the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and the fossil fuel cartel OPEC deciding to restrict supply, the EU Commission proposed a windfall fossil fuel tax. There are not yet common standards on energy enterprise governance, although a number of member states ensure that workers and energy bill payers have the right to vote for directors.

===Agriculture, forestry and water===
Everyone has the right to food and water, and under the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU &quot;the improvement of the quality of the environment must be integrated into the policies of the Union&quot;. The Common Agricultural Policy&#x27;s origins lay in ensuring that all farm workers had fair wages and everyone had food, since in 1960 a third of employment and a fifth of GDP was in agriculture, and after WW2 Europe had been on the brink of starvation. In 2020, the agricultural workforce was 4.2% of the EU total. The CAP&#x27;s objectives are still to increase production, &quot;a fair standard of living for the agricultural community&quot;, to stabilise markets and supplies, and &quot;reasonable prices&quot; for consumers. In 2021, the CAP was 33.1% of the entire EU budget, at €55.1 billion, however there are no requirements for subsidies to be used so that farm workers (as opposed to owners) have fair pay scales, few requirements for rural development, and minimal standards for environmental improvement.
The CAP has three main parts. First, the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund distributes &#x27;direct payments&#x27;, which are 70.9% of the CAP budget. The Direct Payments Regulation 2013 gives payments to an &#x27;active farmer&#x27; that carries out agricultural activity, grazing or cultivation, does not operate airports, rail, waterworks, real estate, sport or recreation grounds, and has the land at their disposal. The farm must have at least 1 hectare and receive €100 for each, though member states can set higher thresholds (e.g. 5 hectares and €200). If payments reach over €150,000 there is a 5% reduction per hectare for each hectare. This favours large farm corporations, and the largest 1% typically receive around 10 to 15% of all subsidies in member states. As conditions of receiving subsidies, farms can be required to keep land in good condition, for public, animal, and plant health, and maintain environment standards. For minimal biodiversity, farmers must have over two crops if they have 10 hectares, not farm at least 5% of lintensively (an &#x27;ecological focus area&#x27; over 15 hectares, and have three crops over 30 hectares. Environmentally sensitive grasslands, as designated by the Habitats Directive 1992 and the Wild Birds Directive 2009, should not be more turned into more than 5% agricultural area. The second main part, also carried out by the EAGF, is &#x27;market measures&#x27;. Under the Agricultural Products Regulation 2013 certain crops and meat are eligible for purchase by member state authorities, to be &#x27;stored by them until disposed of&#x27;, with extra aid for storage. The goal of this is to restrict supply and therefore raise prices, particularly in response to unexpected drops in demand, a health scare, or international market volatility. In 2018, this was 4.59% of the CAP budget. The benefits of many of these subsidies go to the parties in the food supply chains with most bargaining power, which is usually supermarkets. The Agricultural Unfair Trading Practices Directive 2019 article 3 prohibits practices such as late payments by buyers of food to suppliers, cancellations at short notice, unilateral alteration of terms, threats of commercial retaliation, and payments by suppliers to the buyers (i.e. from farmers to supermarkets) for stocking, adverts, marketing or staff. These rules limit supermarkets&#x27; abuse of a dominant position but do not ensure subsidies reach farm communities. The Food Safety Regulation 2002 article 14 requires that food is not place on the market if it is &#x27;injurious to health&#x27; or is &#x27;unfit for human consumption&#x27;, but there is no requirement that supermarkets or others eliminate harmful packaging such as plastic. The third main part, administered by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, is &#x27;rural development&#x27; payments, which are 24.4% of the CAP budget. Following the &#x27;Europe 2020 Strategy by promoting sustainable rural development&#x27;, payments are made for knowledge transfer, advice, asset investment, and business development aid. Priorities may include improving water and energy use. The courts give the EU a wide discretion to implement policy, so judicial review is possible only if agricultural measures are &#x27;manifestly inappropriate&#x27;. EU law does not yet have a systematic plan or subsidies to rewild depleted environments, and to move to complete clean energy infrastructure.
Outside farms, forests cover just 43.52% of the EU&#x27;s land, compared to 80% forest cover historically across Europe. There is no requirement yet to undertake any reforesting or rewilding of land, while the Land Use and Forestry Directive 2018 merely requires that member states keep accounts of land use and forestry changes based on greenhouse gas emissions, and that emissions do not exceed removals of greenhouse gases. Globally, the Timber Regulation 2010 requires that all timber traders know their supply chains and keep records for 5 years, to ensure that any illegally harvested timber is banned in the EU law, however there is not yet any ban on imports of goods (such as beef or palm oil) from countries that continue to deforest their landscape. For water resources, in nature or for drinking, the Water Framework Directive 2000 sets common standards and provides that member states should oversee water industry standards. The Drinking Water Quality Directive 2020 requires water that is &quot;wholesome and clean&quot;, and article 4 defines this as free from micro-organisms and parasites dangerous to health, and compliant with chemical and biological standards in Annex I. The Bathing Waters Directive 2006 sets standards for quality of bathing waters, namely riviers and beaches, to be free from toxic waste or sewage. There must be adequate remedies for breaches, so in &quot;Commission v United Kingdom&quot; (1992) it was held that the UK&#x27;s approach of accepting undertakings from water companies to behave better in future, instead of using enforcement orders, was inadequate to comply with EU law. Fines can be and often are significant, ranging into hundreds of thousands or millions of euros for breach.

===Transport and buildings ===
Clean road, rail, sea and air transport are fundamental goals of the EU, given its commitment to human rights for &#x27;improvement of the quality of the environment&#x27;, &#x27;services of general economic interest&#x27;, and the right to &#x27;the benefits of scientific progress&#x27;. However, the pace of reform is slow compared to the urgency of reversing global heating. The Renewable Energy Directive 2018 article 25 requires that final energy consumption in transport in each member state is &#x27;at least 14%&#x27; renewable by 2030. This is within the 2030 target for 32% &quot;share of energy from renewable sources in the Union&#x27;s gross final consumption of energy&quot;. In 2022, the EU promised to ban sale of new petrol and diesel vehicles only by 2035, enabling manufacturing corporations to profit from toxic emissions for another 13 years, though many member states have higher standards. There is not yet a plan for full rail electrification, or clean shipping or air travel, even where technology exists.
In road transport, the Emission Performance Regulation 2019 says manufacturers of &quot;new passenger cars&quot; should not allow emissions to exceed 95 grams of CO2 per kilometre, and 147 grams of CO2 per kilometre for new light commercial vehicles, but this is merely an &quot;EU fleet-wide target&quot; rather than requirements for each vehicle. Manufacturers can agree to pool their production quotas, so as to meet their targets on average, but there is no legal sanction for failure to meet the target. Member states are simply required to record the relevant success or failure, and manufacturers&#x27; performance is published. By contrast the Vehicles Emissions Regulation 2007 sets the &quot;Euro 6&quot; standards in maximum emissions that car manufacturers can have. Since the &#x27;Euro 1&#x27; standard was introduced in 1992, standards became cleaner each 4 to 5 years, but recently stalled. Article 2 states this applies to vehicles under 2,610 kilograms, while the Heavy Vehicle Emission Regulation 2019 applies to heavier vehicles, with looser CO2 limits. Article 4 states manufacturers must &#x27;demonstrate that all new vehicles sold, registered or put into service in the Community are type approved in accordance with this Regulation&#x27;. Article 6 requires manufacturers to &#x27;provide unrestricted and standardised access to vehicle repair and maintenance information&#x27; should there be any non-compliance. Article 13 requires penalties imposed by member states for breach are &#x27;effective, proportionate and dissuasive&#x27;, and breaches include any &#x27;false declarations&#x27; as well as &#x27;use of defeat devices&#x27;. This reference follows the &quot;Dieselgate&quot; scandal where Volkswagen and manufacturers around Europe and the world fraudulently concealed their true emissions. In 2007, &quot;Commission v Germany&quot; held that the German Volkswagen Act 1959 violated free movement of capital in TFEU article 63 by ensuring that the state of Lower Saxony had a golden share to exercise public control over the company&#x27;s governance. It limited voting rights of individual shareholder to 20% of the company. The German government&#x27;s justification that the restrictions were an overriding public interest, for instance, to protect workers was rejected. A justification for environmental protection was not offered. After this, the Porsche family dominated Volkswagen, and in 2007 a new CEO, Martin Winterkorn took up his post and aimed in &#x27;Strategie 2018&#x27; to become the world&#x27;s largest auto-manufacturer, and it began to install cheat devices.
People need to have a driving licence to drive on a road, and there is a common system of recognition around the EU. For delivery vehicle workers, the Road Transport Regulation 2006 limits daily driving time to 9 hours a day, a maximum of 56 hours a week, and requires at least a 45-minute break after hours. Drivers may also not be paid according to distance travelled if this would endanger road safety. Taxi enterprises are usually regulated separately in each member state, and the attempts of the app-based firm Uber to evade regulation by arguing it was not a &quot;transport service&quot; rather than an &quot;Information Society Service&quot; failed. Most bus networks are publicly owned or procured, but there are common rights. If buses are delayed in journeys over 250 kilometres, the Bus Passenger Rights Regulation 2011 entitles passengers to compensation. Under article 19, a delay over two hours must result in compensation of 50% of the ticket price, as well as rerouting and reimbursement. Article 6 says &#x27;Carriers may offer contract conditions that are more favourable for the passenger&#x27;, although it is not clear many take up this option. Article 7 says member states cannot set maximum compensation for death or injury lower than €220,000 per passenger or €1200 per item of luggage. There is not yet a requirement for the major bus, delivery, taxi enterprises to electrify their fleets even though this would create the fastest reduction of emissions and would be cheaper for business in total operating costs.
In rail transport, the Single European Railway Directive 2012 requires that ownership of tracks and operating companies are separated to prevent conflicts of interest and pricing, particularly to ensure that trains can run from one member state to another. Most European railways are publicly owned, and each train enterprise must have separate accounts and member states should run railways &#x27;at the lowest possible cost for the quality of service required&#x27;. The Rail Passenger Rights Regulation 2007 article 17 states that 25% of a ticket price should be refunded if there is a one-hour delay, and 50% over two hours, with a threshold of €4 to claim. Passengers have a right to take bicycles on trains where they are not overcrowded, there must be clear information on tickets, and there are rights to make reservations. Finally, in air transport, under the Flight Compensation Regulation (EC) No 261/2004 there is a minimum right of €250 compensation for 2 hour delay on 1500 km flight, €400 compensation for 3 hour delay or more on a 1500–3500 km flight, and €600 for 4 hours in flights over 3500 km flight, plus the right to refreshments, hotels, and alternative transport. There are not yet duties on airline companies to invest in research for clean fuels, and eliminate unnecessary flight paths when clean land transport alternatives (such as high-speed rail) exist.

Finally, the &#x27;right to housing assistance&#x27; is a basic part of EU law. House prices are affected by monetary policy (above), but otherwise the EU&#x27;s involvement is so far limited to minimal environmental standards. The Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 2010 aims to eliminate unclean materials and energy waste to have &quot;nearly zero-energy buildings&quot;, particularly by setting standards for new buildings since 2020 and upgrading existing buildings by 2050. There is, however, no requirement yet that all buildings replace gas heating with electric or heat-pumps, have solar or wind energy generation, electric vehicle charging, and particular insulation standards, wherever possible.

===Communications and data ===
The right &#x27;to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers&#x27; is a basic part of freedom of expression, as much as the right against &#x27;arbitrary or unlawful interference with [our] privacy, family, home or correspondence&#x27;, whether interference is by business, government or anyone else. Communication networks, from the post to telephone lines to the internet, are crucial for friends, families, business and government, and EU law sets standards for their construction and use. For example, the Postal Services Directive 1997 article 3 requires &#x27;universal service&#x27; at minimum standards by the main postal provider. For mobile phone access anywhere in the EU, the Roaming Regulation 2022 eliminates extra charges for mobile calls, texts and data when abroad in other member states, and wholesale charges must be fair. To ensure internet service providers do not slow speeds for some websites to gain unfair profit, the Net Neutrality Regulation 2015 states providers &#x27;of internet access services shall treat all traffic equally&#x27; but this shall not prevent &#x27;reasonable traffic management measures&#x27;.
Since today&#x27;s communications have mostly merged into the internet, the Electronic Communications Code Directive 2018 is critical for EU infrastructure. Article 5 requires a member state regulator or a &quot;competent authority&quot; is set up that will license use of the radio spectrum, through which mobile and internet signals travel. A regulator must also enable access and interconnection to other infrastructure (such as telecomms and broadband cables), protect end-user rights, and monitor &quot;competition issues regarding open internet access&quot; to ensure rights such as universal service and portability of phone numbers. Articles 6–8 require the regulators are independent, with dismissal of heads only for a good reason, and articles 10–11 require cooperation with other authorities. Articles 12–13 require that use of electronic communication networks is authorised by a regulator, and that conditions attached are non-discriminatory, proportionate and transparent. The owner of a communication network has duties to allow access and interconnection on fair terms, and so article 17 requires that its accounts and financial reports are separate from other activities (if the enterprise does other business), article 74 foresees that regulators can control prices, and article 84 says member states should &quot;ensure that all consumers in their territories have access at an affordable price, in light of specific national conditions, to an available adequate broadband internet access service and to voice communications services&quot;. While some EU member states have privatised all, and some part, of their telecomms infrastructure, publicly or community-owned internet providers (such as in Denmark or Romania) tend to have the fastest web speeds.
Historically to protect people&#x27;s privacy and correspondence, the post banned tampering with letters, and excluded post offices from responsibility for letters even if the contents were for something illegal. As the internet developed, the original Information Society Directive 1998 aimed for something similar, so that internet server providers or email hosts, for instance, protected privacy. After this the Electronic Commerce Directive 2000 also sought to ensure free movement for an &quot;information society service&quot;, requiring member states to not restrict them unless it was to fulfill a public policy, prevent crime, fight incitement to hatred, protect individual dignity, protect health, or protect consumers or investors. Articles 12 to 14 further said that an ISS operating as a &quot;mere conduit&quot; for information, doing &quot;caching&quot; or &quot;hosting&quot; is &#x27;not liable for information stored&#x27; if the &#x27;provider does not have actual knowledge of illegal activity&#x27; and &#x27;is not aware of facts or circumstances from which the illegal activity or information is apparent&#x27;, but must act quickly to remove or disable access &#x27;upon obtaining knowledge or awareness&#x27;. Article 15 states that member states should &#x27;not impose a general obligation on providers... to monitor the information which they transmit or store&#x27; nor &#x27;seek facts&#x27; on illegality. However the meaning of who was an &quot;ISS&quot; was not clearly defined in law, and has become a problem with social media that was not meant to be protected like private communication. An internet service provider has been held to be an ISS, and so has a Wi-Fi host, the Electronic Commerce Directive 2000 recital 11 states email services, search engines, data storage, and streaming, are information society services, and an individual email is not, and the Information Society Directive 2015 makes clear that TV and radio stations do not count as ISS&#x27;s. None of these definitions include advertising, which is never &quot;at the request of a recipient of services&quot; as the 2015 Directive requires, however various cases have decided that eBay, Facebook, and AirBnB, may count as ISSs, but the cab app Uber does not.

The main rights to data privacy are found in the General Data Protection Regulation 2016. First, there is the right to have data about someone processed only with their &#x27;consent&#x27;, or based on other justifiable grounds, such as a lawful purpose. It has been held that consent is not given if there is &#x27;a pre-checked checkbox which the user must deselect to refuse&#x27;. Under the Privacy and Electronic Communications Directive 2002 a well-known result is that websites must not install &quot;cookies&quot; into someone&#x27;s web browser unless they positively accept cookies. The EU has not yet simply enabled people to block all cookies within a browser, and required that websites give people this option without thousands of annoying buttons to click. Second, people have the right to be informed about data kept on them. Third, there is a right to be forgotten and the data to be deleted. Where legal standards do not exist, Alphabet, Facebook or Microsoft have largely been uncontrolled in privacy invasion, for instance, Gmail pioneering surveillance of emails for ads as its first business model, and Facebook abolishing service-user voting rights over changes to its privacy policies in 2012. There are no rights yet in EU law for service-users to vote for representatives on boards of big tech companies that take their data, or to have decision-rights over use of their data, in contrast to the rights of service-users of websites like Wikipedia.

===Media and markets ===
Pluralism and regulation of the media, such as through &#x27;the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises&#x27;, have long been seen as essential to protect freedom of opinion and expression, to ensure that citizens have a more equal voice, and ultimately to support the universal &#x27;right to take part in the government&#x27;. In almost all member states there is a well funded public, and independent broadcaster for TV and radio, and there are common standards for all TV and radio, which are designed to support open, fact-based discussion and deliberative democracy. However, the same standards have not yet been applied to equivalent internet television, radio or &quot;social media&quot; such as the platforms controlled by YouTube (owned by Alphabet), Facebook or Instagram (owned by Meta), or Twitter (owned by Elon Musk), all of which have spread conspiracy theories, discrimination, far-right, extremist, terrorist, and hostile military content.
General standards for broadcasting are found in the Audiovisual Media Services Directive 2010. It defines an audiovisual media services to mean those &#x27;devoted to providing programmes, under the editorial responsibility of a media service provider, to the general public, in order to inform, entertain or educate, to the general public by electronic communications networks&#x27;, either on TV or an &#x27;on-demand&#x27; service. An &#x27;on-demand&#x27; service involves &#x27;viewing of programmes at the moment chosen by the user and at his individual request on the basis of a catalogue of programmes selected by the media service provider&#x27;. Member states must ensure audiovisual services &#x27;do not contain any incitement to hatred&#x27; based on race, sex, religion, nationality or other protected characteristics. Article 9 prohibits media with &#x27;surreptitious&#x27; communication or &#x27;subliminal&#x27; techniques, to &#x27;prejudice respect for human dignity&#x27;, that would &#x27;promote any discrimination&#x27;, prejudice health and safety or &#x27;encourage behaviour grossly prejudicial to the protection of the environment&#x27;. Social media on Facebook, YouTube or Twitter may be thought to be exempt as they lack &#x27;editorial responsibility&#x27;, however each use algorithms to exert &#x27;effective control&#x27; and profit from arrangement of media. After 2018 new provisions on &quot;video-sharing platform service&quot; providers were introduced, with duties on member states to ensure under article 28b that video-sharing platform providers protect (a) minors from content that &quot;may impair their physical, mental or moral development&quot;, (b) the general public from content &quot;containing incitement to violence or hatred&quot;, and (c) the general public from content whose dissemination is criminal in EU law, such as terrorism, child pornography or offences concerning racism or xenophobia. Under the Digital Services Act Regulation 2022 the rules from the Electronic Commerce Directive 2000 were repeated, so that a platform&#x27;s or &quot;gatekeeper&#x27;s&quot; liability is limited unless the platforms have failed to act with due diligence to stop certain illegal content, complying with transparent terms and algorithms. New codes of conduct should be drawn up for best practice. Fines for large platforms go up to 6% of annual turnover. These rules fall short of most TV standards that restrict inaccurate news (such as flat Earth conspiracies or global warming denial), discriminatory content short of incitement to hatred, systematic bias, or propaganda from dictatorships or corporations. By contrast, Wikipedia&#x27;s online content has user-regulated policies preventing uncontrolled use of , preventing by suspending or banning users that break rules, and ensuring Wikipedia maintains a .

The EU has also begun to regulate marketplaces that operate online, both through competition law and the Digital Markets Act Regulation 2022. First, in a series of Commission decisions, Google and Amazon were fined for competition violations. In the &quot;Google Shopping&quot; case, the Commission fined Google €2.4 billion for giving preference to its own shopping results over others in Google&#x27;s search, leading to huge increases in traffic for Google over rivals. In the &quot;Google Android&quot; case the Commission fined Alphabet Inc (by then Google&#x27;s rebranded parent name) €4.34 billion, or 4.5% of worldwide turnover, for paying phone manufacturers to pre-install its apps, such as Google search or Chrome, as a condition to license its app marketplace Google Play. In the &quot;Google AdSense&quot; case, the Commission fined Google €1.49 billion for stopping third-party websites displaying their adverts in Google&#x27;s embedded search widgets, given that it was dominant in the ad market, and unfairly excluding competitors from results. In the &quot;Amazon Marketplace&quot; case an investigation for abuse of dominant position was launched for Amazon using other traders&#x27; data to benefit its own retail business, and preferencing itself in its &quot;Buy Box&quot; and in access to &quot;Prime&quot; seller status. This was settled after Amazon committed in 2022 &quot;not to use non-public data relating to, or derived from, the independent sellers&#x27; activities on its marketplace, for its retail business&quot;, and to not discriminate against third parties in its Buy Box and Prime services. The Digital Markets Act codifies many of these standards.

===Consumer Products===
The General Product Safety Regulation (GPSR) is a European regulation on consumer protection. It replaces Directive 2001/95/EC on general product safety. The regulation is intended to ensure that products placed on the market in the European internal market do not endanger the health and safety of consumers through a high level of consumer protection.
The GPSR mandates a risk-based approach to product safety, requiring manufacturers and other economic operators to conduct comprehensive risk assessments before placing products on the market. These assessments must consider:
* Foreseeable use and misuse of the product
* Chemical, mechanical, and electrical hazards
* Vulnerable consumers, including children, elderly individuals, and persons with disabilities

Where no harmonized standards exist, economic operators must use scientific and technical knowledge to ensure compliance.

===Foreign, security and trade policy===
*Common Foreign and Security Policy, including the Common Security and Defence Policy (funded by the European Defence Fund and European Defence Agency), membership of NATO, the United Nations
*TFEU art 214, Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations
*European Neighbourhood Policy
*Common Commercial Policy (EU), European Commissioner for Trade, European Union free trade agreements, World Trade Organization
*TFEU art 218, advisory opinion procedure on international agreements

===Security and justice===
*Area of freedom, security and justice and European Arrest Warrant, TFEU art 67

In 2006, a toxic waste spill off the coast of Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, from a European ship, prompted the commission to look into legislation against toxic waste. Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas stated that &quot;Such highly toxic waste should never have left the European Union&quot;. With countries such as Spain not even having a crime against shipping toxic waste, Franco Frattini, the Justice, Freedom and Security Commissioner, proposed with Dimas to create criminal sentences for &quot;ecological crimes&quot;. The competence for the Union to do this was contested in 2005 at the Court of Justice resulting in a victory for the commission. That ruling set a precedent that the commission, on a supranational basis, may legislate in criminal law – something never done before. So far, the only other proposal has been the draft intellectual property rights directive. Motions were tabled in the European Parliament against that legislation on the basis that criminal law should not be an EU competence, but was rejected at vote. However, in October 2007, the Court of Justice ruled that the commission could not propose what the criminal sanctions could be, only that there must be some.

== See also ==
* Europäische Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftsrecht (European Journal of Business Law)
* 
* 
* List of European Court of Justice rulings
* List of European Union directives
== Notes ==
==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* (later editions are available) 
* (later editions are available)
* 

== External links ==
* EUR-Lex – online access to existing and proposed European Union legislation
* Treaties
* Summaries of EU legislation
* Evolution of European Union legislation
* &quot;The Principle of Loyalty in EU Law&quot;, 2014, by Marcus Klamert, Legal Officer, European Commission</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="0" end="18" title="Law of the European Union" label="European Union law"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="64" end="99" title="member states of the European Union" label="member states of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="160" end="193" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="231" end="252" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q384136" start="258" end="273" title="full employment" label="full employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="309" end="339" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="Treaties of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="506" end="544" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17046428" start="547" end="567" title="Legal Act of the European Union" label="Legal Acts of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q944550" start="596" end="621" title="European Union legislative procedure" label="EU legislative procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="654" end="673" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="679" end="708" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="752" end="771" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="857" end="873" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q559518" start="928" end="960" title="Right of initiative (legislative)" label="the right to propose legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="982" end="993" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="1053" end="1063" title="Directive (European Union)" label="directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538001" start="1101" end="1132" title="Transposition (law)" label="transposition into national law"/>
<link wikidata="Q732833" start="1134" end="1143" title="Decision (European Union)" label="decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120221" start="1259" end="1287" title="Recommendation (European Union)" label="recommendations and opinions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434503" start="1331" end="1344" title="direct effect" label="direct effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025098" start="1472" end="1487" title="indirect effect" label="indirect effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1737" end="1768" title="Primary and secondary legislation#European Union" label="Implementing and delegated acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="2200" end="2232" title="Brexit" label="withdrawal of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582790" start="2255" end="2270" title="retained EU law" label="retained EU law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="2283" end="2289" title="UK law" label="UK law"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2348" end="2360" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="2371" end="2384" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="2439" end="2450" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="2624" end="2646" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194052" start="2675" end="2699" title="Bretton Woods Conference" label="Bretton Woods Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2734" end="2744" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2749" end="2756" title="International Monetary Fund" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2761" end="2766" title="World Trade Organization" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2778" end="2795" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q290712" start="2811" end="2832" title="Treaty of London 1949" label="Treaty of London 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="2844" end="2879" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="2913" end="2918" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="2922" end="2932" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="2959" end="2976" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="3003" end="3020" title="UK Prime Minister" label="UK Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="3024" end="3028" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="3053" end="3076" title="United States of Europe" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3144" end="3156" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981" start="3195" end="3209" title="Robert Schuman" label="Robert Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q724496" start="3529" end="3549" title="Treaty of Paris (1951)" label="1951 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="3568" end="3601" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q159700" start="3695" end="3706" title="Jean Monnet" label="Jean Monnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="3899" end="3918" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="3947" end="3967" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="3993" end="4003" title="European Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="4028" end="4044" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4084" end="4096" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="4203" end="4209" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="4235" end="4252" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="4253" end="4270" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="4305" end="4310" title="tanks" label="tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="4332" end="4360" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="4492" end="4511" title="Treaty of Rome 1957" label="1957 Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="4532" end="4559" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821705" start="4701" end="4713" title="Spaak Report" label="Spaak Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="4774" end="4787" title="common market" label="common market"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="4980" end="5012" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="5165" end="5182" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="5247" end="5266" title="Franco dictatorship" label="Franco dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="5287" end="5303" title="European Court of Justice" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892660" start="5442" end="5502" title="Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen" label="Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q622766" start="5543" end="5556" title="Merger Treaty" label="Merger Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="5585" end="5592" title="Euratom" label="Euratom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418500" start="5721" end="5742" title="Luxembourg compromise" label="Luxembourg compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="5887" end="5913" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="5952" end="5970" title="qualified majority" label="qualified majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="5992" end="6017" title="May 1968 events in France" label="May 1968 events in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001342" start="6131" end="6137" title="Norway–European Union relations" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780683" start="6164" end="6179" title="1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum" label="1972 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="6224" end="6239" title="United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum, 1975" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="6522" end="6541" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="6692" end="6716" title="Single European Act" label="1986 Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="6888" end="6906" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="7081" end="7098" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="7183" end="7191" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="7208" end="7219" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="7297" end="7329" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="7691" end="7697" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="7720" end="7731" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="7778" end="7790" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="7897" end="7914" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7944" end="7958" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q368611" start="8003" end="8017" title="European labour law" label="social chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q733221" start="8028" end="8060" title="European Exchange Rate Mechanism" label="European Exchange Rate Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="8180" end="8200" title="1992 sterling crisis" label="1992 sterling crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="8265" end="8281" title="British currency" label="British currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774974" start="8373" end="8388" title="1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum" label="1994 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338737" start="8420" end="8444" title="European Free Trade Area" label="European Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="8465" end="8487" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="8556" end="8575" title="Treaty of Amsterdam" label="Treaty of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8588" end="8594" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q208688" start="8696" end="8710" title="Treaty of Nice" label="Treaty of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="8776" end="8780" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="8971" end="9016" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9100" end="9153" title="Referendums related to the European Union#European Constitution, 2005" label="rejected by referendums in France and the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="9211" end="9227" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="9368" end="9392" title="subprime mortgage crisis" label="subprime mortgage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="9401" end="9422" title="2008 financial crisis" label="2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q66295" start="9461" end="9472" title="derivative (finance)" label="derivatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="9701" end="9721" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="9869" end="9883" title="interest rates" label="interest rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="9942" end="9963" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="10059" end="10068" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="10085" end="10106" title="structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377817" start="10225" end="10248" title="European Fiscal Compact" label="European Fiscal Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130098" start="10253" end="10281" title="European Stability Mechanism" label="European Stability Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="10313" end="10321" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10425" end="10437" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="10465" end="10475" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="10678" end="10703" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="Parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="10758" end="10779" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="11041" end="11062" title="Uncodified constitution" label="codified constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="11216" end="11240" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="11249" end="11296" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="11530" end="11540" title="Directive (European Union)" label="Directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="11544" end="11555" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="11561" end="11580" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q559518" start="11636" end="11667" title="Right of initiative (legislative)" label="right of legislative initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q944550" start="11680" end="11710" title="European Union legislative procedure" label="ordinary legislative procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="11716" end="11723" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="11784" end="11803" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="11992" end="12008" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="12032" end="12061" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="12238" end="12259" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="12265" end="12290" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="12592" end="12616" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="12631" end="12678" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="12855" end="12867" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q239768" start="13110" end="13132" title="Vienna Convention 1969" label="Vienna Convention 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="13537" end="13553" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q274782" start="13841" end="13854" title="human dignity" label="human dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="13856" end="13863" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="13876" end="13884" title="Social equality" label="equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="13890" end="13901" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="13978" end="13988" title="minorities" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="14187" end="14196" title="pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="14218" end="14227" title="toleration" label="tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="14238" end="14248" title="solidarity" label="solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="14893" end="14909" title="Inequality of bargaining power" label="bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="15255" end="15284" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="15309" end="15319" title="European Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="15480" end="15499" title="Schengen Agreements" label="Schengen Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="15643" end="15663" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991234" start="15669" end="15726" title="Treaty Establishing the European Stability Mechanism 2012" label="Treaty Establishing the European Stability Mechanism 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377817" start="15735" end="15789" title="Treaty on Stability, Co-ordination and Governance 2012" label="Treaty on Stability, Co-ordination and Governance 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="15871" end="15875" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="16230" end="16249" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16284" end="16298" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="16321" end="16345" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772" start="16977" end="16997" title="Ursula von der Leyen" label="Ursula von der Leyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="17249" end="17265" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8882" start="17366" end="17375" title="President of the European Commission" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="17384" end="17435" title="High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy" label="High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312901" start="17447" end="17460" title="Josep Borrell" label="Josep Borrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="17880" end="17908" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194384" start="18128" end="18151" title="qualified majority vote" label="qualified majority vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="18674" end="18690" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569199" start="19038" end="19055" title="Santer Commission" label="Santer Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112990" start="19188" end="19214" title="Commission v Edith Cresson" label="Commission v Edith Cresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="19231" end="19256" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138377" start="19623" end="19649" title="European Anti-fraud Office" label="European Anti-fraud Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q518375" start="19713" end="19723" title="John Dalli" label="John Dalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595913" start="19815" end="19841" title="Tobacco Products Directive" label="Tobacco Products Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="19871" end="19892" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="19943" end="19958" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="19991" end="19995" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="20040" end="20056" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15105" start="20065" end="20072" title="Council of Ministers" label="Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="20234" end="20244" title="European Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="20291" end="20310" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="20319" end="20348" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="20432" end="20456" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q316254" start="20627" end="20635" title="equality before the law" label="equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186065" start="21010" end="21028" title="democratic deficit" label="democratic deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q52857" start="21578" end="21607" title="European Citizens&amp;#x27; Initiative" label="right to submit an initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="21702" end="21706" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128324" start="21814" end="21834" title="Elections to the European Parliament" label="Parliament elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="21879" end="21913" title="Members of the European Parliament" label="Members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="21958" end="21985" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="21991" end="22015" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="22417" end="22445" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="22480" end="22508" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="22587" end="22603" title="ECJ" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112998" start="22618" end="22678" title="Parti écologiste &amp;quot;Les Verts&amp;quot; v European Parliament" label="Parti écologiste &amp;quot;Les Verts&amp;quot; v European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569199" start="23021" end="23038" title="Santer Commission" label="Santer Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="23754" end="23770" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q950958" start="24044" end="24058" title="Charles Michel" label="Charles Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194384" start="24783" end="24806" title="qualified majority vote" label="qualified majority vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q944550" start="25173" end="25203" title="European Union legislative procedure" label="ordinary legislative procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479560" start="25614" end="25626" title="Conciliation" label="Conciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780844" start="26561" end="26580" title="Kompetenz-Kompetenz" label="Kompetenz-Kompetenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="26756" end="26767" title="Parliaments" label="Parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="26980" end="26988" title="treaties" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="27056" end="27094" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="27160" end="27176" title="European Court of Justice" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q740574" start="27242" end="27255" title="General Court (European Union)" label="General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8900" start="27341" end="27358" title="Court of Auditors" label="Court of Auditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="27370" end="27394" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="27967" end="27982" title="Court of Appeal" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q687323" start="27995" end="28012" title="Bundesgerichtshof" label="Bundesgerichtshof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377319" start="28026" end="28041" title="Cour du travail" label="Cour du travail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759312" start="28108" end="28126" title="preliminary ruling" label="preliminary ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892660" start="28479" end="28495" title="Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen" label="Van Gend en Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544831" start="28670" end="28684" title="Mangold v Helm" label="Mangold v Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532382" start="28719" end="28746" title="general principle of EU law" label="general principle of EU law"/>
<link wikidata="Q111748413" start="28759" end="28776" title="Kadi v Commission" label="Kadi v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="28795" end="28812" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142069" start="28888" end="28925" title="European Union Civil Service Tribunal" label="European Union Civil Service Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886256" start="28985" end="29005" title="Statute of the Court" label="Statute of the Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="29010" end="29014" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886349" start="29319" end="29361" title="Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice" label="Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478218" start="29768" end="29785" title="Advocates General" label="Advocates General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150" start="30456" end="30487" title="languages of the European Union" label="languages of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="30969" end="30999" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q98450626" start="31170" end="31180" title="rapporteur" label="rapporteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="31608" end="31638" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139042" start="31774" end="31783" title="Legal pluralism" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="31804" end="31815" title="globalising" label="globalising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="31855" end="31880" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733207" start="31960" end="31977" title="conflicts of laws" label="conflicts of laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114811" start="32141" end="32148" title="Primacy of European Union law" label="primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136320" start="32189" end="32201" title="Costa v ENEL" label="Costa v ENEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q547462" start="32211" end="32219" title="Milanese" label="Milanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q651222" start="32327" end="32331" title="Enel" label="Enel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="32358" end="32373" title="Nationalization" label="Nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="32473" end="32487" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q981005" start="32535" end="32563" title="Italian Constitutional Court" label="Italian Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="32595" end="32599" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913337" start="33271" end="33287" title="Van Gend en Loos" label="Van Gend en Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016939" start="33792" end="33850" title="Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal SpA" label="Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal SpA"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="34018" end="34029" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864310" start="35287" end="35340" title="R (Factortame Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport" label="R (Factortame Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="35706" end="35741" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908070" start="35762" end="35824" title="R (HS2 Action Alliance Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport" label="R (HS2 Action Alliance Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949103" start="36063" end="36092" title="European Communities Act 1972 (UK)" label="European Communities Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="36110" end="36137" title="German Constitutional Court" label="German Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723079" start="36153" end="36162" title="Solange I" label="Solange I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298208" start="36179" end="36189" title="Solange II" label="Solange II"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="36321" end="36332" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="36341" end="36353" title="social state" label="social state"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="37035" end="37070" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="37195" end="37219" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="37400" end="37416" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="37506" end="37536" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="37540" end="37550" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230646" start="37570" end="37582" title="Opinion 2/13" label="Opinion 2/13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="37681" end="37691" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="38105" end="38127" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="38139" end="38159" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="38167" end="38202" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q877358" start="38208" end="38227" title="United Nations Security Council resolution" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="38305" end="38320" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600381" start="38338" end="38343" title="Saudi people" label="Saudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q877358" start="38442" end="38472" title="UN Security Council resolution" label="UN Security Council resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q111748413" start="38483" end="38500" title="Kadi v Commission" label="Kadi v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="38603" end="38613" title="fair trial" label="fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q13576558" start="38657" end="38666" title="AG Maduro" label="AG Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q399963" start="38676" end="38688" title="Aharon Barak" label="Aharon Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="38697" end="38720" title="Supreme Court of Israel" label="Supreme Court of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q855317" start="39018" end="39028" title="jus cogens" label="jus cogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="39142" end="39150" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="39251" end="39265" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="39411" end="39421" title="European Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="39480" end="39492" title="locus standi" label="locus standi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="39627" end="39643" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="39796" end="39807" title="Regulation (European Union)" label="Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="39894" end="39904" title="Directive (European Union)" label="Directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434503" start="40261" end="40274" title="direct effect" label="direct effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="40408" end="40423" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="40452" end="40467" title="proportionality (law)" label="proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q257385" start="40672" end="40692" title="specific performance" label="specific performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434503" start="40948" end="40961" title="direct effect" label="direct effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="41011" end="41019" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="41025" end="41039" title="EU Regulations" label="EU Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913337" start="41215" end="41231" title="Van Gend en Loos" label="Van Gend en Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="41276" end="41280" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q146537" start="41367" end="41384" title="urea-formaldehyde" label="urea-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="41469" end="41485" title="European Court of Justice" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351847" start="42363" end="42381" title="Commission v Italy (1972)" label="Commission v Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="42539" end="42543" title="cows" label="cows"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="43147" end="43156" title="Directive (European Union)" label="Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q314555" start="43588" end="43610" title="Working Time Directive" label="Working Time Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338673" start="43659" end="43672" title="paid holidays" label="paid holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478218" start="44112" end="44129" title="Advocate Generals" label="Advocate Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132942" start="44522" end="44548" title="Pubblico Ministero v Ratti" label="Pubblico Ministero v Ratti"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="44660" end="44668" title="solvents" label="solvents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142833" start="44693" end="44701" title="estopped" label="estopped"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="44790" end="44797" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056756" start="45187" end="45225" title="CIA Security v Signalson and Securitel" label="CIA Security v Signalson and Securitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q945434" start="45409" end="45414" title="alarm" label="alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147197" start="45711" end="45748" title="Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH &amp;amp; Co KG" label="Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH &amp;amp; Co KG"/>
<link wikidata="Q165728" start="45765" end="45782" title="German Civil Code" label="German Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q438946" start="46097" end="46115" title="age discrimination" label="age discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q788804" start="46126" end="46165" title="Employment Equality Framework Directive" label="Employment Equality Framework Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q316254" start="46246" end="46254" title="equality before the law" label="equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532382" start="46266" end="46293" title="general principle of EU law" label="general principle of EU law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473808" start="46428" end="46452" title="Foster v British Gas plc" label="Foster v British Gas plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="46463" end="46479" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="46525" end="46543" title="sex discrimination" label="sex discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925725" start="46572" end="46587" title="British Gas plc" label="British Gas plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="46781" end="46791" title="privatised" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025098" start="47092" end="47107" title="indirect effect" label="indirect effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771698" start="47124" end="47155" title="Marleasing SA v La Comercial SA" label="Marleasing SA v La Comercial SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923776" start="47238" end="47248" title="Civil Code" label="Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q114316014" start="47333" end="47360" title="European corporate law" label="First Company Law Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="48136" end="48148" title="damages" label="compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q818977" start="48153" end="48164" title="restitution" label="restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="48202" end="48213" title="injunctions" label="injunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q257385" start="48218" end="48238" title="specific performance" label="specific performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="48379" end="48395" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759312" start="48408" end="48426" title="preliminary ruling" label="preliminary ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="48473" end="48477" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="48855" end="48871" title="UK Supreme Court" label="UK Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128539" start="48875" end="48885" title="High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q627718" start="48893" end="48912" title="Employment Tribunal" label="Employment Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231106" start="48923" end="48958" title="Vaassen v Beambtenfonds Mijnbedrijf" label="Vaassen v Beambtenfonds Mijnbedrijf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="48969" end="48985" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="49025" end="49036" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231115" start="49103" end="49127" title="Miles v European Schools" label="Miles v European Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q324398" start="49543" end="49558" title="Lord Denning MR" label="Lord Denning MR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055840" start="49657" end="49678" title="Civil Procedure Rules" label="Civil Procedure Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="49691" end="49701" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500345" start="49800" end="49827" title="CILFIT v Ministry of Health" label="CILFIT v Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q343205" start="49903" end="49913" title="acte clair" label="acte clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231118" start="50082" end="50104" title="Kenny Roland Lyckeskog" label="Kenny Roland Lyckeskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350090" start="50464" end="50513" title="Three Rivers DC v Governor of the Bank of England" label="Three Rivers DC v Governor of the Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083442" start="50922" end="50945" title="ParkingEye Ltd v Beavis" label="ParkingEye Ltd v Beavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884293" start="51036" end="51080" title="Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive" label="Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="51376" end="51392" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="51398" end="51414" title="UK Supreme Court" label="UK Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908070" start="51424" end="51486" title="R (HS2 Action Alliance Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport" label="R (HS2 Action Alliance Ltd) v Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949103" start="51767" end="51796" title="European Communities Act 1972 (UK)" label="European Communities Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="52002" end="52029" title="German Constitutional Court" label="German Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231123" start="52043" end="52078" title="Outright Monetary Transactions case" label="Outright Monetary Transactions case"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="52143" end="52164" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q113023546" start="52666" end="52694" title="right to an effective remedy" label="right to an effective remedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="52746" end="52775" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q31433" start="53131" end="53149" title="Francovich v Italy" label="Francovich v Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187664" start="53301" end="53332" title="Insolvency Protection Directive" label="Insolvency Protection Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864310" start="53808" end="53818" title="Factortame" label="Factortame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18434387" start="53981" end="54011" title="Brasserie du Pêcheur v Germany" label="Brasserie du Pêcheur v Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q167255" start="54155" end="54170" title="beer purity law" label="beer purity law"/>
<link wikidata="Q676640" start="54625" end="54653" title="Köbler v Republik Österreich" label="Köbler v Republik Österreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="55183" end="55199" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="55203" end="55218" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="55255" end="55302" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="55471" end="55522" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350082" start="55634" end="55698" title="Société anonyme Cimenteries CBR Cementsbedrijven NV v Commission" label="Société anonyme Cimenteries CBR Cementsbedrijven NV v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="55816" end="55831" title="competition law" label="competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886609" start="56236" end="56262" title="Deutsche Post v Commission" label="Deutsche Post v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002754" start="56308" end="56317" title="state aid" label="state aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266289" start="56338" end="56351" title="Deutsche Post" label="Deutsche Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350081" start="56743" end="56759" title="IBM v Commission" label="IBM v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886688" start="57696" end="57725" title="Piraiki-Patraiki v Commission" label="Piraiki-Patraiki v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350080" start="58130" end="58170" title="Municipality of Differdange v Commission" label="Municipality of Differdange v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16069178" start="58683" end="58713" title="Plaumann &amp;amp; Co v Commission" label="Plaumann &amp;amp; Co v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q460517" start="58753" end="58763" title="clementine" label="clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="58813" end="58823" title="European Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886636" start="59099" end="59129" title="Unión de Pequeños Agricultores" label="Unión de Pequeños Agricultores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124645" start="59137" end="59160" title="Advocate General Jacobs" label="Advocate General Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="59325" end="59334" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886673" start="59884" end="59932" title="Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami v Parliament and Council" label="Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami v Parliament and Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="59943" end="59959" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="60156" end="60161" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="60198" end="60202" title="Pinniped" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="60852" end="60873" title="Treaty of Lisbon 2007" label="Treaty of Lisbon 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="60899" end="60915" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="60979" end="61014" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="61041" end="61057" title="Strasbourg Court" label="Strasbourg Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542871" start="61251" end="61272" title="Stauder v City of Ulm" label="Stauder v City of Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136859" start="61630" end="61641" title="humiliation" label="humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q914661" start="61884" end="61896" title="positive law" label="positive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="62365" end="62400" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334480" start="62406" end="62434" title="European Social Charter 1961" label="European Social Charter 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="62440" end="62482" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="62491" end="62524" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="62578" end="62582" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="ECHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230646" start="62602" end="62614" title="Opinion 2/13" label="Opinion 2/13"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="62792" end="62843" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="63021" end="63037" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577007" start="63102" end="63142" title="Test-Achats ASBL v Conseil des ministres" label="Test-Achats ASBL v Conseil des ministres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151384" start="63181" end="63233" title="Equal Treatment in Goods and Services Directive 2004" label="Equal Treatment in Goods and Services Directive 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200314" start="63275" end="63285" title="derogation" label="derogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="63436" end="63446" title="CFREU 2000" label="CFREU 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349214" start="63554" end="63597" title="Deutsches Weintor eG v Land Rheinland-Pfalz" label="Deutsches Weintor eG v Land Rheinland-Pfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="64109" end="64116" title="CFREU" label="Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350076" start="64214" end="64250" title="AMS v Union locale des syndicats CGT" label="AMS v Union locale des syndicats CGT"/>
<link wikidata="Q628943" start="64295" end="64313" title="French Labour Code" label="French Labour Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q671974" start="64391" end="64403" title="work council" label="work council"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113039" start="64485" end="64536" title="Information and Consultation of Employees Directive" label="Information and Consultation of Employees Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q49094488" start="65110" end="65125" title="Legal certainty" label="Legal certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="65221" end="65234" title="proportionality (law)" label="proportionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="65722" end="65730" title="Social equality" label="Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="66002" end="66023" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="66070" end="66091" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="2007 Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="66164" end="66178" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215551" start="66211" end="66232" title="comparative advantage" label="comparative advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="66356" end="66393" title="North American Free Trade Association" label="North American Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="66402" end="66426" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485549" start="66522" end="66528" title="Manual labour" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="66533" end="66540" title="capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q160151" start="66575" end="66581" title="prices" label="prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="66671" end="66684" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="66701" end="66714" title="common market" label="common market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="66721" end="66735" title="monetary union" label="monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="66827" end="66840" title="federal state" label="federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q332225" start="66917" end="66924" title="Chess endgame" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="66962" end="66972" title="Free trade" label="Free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188485" start="66999" end="67009" title="fair trade" label="fair trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="67127" end="67148" title="Inequality of bargaining power" label="lack bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="67206" end="67220" title="small business" label="small business"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="67521" end="67568" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="67614" end="67636" title="free movement of goods" label="free movement of goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q215627" start="67697" end="67704" title="persons" label="persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="67950" end="67965" title="Value Added Tax" label="Value Added Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="68098" end="68114" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="68205" end="68218" title="labour rights" label="labour rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="68316" end="68330" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="68348" end="68361" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="68548" end="68595" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="68659" end="68692" title="measures having equivalent effect" label="measures having equivalent effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q370843" start="68751" end="68781" title="Procureur du Roi v Dassonville" label="Procureur du Roi v Dassonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="68792" end="68808" title="ECJ" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="69045" end="69052" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="69067" end="69080" title="Scotch whisky" label="Scotch whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="69294" end="69300" title="Scotch whisky" label="Scotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937748" start="69483" end="69492" title="Buy Irish" label="Buy Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841967" start="69622" end="69641" title="Commission v France (1997)" label="Commission v France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="69722" end="69734" title="strawberries" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="70138" end="70146" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935556" start="70681" end="70703" title="Schmidberger v Austria" label="Schmidberger v Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q357016" start="70854" end="70870" title="Brenner Autobahn" label="Brenner Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="71033" end="71055" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="71322" end="71337" title="Proportionality (law)" label="proportionately"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="71402" end="71410" title="suitable" label="suitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215875" start="71530" end="71540" title="Reasonableness" label="reasonable"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="71991" end="72010" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054717" start="72022" end="72038" title="labour standards" label="labour standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048414" start="72172" end="72218" title="Rewe-Zentral AG v Bundesmonopol für Branntwein" label="Rewe-Zentral AG v Bundesmonopol für Branntwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q968019" start="72517" end="72532" title="Cassis de Dijon" label="Cassis de Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348869" start="72997" end="73041" title="Walter Rau Lebensmittelwerke v De Smedt PVBA" label="Walter Rau Lebensmittelwerke v De Smedt PVBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287" start="73108" end="73117" title="margarine" label="margarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="73127" end="73131" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976378" start="73258" end="73285" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Believe It&amp;#x27;s Not Butter!" label="would believe it was butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351875" start="73508" end="73526" title="Commission v Italy (2003)" label="Commission v Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="73594" end="73607" title="vegetable fat" label="vegetable fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q251106" start="73740" end="73752" title="cocoa butter" label="cocoa butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351869" start="74254" end="74272" title="Commission v Italy (2009)" label="Commission v Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770787" start="74756" end="74792" title="Market access" label="access of that product to the market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770787" start="74942" end="74955" title="market access" label="market access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252277" start="75187" end="75205" title="Keck and Mithouard" label="Keck and Mithouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="75272" end="75287" title="competition law" label="competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756360" start="75318" end="75328" title="Picon beer" label="Picon beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514622" start="75400" end="75422" title="cut throat competition" label="cut throat competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230454" start="75933" end="75968" title="Konsumentombudsmannen v De Agostini" label="Konsumentombudsmannen v De Agostini"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230455" start="76399" end="76433" title="Konsumentombudsmannen v Gourmet AB" label="Konsumentombudsmannen v Gourmet AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884288" start="76856" end="76893" title="Unfair Commercial Practices Directive" label="Unfair Commercial Practices Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q301468" start="77012" end="77030" title="consumer behaviour" label="consumer behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535850" start="77149" end="77167" title="mutual recognition" label="mutual recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q605215" start="77355" end="77373" title="race to the bottom" label="race to the bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="77639" end="77657" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="77719" end="77739" title="factor of production" label="factor of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554401" start="77888" end="77905" title="Defrenne v Sabena" label="Defrenne v Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q363404" start="77994" end="78005" title="Citizenship of the European Union" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="78212" end="78216" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="78340" end="78356" title="ECJ" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348970" start="78658" end="78698" title="Steymann v Staatssecretaris van Justitie" label="Steymann v Staatssecretaris van Justitie"/>
<link wikidata="Q560179" start="78828" end="78835" title="Bhagwan" label="Bhagwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="79238" end="79253" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="79477" end="79492" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q25226846" start="79865" end="79900" title="Free Movement of Workers Regulation" label="Free Movement of Workers Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q465550" start="80175" end="80212" title="Belgian Football Association v Bosman" label="Belgian Football Association v Bosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q320948" start="80247" end="80263" title="Jean-Marc Bosman" label="Jean-Marc Bosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347229" start="80312" end="80327" title="R.F.C. de Liège" label="R.F.C. de Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815297" start="80331" end="80344" title="USL Dunkerque" label="USL Dunkerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110762" start="80664" end="80696" title="Groener v Minister for Education" label="Groener v Minister for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="80761" end="80767" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="80782" end="80788" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230507" start="80956" end="81000" title="Angonese v Cassa di Risparmio di Bolzano SpA" label="Angonese v Cassa di Risparmio di Bolzano SpA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526" start="81017" end="81024" title="Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452479" start="81550" end="81586" title="Finanzamt Köln Altstadt v Schumacker" label="Finanzamt Köln Altstadt v Schumacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230512" start="81867" end="81912" title="Weigel v Finanzlandesdirektion für Vorarlberg" label="Weigel v Finanzlandesdirektion für Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230515" start="82507" end="82545" title="Hendrix v Employee Insurance Institute" label="Hendrix v Employee Insurance Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112994" start="82809" end="82841" title="Geven v Land Nordrhein-Westfalen" label="Geven v Land Nordrhein-Westfalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="83524" end="83535" title="Human rights" label="human being"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="83554" end="83570" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="84107" end="84111" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576606" start="84735" end="84765" title="Citizens Rights Directive 2004" label="Citizens Rights Directive 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="84929" end="84941" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="84950" end="84961" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="85089" end="85102" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="85741" end="85760" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q912512" start="85967" end="85982" title="equal treatment" label="equal treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896888" start="86107" end="86130" title="Sala v Freistaat Bayern" label="Sala v Freistaat Bayern"/>
<link wikidata="Q954957" start="86252" end="86265" title="child support" label="child support"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230505" start="86351" end="86407" title="Trojani v Centre public d&amp;#x27;aide sociale de Bruxelles" label="Trojani v Centre public d&amp;#x27;aide sociale de Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896882" start="86564" end="86642" title="Grzelczyk v Centre Public d&amp;#x27;Aide Sociale d&amp;#x27;Ottignes-Louvain-la-Neuve" label="Grzelczyk v Centre Public d&amp;#x27;Aide Sociale d&amp;#x27;Ottignes-Louvain-la-Neuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352427" start="86822" end="86858" title="R (Bidar) v London Borough of Ealing" label="R (Bidar) v London Borough of Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="86930" end="86933" title="University College London" label="UCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896868" start="87104" end="87124" title="Commission v Austria" label="Commission v Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896859" start="87386" end="87410" title="Dano v Jobcenter Leipzig" label="Dano v Jobcenter Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="87953" end="87974" title="Inequality of bargaining power" label="lack bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="87994" end="88041" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="88178" end="88194" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="88449" end="88458" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="88487" end="88492" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840583" start="89309" end="89326" title="Reyners v Belgium" label="Reyners v Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505692" start="89429" end="89448" title="Belgian nationality law" label="Belgian nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351925" start="89722" end="89740" title="Commission v Italy (2011)" label="Commission v Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="89915" end="89928" title="European Court of Justice" label="Grand Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351886" start="90249" end="90299" title="R (Daily Mail and General Trust plc) v HM Treasury" label="R (Daily Mail and General Trust plc) v HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="90436" end="90446" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q667613" start="90470" end="90484" title="Daily Mail and General Trust" label="parent company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="90495" end="90504" title="evade tax" label="evade tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054361" start="90714" end="90756" title="Centros Ltd v Erhversus-og Selkabssyrelsen" label="Centros Ltd v Erhversus-og Selkabssyrelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="90800" end="90815" title="limited company" label="limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865433" start="90889" end="90910" title="minimum share capital" label="minimum share capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="91076" end="91088" title="Danish krone" label="Danish krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q157165" start="91117" end="91125" title="creditor" label="creditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q757382" start="91158" end="91167" title="insolvent" label="insolvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309693" start="91580" end="91602" title="regulatory competition" label="regulatory competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q605215" start="91610" end="91628" title="race to the bottom" label="race to the bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="91670" end="91678" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079440" start="91837" end="91878" title="Überseering BV v Nordic Construction GmbH" label="Überseering BV v Nordic Construction GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047283" start="92395" end="92428" title="Cartesio Oktató és Szolgáltató bt" label="Cartesio Oktató és Szolgáltató bt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348916" start="93242" end="93316" title="Van Binsbergen v Bestuur van de Bedrijfvereniging voor de Metaalnijverheid" label="Van Binsbergen v Bestuur van de Bedrijfvereniging voor de Metaalnijverheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="93384" end="93399" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348911" start="94000" end="94037" title="Geraets-Smits v Stichting Ziekenfonds" label="Geraets-Smits v Stichting Ziekenfonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="95017" end="95040" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348912" start="95145" end="95183" title="Josemans v Burgemeester van Maastricht" label="Josemans v Burgemeester van Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="95236" end="95244" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="95355" end="95367" title="coffee shops" label="coffee shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296533" start="95776" end="95822" title="Alpine Investments BV v Minister van Financiën" label="Alpine Investments BV v Minister van Financiën"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="95850" end="95861" title="commodities" label="commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q183984" start="95862" end="95869" title="futures contract" label="futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="95876" end="95889" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q935918" start="95969" end="95981" title="cold calling" label="cold calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348920" start="96260" end="96289" title="Omega Spielhallen GmbH v Bonn" label="Omega Spielhallen GmbH v Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="96348" end="96352" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q274782" start="96578" end="96591" title="human dignity" label="human dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348919" start="96698" end="96763" title="Liga Portuguesa de Futebol v Santa Casa da Misericórdia de Lisboa" label="Liga Portuguesa de Futebol v Santa Casa da Misericórdia de Lisboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="96858" end="96867" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757839" start="97156" end="97174" title="Services Directive" label="Services Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="97297" end="97304" title="capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="97426" end="97440" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="97562" end="97582" title="Treaty of Maastricht" label="Treaty of Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="97591" end="97595" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946428" start="97764" end="97780" title="capital controls" label="capital controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="97868" end="97882" title="company shares" label="company shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="97944" end="97962" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="98008" end="98021" title="corporate tax" label="corporate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q687591" start="98023" end="98040" title="capital gains tax" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328471" start="98045" end="98070" title="Financial transaction tax" label="Financial transaction tax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98157" end="98188" title="Capital Movement Directive 1988" label="Capital Movement Directive 1988"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98267" end="98315" title="Baars v Inspecteur der Belastingen Particulieren" label="Baars v Inspecteur der Belastingen Particulieren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="98326" end="98342" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="99039" end="99050" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523234" start="99171" end="99184" title="golden shares" label="golden shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744155" start="99209" end="99229" title="Commission v Germany (2007)" label="Commission v Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605349" start="99275" end="99289" title="Volkswagen Act" label="Volkswagen Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="99455" end="99467" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744158" start="99796" end="99817" title="Commission v Portugal" label="Commission v Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105426" start="99929" end="99945" title="Portugal Telecom" label="Portugal Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="100400" end="100415" title="single currency" label="single currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="100420" end="100435" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="100453" end="100469" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="100582" end="100586" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189275" start="100626" end="100643" title="Delors Commission" label="Delors Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q212141" start="100683" end="100710" title="Economic and Monetary Union of the EU" label="economic and monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="Q221598" start="100787" end="100819" title="European System of Central Banks" label="European System of Central Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="100933" end="100937" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="101102" end="101122" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="101185" end="101206" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q351258" start="101243" end="101258" title="price stability" label="price stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q384136" start="101335" end="101350" title="full employment" label="full employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="101358" end="101382" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="101439" end="101466" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="101489" end="101502" title="free movement" label="free movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="101631" end="101647" title="ECJ" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554401" start="101662" end="101679" title="Defrenne v Sabena" label="Defrenne v Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q852998" start="101886" end="101898" title="stakeholder (corporate)" label="stakeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="101990" end="102009" title="Globalization" label="globalising economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="102023" end="102047" title="Inequality of bargaining power" label="greater bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="102184" end="102196" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q605215" start="102351" end="102369" title="race to the bottom" label="race to the bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883388" start="102379" end="102396" title="human development (humanity)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="102406" end="102419" title="globalisation" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112984" start="102511" end="102520" title="European consumer law" label="consumers"/>
<link wikidata="Q368611" start="102522" end="102529" title="European labour law" label="workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q114316014" start="102542" end="102554" title="European company law" label="shareholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q157165" start="102556" end="102564" title="creditor" label="creditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388316" start="102575" end="102581" title="public" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q466938" start="102638" end="102648" title="Subsidiarity" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467247" start="102762" end="102787" title="laboratories of democracy" label="laboratories of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="102943" end="102947" title="vote" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660020" start="102974" end="102989" title="European competition law" label="competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="103094" end="103118" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="103162" end="103183" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="103214" end="103261" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="103354" end="103362" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="103476" end="103492" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="103500" end="103509" title="privatise" label="privatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413491" start="103563" end="103582" title="European Civil Code" label="European Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550628" start="103632" end="103640" title="Principles of European Contract Law" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099118" start="103645" end="103649" title="Principles of European Tort Law" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733207" start="103687" end="103703" title="conflict of laws" label="conflict of laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="103857" end="103904" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q944550" start="103946" end="103976" title="ordinary legislative procedure" label="ordinary legislative procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247739" start="104405" end="104437" title="Product Liability Directive 1985" label="Product Liability Directive 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884293" start="104439" end="104488" title="Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive 1993" label="Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884288" start="104490" end="104532" title="Unfair Commercial Practices Directive 2005" label="Unfair Commercial Practices Directive 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q15842432" start="104541" end="104571" title="Consumer Rights Directive 2011" label="Consumer Rights Directive 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039961" start="104862" end="104885" title="Consumer Bill of Rights" label="Consumer Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="104900" end="104915" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="104929" end="104945" title="ECJ" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q431965" start="105072" end="105088" title="information asymmetry" label="lack information"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="105104" end="105125" title="less bargaining power" label="less bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873017" start="105178" end="105214" title="Banco Español de Crédito SA v Camino" label="Banco Español de Crédito SA v Camino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105258" end="105300" title="Océano Grupo Editorial and Salvat Editores" label="Océano Grupo Editorial and Salvat Editores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247739" start="105379" end="105411" title="Product Liability Directive 1985" label="Product Liability Directive 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="105466" end="105472" title="Strict liability" label="strict"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380392" start="105473" end="105493" title="enterprise liability" label="enterprise liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q757382" start="105679" end="105688" title="insolvent" label="insolvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="106203" end="106214" title="Externality" label="externalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884293" start="106249" end="106298" title="Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive 1993" label="Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="106471" end="106481" title="good faith" label="good faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625018" start="106838" end="106854" title="bargaining power" label="bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q431965" start="106863" end="106881" title="Information asymmetry" label="level of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18396951" start="107032" end="107067" title="RWE AG v Verbraucherzentrale NRW eV" label="RWE AG v Verbraucherzentrale NRW eV"/>
<link wikidata="Q138133" start="107128" end="107131" title="RWE" label="RWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379194" start="107265" end="107283" title="Brusse v Jahani BV" label="Brusse v Jahani BV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355747" start="107561" end="107602" title="Aziz v Caixa d&amp;#x27;Estalvis de Catalunya" label="Aziz v Caixa d&amp;#x27;Estalvis de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="107624" end="107653" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344222" start="107811" end="107841" title="Kušionová v SMART Capital a.s." label="Kušionová v SMART Capital a.s."/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="107853" end="107869" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849028" start="107965" end="107981" title="right to housing" label="right to housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884288" start="108186" end="108223" title="Unfair Commercial Practices Directive" label="Unfair Commercial Practices Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15842432" start="108236" end="108261" title="Consumer Rights Directive" label="Consumer Rights Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029656" start="108274" end="108300" title="Payment Services Directive" label="Payment Services Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147917" start="108313" end="108336" title="Late Payments Directive" label="Late Payments Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q627297" start="108374" end="108398" title="free movement of workers" label="free movement of workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="108424" end="108451" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q368611" start="108482" end="108501" title="European labour law" label="European labour law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081081" start="108546" end="108558" title="Ohlin Report" label="Ohlin Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q605215" start="108839" end="108857" title="race to the bottom" label="race to the bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="108867" end="108886" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="108994" end="108998" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="109241" end="109262" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="109270" end="109285" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="109328" end="109348" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959501" start="109483" end="109498" title="wage regulation" label="wage regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="109503" end="109524" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q302562" start="109747" end="109759" title="job security" label="job security"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="109966" end="109990" title="unequal bargaining power" label="unequal bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242046" start="110062" end="110075" title="social rights" label="social rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q25226898" start="110225" end="110291" title="Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers 1989" label="Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="110345" end="110365" title="Treaty of Maastricht" label="Treaty of Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="110428" end="110446" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="110476" end="110488" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="110497" end="110518" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="110526" end="110545" title="Treaty of Amsterdam" label="Treaty of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374341" start="110649" end="110686" title="Employment Information Directive 1991" label="Employment Information Directive 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959501" start="110839" end="110854" title="wage regulation" label="wage regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147915" start="110860" end="110925" title="Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision Directive 2003" label="Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision Directive 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="111265" end="111302" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269217" start="111307" end="111322" title="ILO Conventions" label="ILO Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q314555" start="111328" end="111355" title="Working Time Directive 2003" label="Working Time Directive 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380031" start="111627" end="111656" title="Parental Leave Directive 2010" label="Parental Leave Directive 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151427" start="111818" end="111849" title="Pregnant Workers Directive 1992" label="Pregnant Workers Directive 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213486" start="111955" end="111995" title="Safety and Health at Work Directive 1989" label="Safety and Health at Work Directive 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="112438" end="112446" title="Social equality" label="equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="112467" end="112483" title="European Court of Justice" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147197" start="112493" end="112530" title="Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH &amp;amp; Co KG" label="Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH &amp;amp; Co KG"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649023" start="112595" end="112624" title="Part-time Work Directive 1997" label="Part-time Work Directive 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187504" start="112626" end="112656" title="Fixed-term Work Directive 1999" label="Fixed-term Work Directive 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q917659" start="112661" end="112697" title="Temporary Agency Work Directive 2008" label="Temporary Agency Work Directive 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q917659" start="112918" end="112927" title="TAWD 2008" label="TAWD 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379308" start="113093" end="113121" title="Race Equality Directive 2000" label="Race Equality Directive 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q788804" start="113123" end="113156" title="Equality Framework Directive 2000" label="Equality Framework Directive 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151398" start="113161" end="113191" title="Equal Treatment Directive 2006" label="Equal Treatment Directive 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="113936" end="113957" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="114037" end="114067" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="114071" end="114093" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967655" start="114104" end="114138" title="Wilson and Palmer v United Kingdom" label="Wilson and Palmer v United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255388" start="114258" end="114284" title="Demir and Baykara v Turkey" label="Demir and Baykara v Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="114502" end="114517" title="right to strike" label="right to strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054028" start="114659" end="114681" title="ITWF v Viking Line ABP" label="ITWF v Viking Line ABP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713496" start="114698" end="114755" title="Laval Un Partneri Ltd v Svenska Byggnadsarbetareforbundet" label="Laval Un Partneri Ltd v Svenska Byggnadsarbetareforbundet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113039" start="115000" end="115043" title="Information and Consultation Directive 2002" label="Information and Consultation Directive 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q671974" start="115127" end="115140" title="work councils" label="work councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377667" start="115177" end="115214" title="European Works Council Directive 2009" label="European Works Council Directive 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q671974" start="115223" end="115236" title="work councils" label="work councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374273" start="115262" end="115297" title="Employee Involvement Directive 2001" label="Employee Involvement Directive 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q279014" start="115359" end="115377" title="European Companies" label="European Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q279014" start="115460" end="115492" title="European Company Regulation 2001" label="European Company Regulation 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000498" start="115598" end="115617" title="Codetermination" label="board participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146141" start="115813" end="115851" title="Collective Redundancies Directive 1998" label="Collective Redundancies Directive 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q579864" start="115982" end="116022" title="Transfers of Undertakings Directive 2001" label="Transfers of Undertakings Directive 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187664" start="116216" end="116252" title="Insolvency Protection Directive 2008" label="Insolvency Protection Directive 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q31433" start="116388" end="116406" title="Francovich v Italy" label="Francovich v Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114316014" start="116667" end="116687" title="European company law" label="European company law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887975" start="116986" end="116988" title="UK company law" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="116995" end="116998" title="Public limited company" label="plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084735" start="117023" end="117025" title="Aktiengesellschaft" label="AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q166280" start="117052" end="117054" title="S.A. (corporation)" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q279014" start="117088" end="117104" title="European Company" label="European Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q279014" start="117121" end="117138" title="Societas Europaea" label="Societas Europaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195910" start="117192" end="117238" title="Statute for a European Company Regulation 2001" label="Statute for a European Company Regulation 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374273" start="117495" end="117530" title="Employee Involvement Directive 2001" label="Employee Involvement Directive 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q163887" start="117712" end="117732" title="collective agreement" label="collective agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q849001" start="118093" end="118109" title="derivative claim" label="derivative claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499257" start="118204" end="118215" title="pre-emption right" label="pre-emption"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="118275" end="118279" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q179050" start="118293" end="118320" title="piercing the corporate veil" label="piercing the corporate veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="118521" end="118529" title="takeover" label="takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q757382" start="118584" end="118594" title="insolvency" label="insolvency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="118653" end="118669" title="ECJ" label="Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054361" start="118684" end="118691" title="Centros" label="Centros"/>
<link wikidata="Q605215" start="118825" end="118843" title="race to the bottom" label="race to the bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188910" start="118917" end="118928" title="Kamer van Koophandel en Fabrieken voor Amsterdam v Inspire Art Ltd" label="Inspire Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="119103" end="119107" title="vote" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304766" start="119184" end="119217" title="Draft Fifth Company Law Directive" label="Draft Fifth Company Law Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q759969" start="119357" end="119371" title="Supervisory board" label="two-tier board"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000498" start="119420" end="119435" title="codetermination" label="codetermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489578" start="119467" end="119500" title="Shareholder Rights Directive 2007" label="Shareholder Rights Directive 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="119510" end="119521" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665188" start="119698" end="119720" title="institutional investor" label="institutional investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q873442" start="119733" end="119747" title="asset managers" label="asset managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760727" start="120005" end="120034" title="Swiss executive pay initiative, 2013" label="2013 people&amp;#x27;s initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234044" start="120048" end="120067" title="Dodd-Frank Act 2010" label="Dodd-Frank Act 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="120298" end="120319" title="conflicts of interest" label="conflicts of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108612" start="120429" end="120454" title="Other People&amp;#x27;s Money And How the Bankers Use It" label="other people&amp;#x27;s money"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147915" start="120511" end="120576" title="Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision Directive 2003" label="Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision Directive 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465791" start="120793" end="120873" title="Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities Directive 2009" label="Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities Directive 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="120907" end="120918" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201895" start="120929" end="120957" title="collective investment scheme" label="collective investment scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="121434" end="121463" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q67205881" start="121744" end="121791" title="Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 2004" label="Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q247506" start="121828" end="121849" title="financial instruments" label="financial instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="122103" end="122124" title="conflicts of interest" label="conflicts of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151421" start="122143" end="122194" title="Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive 2011" label="Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="122279" end="122289" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="122295" end="122309" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894831" start="122726" end="122741" title="asset stripping" label="asset stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255619" start="122747" end="122773" title="Solvency II Directive 2009" label="Solvency II Directive 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034661" start="122919" end="122950" title="Capital Requirements Directives" label="Capital Requirements Directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q772723" start="123042" end="123082" title="European System of Financial Supervision" label="European System of Financial Supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q769112" start="123149" end="123190" title="European Securities and Markets Authority" label="European Securities and Markets Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q769548" start="123205" end="123231" title="European Banking Authority" label="European Banking Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116004" start="123250" end="123304" title="European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority" label="European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979280" start="123997" end="124022" title="labour is not a commodity" label="labour is not a commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="124054" end="124078" title="unequal bargaining power" label="unequal bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="124239" end="124270" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q189289" start="124279" end="124312" title="International Swimming Federation" label="International Swimming Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="124791" end="124798" title="mergers" label="mergers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="124814" end="124821" title="cartels" label="cartels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800858" start="124868" end="124934" title="Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786765" start="125766" end="125795" title="United Brands Co v Commission" label="United Brands Co v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="125824" end="125830" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200561" start="126193" end="126210" title="predatory pricing" label="predatory pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123630982" start="126559" end="126587" title="AstraZeneca plc v Commission" label="AstraZeneca plc v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q422210" start="126723" end="126728" title="Losec" label="Losec"/>
<link wikidata="Q123630800" start="126772" end="126795" title="Google LLC v Commission" label="Google LLC v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12535449" start="126836" end="126843" title="billion" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="126935" end="126942" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q123630799" start="127166" end="127210" title="Commercial Solvents Corporation v Commission" label="Commercial Solvents Corporation v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176811" start="127385" end="127412" title="Microsoft Corp v Commission" label="Microsoft Corp v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="127495" end="127511" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q131054664" start="127689" end="127721" title="British Airways plc v Commission" label="British Airways plc v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="127745" end="127760" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176811" start="128132" end="128159" title="Microsoft Corp v Commission" label="Microsoft Corp v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="128230" end="128237" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q644320" start="128311" end="128321" title="RealPlayer" label="RealPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="128345" end="128368" title="Intel Corp v Commission" label="Intel Corp v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="128376" end="128381" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413361" start="128822" end="128844" title="Merger Regulation 2004" label="Merger Regulation 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800856" start="129410" end="129421" title="Article 101" label="Article 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="129429" end="129433" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="129514" end="129526" title="price fixing" label="price fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622188" start="130065" end="130092" title="Parker ITR Srl v Commission" label="Parker ITR Srl v Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="130900" end="130904" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002754" start="131224" end="131233" title="state aid" label="state aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577882" start="131460" end="131492" title="government procurement in the EU" label="government procurement in the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550628" start="131829" end="131864" title="Principles of European Contract Law" label="Principles of European Contract Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099118" start="131869" end="131900" title="Principles of European Tort Law" label="Principles of European Tort Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088379" start="132113" end="132139" title="Brussels I Regulation 2012" label="Brussels I Regulation 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q645589" start="132312" end="132329" title="Rome I Regulation" label="Rome I Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356179" start="132547" end="132565" title="Rome II Regulation" label="Rome II Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169232" start="133124" end="133153" title="Copyright Term Directive 2006" label="Copyright Term Directive 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933649" start="133254" end="133302" title="Copyright and Information Society Directive 2001" label="Copyright and Information Society Directive 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314925" start="133595" end="133618" title="Resale Rights Directive" label="Resale Rights Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q377687" start="133688" end="133709" title="Enforcement Directive" label="Enforcement Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378173" start="133788" end="133814" title="European Patent Convention" label="European Patent Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q450873" start="133991" end="134000" title="EU patent" label="EU patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831958" start="134057" end="134078" title="Trade Marks Directive" label="Trade Marks Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="134380" end="134415" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the EU" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="134814" end="134835" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="135053" end="135067" title="climate damage" label="climate damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q672788" start="135445" end="135479" title="Common Foreign and Security Policy" label="Common Foreign and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334480" start="135649" end="135672" title="European Social Charter" label="European Social Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="135683" end="135704" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328552" start="135710" end="135744" title="International Bill of Human Rights" label="International Bill of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q254168" start="136298" end="136315" title="Erasmus Programme" label="Erasmus Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339239" start="136441" end="136460" title="Bologna Declaration" label="Bologna Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q187073" start="136465" end="136472" title="Bologna Process" label="Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377863" start="136500" end="136530" title="European Higher Education Area" label="European Higher Education Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352427" start="136984" end="137020" title="R (Bidar) v London Borough of Ealing" label="R (Bidar) v London Borough of Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850262" start="138439" end="138454" title="Beveridge model" label="Beveridge model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287732" start="138508" end="138514" title="Health care in Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690875" start="138525" end="138530" title="Health care in Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q95199169" start="138716" end="138730" title="Bismarck model" label="Bismarck model"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="139552" end="139599" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874945" start="139680" end="139716" title="Patients&amp;#x27; Rights Directive 2011" label="Patients&amp;#x27; Rights Directive 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q569412" start="140116" end="140146" title="European Health Insurance Card" label="European Health Insurance Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817272" start="140245" end="140283" title="R (Watts) v Bedford Primary Care Trust" label="R (Watts) v Bedford Primary Care Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="140876" end="140906" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817271" start="140921" end="140939" title="N v United Kingdom" label="N v United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865584" start="141006" end="141020" title="ECHR article 3" label="ECHR article 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="141586" end="141607" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="141632" end="141645" title="EU Commission" label="EU Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="141805" end="141813" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="141841" end="141845" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="142237" end="142240" title="European Central Bank" label="ECB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="142306" end="142310" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q162222" start="142363" end="142373" title="Bundesbank" label="Bundesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q789966" start="142377" end="142392" title="Banco de España" label="Banco de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="142600" end="142616" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q351258" start="142978" end="142993" title="price stability" label="price stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="143122" end="143137" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="143180" end="143201" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q384136" start="143213" end="143228" title="full employment" label="full employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324585" start="143319" end="143330" title="EU environmental law" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612372" start="143684" end="143715" title="Gauweiler v Deutscher Bundestag" label="Gauweiler v Deutscher Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="143834" end="143838" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324184" start="144318" end="144352" title="Credit Institutions Directive 2013" label="Credit Institutions Directive 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q809926" start="144450" end="144459" title="Basel III" label="Basel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619900" start="144687" end="144723" title="Capital Requirements Regulation 2013" label="Capital Requirements Regulation 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q806663" start="144934" end="144943" title="bank runs" label="bank runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q117779976" start="144949" end="144981" title="Deposit Guarantee Directive 2014" label="Deposit Guarantee Directive 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433166" start="145226" end="145238" title="climate risk" label="climate risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130259" start="145348" end="145376" title="budget of the European Union" label="budget of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377817" start="145647" end="145661" title="Fiscal Compact" label="Fiscal Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="145811" end="145826" title="Eurozone crisis" label="Eurozone crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991234" start="145830" end="145882" title="Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism" label="Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="146032" end="146053" title="structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q117777850" start="146340" end="146377" title="Gross National Income Regulation 2019" label="Gross National Income Regulation 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q966048" start="146659" end="146677" title="EU value added tax" label="EU value added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="147466" end="147490" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="147690" end="147722" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q117777687" start="147818" end="147845" title="Hydrocarbons Directive 1994" label="Hydrocarbons Directive 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q107004432" start="148378" end="148422" title="Friends of the Earth v Royal Dutch Shell plc" label="Friends of the Earth v Royal Dutch Shell plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014906" start="148511" end="148527" title="Dutch Civil Code" label="Dutch Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="148581" end="148601" title="Paris Agreement 2015" label="Paris Agreement 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="148619" end="148623" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="ECHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q117777684" start="149211" end="149226" title="Lliuya v RWE AG" label="Lliuya v RWE AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q793809" start="149257" end="149263" title="Huaraz" label="Huaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="149265" end="149269" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q138133" start="149287" end="149293" title="RWE AG" label="RWE AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806749" start="149404" end="149419" title="Lake Palcacocha" label="Lake Palcacocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q452543" start="149507" end="149528" title="Higher Regional Court" label="Higher Regional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q79372212" start="149714" end="149744" title="Urgenda v State of Netherlands" label="Urgenda v State of Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="149872" end="149876" title="IPCC" label="IPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q118901973" start="150013" end="150029" title="Klimaschutz case" label="Klimaschutz case"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="150041" end="150068" title="German Constitutional Court" label="German Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="150208" end="150224" title="Grundgesetz 1949" label="Grundgesetz 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276180" start="150395" end="150422" title="EU Emissions Trading System" label="EU Emissions Trading System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490338" start="150571" end="150575" title="Wind power in the European Union" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483282" start="150577" end="150582" title="Solar power in the European Union" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="150586" end="150599" title="hydro storage" label="hydro storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151415" start="150732" end="150763" title="Renewable Energy Directive 2018" label="Renewable Energy Directive 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q279637" start="151169" end="151183" title="feed-in tariff" label="feed-in tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593736" start="151325" end="151358" title="PreussenElektra AG v Schleswag AG" label="PreussenElektra AG v Schleswag AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q270223" start="151554" end="151558" title="E.ON" label="E.ON"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="151606" end="151610" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593745" start="152575" end="152598" title="Netherlands v Essent NV" label="Netherlands v Essent NV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136320" start="153144" end="153156" title="Costa v ENEL" label="Costa v ENEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q108904013" start="153840" end="153872" title="2021–2022 global energy crisis" label="OPEC deciding to restrict supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="154208" end="154247" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="154365" end="154391" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="154534" end="154537" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377659" start="155221" end="155257" title="European Agricultural Guarantee Fund" label="European Agricultural Guarantee Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q118876003" start="155338" end="155369" title="Direct Payments Regulation 2013" label="Direct Payments Regulation 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="155634" end="155641" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874672" start="156615" end="156652" title="Agricultural Products Regulation 2013" label="Agricultural Products Regulation 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="157123" end="157139" title="unequal bargaining power" label="bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473332" start="157176" end="157228" title="Agricultural Unfair Trading Practices Directive 2019" label="Agricultural Unfair Trading Practices Directive 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473111" start="157652" end="157679" title="Food Safety Regulation 2002" label="Food Safety Regulation 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377910" start="157967" end="158015" title="European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development" label="European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517542" start="158739" end="158751" title="History of the forest in Central Europe" label="historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473108" start="158856" end="158892" title="Land Use and Forestry Directive 2018" label="Land Use and Forestry Directive 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874733" start="159087" end="159109" title="Timber Regulation 2010" label="Timber Regulation 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462895" start="159459" end="159489" title="Water Framework Directive 2000" label="Water Framework Directive 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q115953008" start="159589" end="159626" title="Drinking Water Quality Directive 2020" label="Drinking Water Quality Directive 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874990" start="159843" end="159872" title="Bathing Waters Directive 2006" label="Bathing Waters Directive 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q118868610" start="160044" end="160071" title="Commission v United Kingdom (C-337/89)" label="Commission v United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="160778" end="160792" title="global heating" label="global heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151415" start="160798" end="160829" title="Renewable Energy Directive 2018" label="Renewable Energy Directive 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417700" start="161134" end="161176" title="Phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles" label="ban sale of new petrol and diesel vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="161362" end="161382" title="rail electrification" label="rail electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473471" start="161470" end="161506" title="Emission Performance Regulation 2019" label="Emission Performance Regulation 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473526" start="162099" end="162133" title="Vehicles Emissions Regulation 2007" label="Vehicles Emissions Regulation 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q932442" start="162149" end="162155" title="Euro 6" label="Euro 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q99536899" start="162429" end="162467" title="Heavy Vehicle Emission Regulation 2019" label="Heavy Vehicle Emission Regulation 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000630" start="163144" end="163154" title="Dieselgate" label="Dieselgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="163175" end="163185" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744155" start="163292" end="163312" title="Commission v Germany (C-112/05)" label="Commission v Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="163369" end="163393" title="free movement of capital" label="free movement of capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="163397" end="163401" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q68355" start="163898" end="163915" title="Martin Winterkorn" label="Martin Winterkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473358" start="164217" end="164247" title="Road Transport Regulation 2006" label="Road Transport Regulation 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="164583" end="164587" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473212" start="164862" end="164898" title="Bus Passenger Rights Regulation 2011" label="Bus Passenger Rights Regulation 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q183423" start="165630" end="165668" title="Single European Railway Directive 2012" label="Single European Railway Directive 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744124" start="166080" end="166117" title="Rail Passenger Rights Regulation 2007" label="Rail Passenger Rights Regulation 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430689" start="166476" end="166523" title="Flight Compensation Regulation (EC) No 261/2004" label="Flight Compensation Regulation (EC) No 261/2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q100262948" start="167224" end="167270" title="Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 2010" label="Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="167867" end="167888" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="167971" end="167978" title="right to privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473419" start="168291" end="168321" title="Postal Services Directive 1997" label="Postal Services Directive 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455859" start="168469" end="168492" title="Roaming Regulation 2022" label="Roaming Regulation 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742439" start="168724" end="168754" title="Net Neutrality Regulation 2015" label="Net Neutrality Regulation 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q72149356" start="168999" end="169044" title="Electronic Communications Code Directive 2018" label="Electronic Communications Code Directive 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="169200" end="169214" title="radio spectrum" label="radio spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202094" start="170642" end="170649" title="Internet in Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202105" start="170653" end="170660" title="Internet in Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358226" start="171114" end="171148" title="Electronic Commerce Directive 2000" label="Electronic Commerce Directive 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q119473980" start="172598" end="172632" title="Information Society Directive 2015" label="Information Society Directive 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="172888" end="172892" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="172894" end="172902" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="173016" end="173055" title="General Data Protection Regulation 2016" label="General Data Protection Regulation 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744072" start="173362" end="173414" title="Privacy and Electronic Communications Directive 2002" label="Privacy and Electronic Communications Directive 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="173475" end="173482" title="cookies" label="cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="174011" end="174016" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="174430" end="174439" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284289" start="175037" end="175059" title="deliberative democracy" label="deliberative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="175220" end="175227" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="175249" end="175257" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="175291" end="175298" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="175309" end="175318" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q116265474" start="175498" end="175539" title="Audiovisual Media Services Directive 2010" label="Audiovisual Media Services Directive 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q100691575" start="177408" end="177444" title="Digital Services Act" label="Digital Services Act Regulation 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358226" start="177464" end="177498" title="Electronic Commerce Directive 2000" label="Electronic Commerce Directive 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q110821736" start="177935" end="177958" title="Modern flat Earth beliefs" label="flat Earth conspiracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="177962" end="177983" title="global warming denial" label="global warming denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="178120" end="178129" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660020" start="178392" end="178407" title="EU competition law" label="competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829590" start="178416" end="178451" title="Digital Markets Act" label="Digital Markets Act Regulation 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433417" start="178567" end="178582" title="Google Shopping" label="Google Shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="178797" end="178811" title="Google Android" label="Google Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q20800404" start="178844" end="178856" title="Alphabet Inc" label="Alphabet Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q183480" start="179110" end="179124" title="Google AdSense" label="Google AdSense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740862" start="179387" end="179405" title="Amazon Marketplace" label="Amazon Marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829590" start="179945" end="179964" title="Digital Markets Act" label="Digital Markets Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q130552835" start="180063" end="180067" title="Regulation (EU) 2023/988" label="GPSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q240141" start="180083" end="180093" title="regulation (European Union)" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="180097" end="180116" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256474" start="180130" end="180150" title="Directive 2001/95/EC" label="Directive 2001/95/EC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21167512" start="180650" end="180658" title="Chemical hazard" label="Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="180660" end="180670" title="Mechanical hazard" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="180676" end="180694" title="Electricity" label="electrical hazards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="180729" end="180737" title="Child" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="180777" end="180789" title="Disability" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q672788" start="180956" end="180990" title="Common Foreign and Security Policy" label="Common Foreign and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="181006" end="181040" title="Common Security and Defence Policy" label="Common Security and Defence Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089474" start="181056" end="181077" title="European Defence Fund" label="European Defence Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134173" start="181082" end="181105" title="European Defence Agency" label="European Defence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="181122" end="181126" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="181132" end="181146" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378040" start="181162" end="181243" title="Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations" label="Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="181245" end="181274" title="European Neighbourhood Policy" label="European Neighbourhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q661131" start="181276" end="181305" title="Common Commercial Policy (EU)" label="Common Commercial Policy (EU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780211" start="181307" end="181338" title="European Commissioner for Trade" label="European Commissioner for Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413366" start="181340" end="181376" title="European Union free trade agreements" label="European Union free trade agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="181378" end="181402" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="181404" end="181408" title="TFEU" label="TFEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133343" start="181502" end="181539" title="Area of freedom, security and justice" label="Area of freedom, security and justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357669" start="181544" end="181567" title="European Arrest Warrant" label="European Arrest Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354342" start="181593" end="181646" title="2006 Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire toxic waste spill" label="toxic waste spill off the coast of Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780199" start="181740" end="181764" title="European Commissioner for the Environment" label="Environment Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q58091" start="181765" end="181778" title="Stavros Dimas" label="Stavros Dimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q333833" start="181953" end="181968" title="Franco Frattini" label="Franco Frattini"/>
<link wikidata="Q783943" start="181974" end="182016" title="Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security" label="Justice, Freedom and Security Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156265" start="182077" end="182093" title="ecological crime" label="ecological crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117824" start="182418" end="182456" title="Proposed directive on criminal measures aimed at ensuring the enforcement of intellectual property rights" label="intellectual property rights directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734643" start="182796" end="182840" title="Europäische Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftsrecht" label="Europäische Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftsrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855726" start="182884" end="182925" title="List of European Court of Justice rulings" label="List of European Court of Justice rulings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256474" start="182928" end="182961" title="List of European Union directives" label="List of European Union directives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276438" wikidata="Q819136" url="?curid=276438" title="Denmark in World War II">
<text>At the outset of World War II in September 1939, Denmark declared itself neutral, but that neutrality did not prevent Nazi Germany from occupying the country soon after the outbreak of war; the occupation lasted until Germany&#x27;s defeat. The decision to occupy Denmark was taken in Berlin on 17 December 1939. On 9 April 1940, Germany occupied Denmark in Operation Weserübung. The Danish government and king functioned in a relatively normal manner until 29 August 1943, when Germany placed Denmark under direct military occupation, which lasted until the Allied victory on 5 May 1945. Contrary to the situation in other countries under German occupation, most Danish institutions continued to function relatively normally until 1945. Both the Danish government and king remained in the country in an uneasy relationship between a democratic and a totalitarian system until 1943 when the Danish government stepped down in protest against German demands that included instituting the death penalty for sabotage.

Just over 3,000 Danes died as a direct result of the occupation. A further 2,000 volunteers of Free Corps Denmark and Waffen-SS, most of whom originated from the German minority of southern Denmark, died fighting on the Eastern Front while 1,072 merchant sailors died in Allied service. Overall, this represents a very low mortality rate compared to other occupied countries and most belligerent countries. Some Danes chose to collaborate during the occupation by joining the National Socialist Workers&#x27; Party of Denmark, Schalburg Corps, HIPO Corps and Peter Group (often with considerable overlap between the participants of the different groups). The National Socialist Workers&#x27; Party of Denmark participated in the 1943 Danish Folketing election, but despite significant support from Germany it only received 2.1% of the votes. In Denmark, the occupation period is known as (Danish for &quot;the Occupation&quot;).

A resistance movement developed over the course of the war, and the vast majority of Danish Jews were rescued and sent to neutral Sweden in 1943 when German authorities ordered their internment as part of the Holocaust.

== Invasion ==
The occupation of Denmark was initially not an important objective for the German government. The decision to occupy its small northern neighbour was taken to facilitate a planned invasion of the strategically more important Norway, and as a precaution against the expected Allied response. German military planners believed that a base in the northern part of Jutland, specifically the airfield of Aalborg, would be essential to operations in Norway, and they began planning the occupation of parts of Denmark. However, as late as February 1940 no firm decision to occupy Denmark had been made. The issue was finally settled when Adolf Hitler personally crossed out the words &#x27; (&quot;the Northern tip of Jutland&quot;) and replaced them with &#x27;, a German abbreviation for Denmark.

Although the Danish territory of South Jutland was home to a significant German minority, and the province had been regained from Germany as a result of a plebiscite resulting from the Versailles Treaty, Germany was in no apparent hurry to reclaim it. In a much more vague and longer-term way, some Nazis hoped to incorporate Denmark into a greater &quot;Nordic Union&quot; at some stage, but these plans never materialized. Officially, Germany claimed to be protecting Denmark from Anglo-French attacks.

At 4:15 on the morning of 9 April 1940, German forces crossed the border into neutral Denmark. In a coordinated operation, German ships began disembarking troops at the docks in Copenhagen. Although outnumbered and poorly equipped, Danish soldiers in several parts of the country put up resistance, most notably the Royal Guard in Copenhagen and units in South Jutland. As the invasion began, German planes dropped the notorious leaflets over Copenhagen calling on Danes to accept the German occupation peacefully, and claiming that Germany had occupied Denmark in order to protect it against Anglo-French attacks. Colonel Lunding from the Royal Danish Army&#x27;s intelligence office later confirmed that Danish intelligence knew the attack would be coming on either 8 or 9 April and had warned the government accordingly. The Danish ambassador to Germany, Herluf Zahle, issued a similar warning which was also ignored.

As a result of the rapid turn of events, the Danish government did not have enough time to officially declare war on Germany. Denmark was in an untenable position in any event, however. Its territory and population were too small to hold out against Germany for any sustained period. Its flat land would have resulted in it being easily overrun by German panzers; Jutland, for instance, was immediately adjacent to Schleswig-Holstein to the south and was thus wide open to a panzer attack from there. Unlike Norway, Denmark had no mountain ranges from which drawn-out resistance could be conducted.
Sixteen Danish soldiers died in the invasion, but after less than six hours the Danish government surrendered, believing that resistance was futile and hoping to work out an advantageous agreement with Germany. Not only was the flat Jutland territory a perfect area for the German army to operate in, the surprise attack on Copenhagen had made any attempt to defend Zealand impossible. The Germans had also been quick to establish control over the bridge across the Little Belt, thus gaining access to the island of Funen. Believing that further resistance would only result in the futile loss of more Danish lives, the Danish cabinet ultimately decided to bow to the German pressure &quot;under protest&quot;. The German forces were technologically sophisticated and numerous; the Danish forces comparatively tiny and using obsolete equipment; partially a result of a pre-war policy of trying to avoid antagonizing Germany by not supplying the army with modern equipment. Even stiff resistance from the Danes would not have lasted long. Questions have been raised around the apparent fact that the German forces did not seem to expect any resistance, invading with unarmored ships and vehicles.

== Other territories within the Kingdom of Denmark ==

=== Faroe Islands ===

After the occupation of Denmark, British forces from 12 April 1940 made a pre-emptive bloodless invasion of the Faroe Islands to prevent their occupation by German troops. Britain took over the areas where Denmark previously had given support, and the islands now became dependent on the United Kingdom, which began to participate in fishing production and supplied the islands with important goods.

The British fortified positions in strategically important locations in the Faroe Islands. Sounds and fjords were mined, and at the island of Vágar, British engineers built a military aviation base. Up to 8,000 British servicemembers were stationed in the islands, which at that time had 30,000 inhabitants.

The Faroe Islands were repeatedly attacked by German aircraft, suffering minimal damage. That said, 25 Faroese ships were lost and 132 sailors died.

=== Iceland ===

From 1918 until 1944, Iceland was self-governing, but the Danish king (King Christian X) was the head of state of both Denmark and Iceland. The United Kingdom occupied Iceland on 10 May 1940 to preempt German occupation, turning it over to the then-neutral United States in July 1941, before the latter&#x27;s entry into the war in December 1941. Officially remaining neutral throughout World War II, Iceland became a fully independent republic on 17 June 1944.

=== Greenland ===

On 9 April 1941, the Danish envoy to the United States, Henrik Kauffmann, signed a treaty with the U.S., authorizing it to defend Greenland and construct military stations there. Kauffmann was supported in this decision by the Danish diplomats in the United States and the local authorities in Greenland. Signing this treaty &quot;in the name of the King&quot; was a clear violation of his diplomatic powers, but Kauffmann argued that he would not receive orders from an occupied Copenhagen.

== Protectorate government (1940–43) ==

Historically, Denmark had a large amount of interaction with Germany. In 1920 the country regained possession of the northern part of Schleswig after losing the provinces during the Second Schleswig War in 1864. The Danish people were divided about what the best policy toward Germany might be. Few were ardent Nazis; some explored the economic possibilities of providing the German occupiers with supplies and goods; others eventually formed resistance groups towards the latter part of the war. The majority of Danes were unwillingly compliant towards the Germans. Due to the relative ease of the occupation and copious amount of dairy products, Denmark earned the nickname &quot;the Cream Front&quot; ().

As a result of the cooperative attitude of the Danish authorities, German officials claimed that they would &quot;respect Danish sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as neutrality.&quot; The German authorities were inclined towards lenient terms with Denmark for several reasons: their only strong interest in Denmark, that of surplus agricultural products, could be supplied by price policy on food rather than by control and restriction (some German records indicate that the German administration had not fully realized this potential before the occupation took place, which can be doubted);
there was serious concern that the Danish economy was so dependent upon trade with Britain that the occupation would create an economic collapse, and Danish officials capitalized on that fear to get early concessions for a reasonable form of cooperation; they also hoped to score propaganda points by making Denmark, in Hitler&#x27;s words, &quot;a model protectorate&quot;; on top of these more practical goals, Nazi race ideology held that Danes were &quot;fellow Nordic Aryans,&quot; and could therefore to some extent be trusted to handle their domestic affairs.

These factors combined to allow Denmark a very favourable relationship with Nazi Germany. The government remained somewhat intact, and the parliament continued to function more or less as it had before. They were able to maintain much of their former control over domestic policy. The police and judicial system remained in Danish hands, and unlike most occupied countries, King Christian X remained in the country as Danish head of state. The German Reich was formally represented by a &quot;&quot; (&#x27;Reich Plenipotentiary&#x27;), i.e. a diplomat accredited to the sovereign, a post awarded to Cecil von Renthe-Fink, the German ambassador, and then in November 1942 to the lawyer and SS general Werner Best.

Danish public opinion generally backed the new government, particularly after the fall of France in June 1940. There was a general feeling that the unpleasant reality of German occupation must be confronted in the most realistic way possible, given the international situation. Politicians realized that they would have to try hard to maintain Denmark&#x27;s privileged position by presenting a united front to the German authorities, so all of the mainstream democratic parties formed a new government together. Parliament and the government agreed to work closely together. Though the effect of this was close to the creation of a one-party state, it remained a representative government.

The Danish government was dominated by Social Democrats, including the pre-war prime minister Thorvald Stauning, who had been strongly opposed to the Nazi party. Stauning himself was deeply depressed by the prospects for Europe under Nazism. Nonetheless, his party pursued a strategy of cooperation, hoping to maintain democracy and Danish control in Denmark for as long as possible. There were many issues that they had to work out with Germany in the months after the occupation. In an effort to keep the Germans satisfied, they compromised Danish democracy and society in several fundamental ways:

* Newspaper articles and news reports &quot;which might jeopardize German-Danish relations&quot; were outlawed, in violation of the Danish constitutional prohibition against censorship.
* On the 22nd of June 1941, when Germany commenced its attack on the Soviet Union, the German authorities in Denmark demanded that Danish Communists should be arrested. The Danish government complied and using secret registers, the Danish police in the following days arrested 339 Communists. Of these 246, including the three Communist members of the Danish parliament, were imprisoned in the Horserød camp, in violation of the Danish constitution. On 22 August 1941, the Danish parliament passed the Communist Law, outlawing the Communist Party and Communist activities, in another violation of the Danish constitution. In 1943, about half of the Communists were transferred to Stutthof concentration camp, where 22 of them died.
* Following Germany&#x27;s assault on the Soviet Union, Denmark joined the Anti-Comintern Pact, together with the fellow Nordic state of Finland. As a result, many Communists were found among the first members of the Danish resistance movement.
* Industrial production and trade was, partly due to geopolitical reality and economic necessity, redirected toward Germany. An overriding concern was a German fear of creating a burden if the Danish economy collapsed as it did after World War I. This sensitivity to Denmark&#x27;s heavy reliance on foreign trade informed the German decision before the occupation to allow the Danes passage through their blockade. Denmark had traditionally been a major trading partner of both Britain and Germany. Many government officials saw expanded trade with Germany as vital to maintaining social order in Denmark. Increased unemployment and poverty were feared to lead to more of open revolt within the country, since Danes tended to blame all negative developments on the Germans. It was feared that any revolt would result in a crackdown by the German authorities.
* The Danish army was largely demobilized, although some units remained until August 1943. The army was allowed to maintain 2,200 men, as well as 1,100 auxiliary troops. Much of the fleet remained in port, but in Danish hands. In at least two towns, the army created secret weapons caches on 10 April 1940. On 23 April 1940, members of the Danish military intelligence established contacts with their British counterparts through the British diplomatic mission in Stockholm. They began dispatching intelligence reports to Britain by Autumn 1940. This traffic became regular and continued until the Germans dissolved the Danish army in 1943. Following the liberation of Denmark, Field Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery described the intelligence gathered in Denmark as &quot;second to none&quot;.

In return for these concessions, the Danish cabinet rejected German demands for legislation discriminating against Denmark&#x27;s Jewish minority. Demands to introduce the death penalty were likewise rebuffed, and so were German demands to allow German military courts jurisdiction over Danish citizens. Denmark also rejected demands for the transfer of Danish army units to German military use.
Stauning remained prime minister until his death in 1942, as head of a coalition cabinet encompassing all major political parties (the exceptions being the tiny Nazi party, and the Communist Party, which was outlawed in 1941). Vilhelm Buhl replaced him briefly, only to be replaced by foreign minister Erik Scavenius, who had been the main link to the Nazi authorities throughout the war. Scavenius was a diplomat, not an elected politician, and had an elitist approach to government. He was afraid that emotional public opinion would destabilize his attempts to build a compromise between Danish sovereignty and the realities of German occupation. Scavenius felt strongly that he was Denmark&#x27;s most ardent defender. After the war there was much recrimination over his stance, particularly from members of the active resistance, who felt that he had hindered the cause of resistance and threatened Denmark&#x27;s national honour. He felt that these people were vain, seeking to build their own reputations or political careers through emotionalism.

The Danish authorities were able to use their more cooperative stance to win important concessions for the country. They continually refused to enter a customs and currency union with Germany. Danes were concerned both about the negative economic effects of the German proposals, as well as the political ones. German officials did not want to risk their special relationship with Denmark by forcing an agreement on them, as they had done in other countries. The Danish government was also able to stall negotiations over the return of South Jutland to Germany, ban &quot;closed-rank uniformed marches&quot; that would have made nationalist German or Danish Nazi agitation more possible, keep National Socialists out of the government, and hold a relatively free election, with decidedly anti-Nazi results, in the middle of the war. Danish military officials also had access to sensitive German information, which they delivered to the Allies under government cover. The economic consequences of the occupation were also mitigated by German-Danish cooperation. Inflation rose sharply in the first year of the war, as the German Army spent a large amount of German military currency in Denmark, most importantly on military installations and troop deployments. Due to the Occupation, the National Bank of Denmark was compelled to exchange German currency for Danish notes, effectively granting the Germans a gigantic unsecured loan with only vague promises that the money would eventually be paid, something which never happened. The Danish government was later able to renegotiate the Germans&#x27; arbitrary exchange rate between the German military currency and the Danish krone to reduce this problem.

The success most often alluded to in regard to the Danish policy toward Germany is the protection of the Jewish minority in Denmark. Throughout its years in power, the government consistently refused to accept German demands regarding the Jews. The authorities would not enact special laws concerning Jews, and their civil rights remained equal with those of the rest of the population. German authorities became increasingly exasperated with this position but concluded that any attempt to remove or mistreat Jews would be &quot;politically unacceptable.&quot; Even the Gestapo officer Werner Best, plenipotentiary in Denmark from November 1942, believed that any attempt to remove the Jews would be enormously disruptive to the relationship between the two governments and recommended against any action concerning the Jews of Denmark.

Christian X remained in Denmark throughout the war, a symbol of courage much appreciated by his subjects.

=== Collaborators ===

==== Free Corps Denmark ====
On 29 June 1941, days after the invasion of the USSR, &quot;Free Corps Denmark&quot; () was founded as a corps of Danish volunteers to fight against the Soviet Union. &quot;Free Corps Denmark&quot; was set up at the initiative of the SS and DNSAP who approached Lieutenant-Colonel C.P. Kryssing of the Danish army shortly after the invasion of the USSR had begun. The Nazi paper &quot;&quot; proclaimed the creation of the corps on 29 June 1941.

According to Danish law, it was not illegal to join a foreign army, but active recruiting on Danish soil was illegal. The SS disregarded this law and began recruiting efforts – predominantly recruiting Danish Nazis and members of the German-speaking minority. The Danish government discovered this and decided to concentrate on persuading the Germans not to recruit underage boys. General Prior wanted to remove Kryssing and his designated second-in-command but decided to consult the cabinet. It agreed that Kryssing should be removed in its meeting on 2 July 1941, but this decision was later withdrawn when Erik Scavenius—who had not attended the original meeting—returned from negotiations and announced that he had reached an agreement with Renthe-Fink that soldiers wishing to join this corps could be given leave until further notice. The government issued an announcement stating that &quot;Lieut. Colonel C. P. Kryssing, Chief of the 5th Artillery reg., Holbæk, has with the consent of the Royal Danish Government assumed command over &#x27;Free Corps Denmark&#x27;&quot;. The Danish text only explicitly said that the government recognized that Kryssing had been given a new command; it did not sanction the creation of the corps, which had already happened without its creators asking the government&#x27;s consent. In July 1941 Heinrich Himmler complained that Denmark was unofficially trying to stop recruitment since the word ran in the army that anyone joining would be committing treason. The government later instructed the army and navy not to obstruct applications from soldiers wishing to leave active duty and join the corps.

A 1998 study showed that the average recruit to &quot;Free Corps Denmark&quot; was a Nazi, a member of the German minority in Denmark, or both, and that recruitment was very broad socially. Historian Bo Lidegaard notes: &quot;The relationship between the population and the corps was freezing cold, and legionnaires on leave time and again came into fights, with civilians meeting the corps&#x27; volunteers with massive contempt.&quot; Lidegaard gives the following figures for 1941: 6,000 Danish citizens had signed up to German army duty; 1,500 of these belonged to the German minority in Denmark.

=== Anti-Comintern Pact ===

On 20 November 1941, five months after the invasion of the USSR, the Danish government received a German &quot;invitation&quot; to join the Anti-Comintern Pact. Finland accepted reluctantly on 25 November and stated that it presumed that Denmark would also attend the ceremony (effectively conditioning its own attendance). Erik Scavenius argued that Denmark should sign the pact but the Cabinet ministers refused, stating that this would violate the policy of neutrality. Scavenius reported this decision to Renthe-Fink. Fink replied on 21 November that &quot;Germany would be unable to comprehend&quot; a Danish rejection and demanded this decision be reversed before the end of the day. He assured Scavenius that the pact contained neither &quot;political or other obligations&quot; (i.e., going to war with the USSR). At a cabinet meeting the same day, it was suggested to seek written confirmation of this promise in an addendum to the protocol. Stauning agreed on these terms since it would effectively make the signing meaningless. The Danish foreign office drew up a list of four terms that stated that Denmark only committed itself to &quot;police action&quot; in Denmark and that the nation remained neutral. The German foreign ministry agreed to the terms, provided that the protocol was not made public, which was the intent of the Danish foreign ministry.

As Berlin grew tired of waiting, Joachim von Ribbentrop called Copenhagen on 23 November threatening to &quot;cancel the peaceful occupation&quot; unless Denmark complied. On 23 November, the &quot;&quot; in Denmark was put on alert, and Renthe-Fink met Stauning and Foreign Minister Munch at 10 AM stating that there would be no room for &quot;parliamentary excuses&quot;. If the German demands were not met Germany &quot;would no longer be committed by the promises given on 9 April 1940&quot; (the threat of a state of war, a Nazi government, and territorial dismemberment). In a Cabinet meeting at 2 PM that day, Stauning, Scavenius, Munch and two additional ministers advocated accession; seven ministers opposed. In a meeting the same day in the Nine Man committee, three more ministers caved in, most notably Vilhelm Buhl, stating &quot;Cooperation is the last shred of our defence&quot;. Prime Minister Stauning&#x27;s notes from the day stated: &quot;The objective is a political positioning. But this was established by the occupation. The danger of saying no—I would not like to see a Terboven here. Sign with addendum—that modifies the pact.&quot;

Scavenius boarded a train and headed for Berlin, where he arrived on Monday 24 November. The next crisis came when he was met by Renthe-Fink, who informed him that Ribbentrop had informed Fink that there had been a &quot;misunderstanding&quot; regarding the four clauses and that clause 2 would be deleted. This had specified that Denmark only had police-like obligations. Scavenius had a strict mandate not to change a sentence and stated that he would be unable to return to Copenhagen with a different content from the one agreed upon, but that he was willing to reopen negotiations to clarify the matter further. This reply enraged Ribbentrop (and rumours claim that he was considering ordering the SS to arrest Scavenius). The task fell to German diplomat Ernst von Weizsäcker to patch up a compromise. He watered down the wording but left the content pretty intact. Nonetheless, for Scavenius it was a strong setback that the four clauses would now only get the status of a unilateral Danish declaration (&quot;&quot;) with a comment on it by Fink that its content &quot;no doubt&quot; was in compliance with the pact. Furthermore, he was instructed to give a public speech while abstaining from mentioning the four clauses but only making general statements about Denmark&#x27;s status as a neutral nation. Scavenius signed the pact. At the following reception, the Italian ambassador described Scavenius as &quot;a fish dragged on land ... a small old gentleman in a suit asking himself how on earth he got to this place&quot;. Lidegaard comments that the old man remained defiant: during a conversation with Ribbentrop in which the latter complained about the &quot;barbarous cannibalism&quot; of Russian POWs, Scavenius rhetorically asked if that statement meant that Germany didn&#x27;t feed her prisoners.

When news of the signing reached Denmark, it left the population outraged, and rumours immediately spread about what Denmark had now committed itself to. The cabinet sent a car to pick up Scavenius at the ferry, to keep him from needing to ride the train alone to Copenhagen. At the same time a large demonstration gathered outside of Parliament, which led the Minister of Justice, to remark that he did not like to see Danish police beating up students singing patriotic songs. When Scavenius had returned to Copenhagen, he asked the cabinet to debate once and for all where the red lines existed in Danish relations with Germany. This debate concluded that three red lines existed:
# No legislation discriminating against Jews,
# Denmark should never join the Axis Pact between Germany, Italy, and Japan,
# No unit of the Danish army should ever fight against foreign forces.
To the surprise of many, Scavenius accepted these instructions without hesitation.

=== The 1942 telegram crisis ===

In October 1942, Hitler transmitted a long, flattering birthday telegram to King Christian. The King replied with a simple &quot;&quot; (&quot;Giving my best thanks. King Christian&quot;) sending the &quot;Führer&quot; into a state of rage at this deliberate slight, and seriously damaging Danish relations with Germany. Hitler immediately recalled his ambassador and expelled the Danish ambassador from Germany. The plenipotentiary, Renthe-Fink, was replaced by Werner Best and orders to crack down in Denmark were issued. Hitler also demanded that Erik Scavenius become prime minister, and all remaining Danish troops were ordered out of Jutland.

== Increasing resistance after the August 1943 crisis==
As the war dragged on, the Danish population became increasingly hostile to the Germans. Soldiers stationed in Denmark had found most of the population cold and distant from the beginning of the occupation, but their willingness to cooperate had made the relationship workable. The government had attempted to discourage sabotage and violent resistance to the occupation, but by the autumn of 1942 the numbers of violent acts of resistance were increasing steadily to the point that Germany declared Denmark &quot;enemy territory&quot; for the first time. After the battles of Stalingrad and El-Alamein the incidents of resistance, violent and symbolic, increased rapidly.

In March 1943 the Germans allowed a general election to be held. The voter turnout was 89.5%, the highest in any Danish parliamentary election, and 94% cast their ballots for one of the democratic parties behind the cooperation policy while 2.2% voted for the anti-cooperation &quot;&quot;. 2.1% voted for the National Socialist Workers&#x27; Party of Denmark, almost corresponding to the 1.8% the party had received in the 1939 elections. The election, discontent, and a growing feeling of optimism that Germany would be defeated led to widespread strikes and civil disturbances in the summer of 1943. The Danish government refused to deal with the situation to the satisfaction of the Germans, who gave an ultimatum to the government, including the following demands, on 28 August 1943: 
*A ban on people assembling in public, 
*outlawing strikes, the introduction of a curfew,
*censorship conducted with German assistance,
*special (German military) courts should be introduced, and 
*death penalty in cases of sabotage. 

In addition, the city of Odense was ordered to pay a fine of 1 million kroner for the death of a German soldier killed in that city and hostages were to be held as security.

The Danish government refused, so on 29 August 1943 the Germans officially dissolved the Danish government and instituted martial law. The Danish cabinet handed in its resignation, but since King Christian never officially accepted it, the government remained functioning &#x27; until the end of the war. In reality—largely due to the initiative of the permanent secretary of foreign affairs Nils Svenningsen—all day-to-day business was handed over to Permanent Secretaries, who each effectively ran his own ministry. The Germans administered the rest of the country, and the Danish Parliament did not convene for the remainder of the occupation. As the ministry of foreign affairs responsible for all negotiations with the Germans, Nils Svenningsen had a leading position in the government.

In anticipation of Operation Safari, the Royal Danish Navy had instructed its captains to resist any German attempts to assume control over their vessels. The navy managed to scuttle 32 of its larger ships, while Germany succeeded in seizing 14 of the larger and 50 of the smaller vessels (&quot; or &quot;patrol cutters&quot;). The Germans later succeeded in raising and refitting 15 of the sunken ships. During the scuttling of the Danish fleet, a number of vessels were ordered to attempt an escape to Swedish waters, and 13 vessels succeeded in this attempt, including four larger ships; two other larger vessels remained at safe harbour in Greenland. The coastal defence ship attempted to break out of the Isefjord, but was attacked by Stukas and forced to run aground. By the autumn of 1944, the ships in Sweden officially formed a Danish naval flotilla in exile. In 1943, Swedish authorities allowed 500 Danish soldiers in Sweden to train themselves as &quot;police troops&quot;. By the autumn of 1944, Sweden increased this number to 4,800 and recognized the entire unit as a Danish brigade in exile. Danish collaboration continued on the administrative level, with Danish bureaucracy functioning under German command.

In September 1943, a variety of resistance groups grouped together into the Danish Freedom Council, which coordinated resistance activities. A high-profile resister was former government minister John Christmas Møller, who had fled to England in 1942 and became a widely popular commentator because of his broadcasts to the nation on BBC radio.

After the fall of the government, Denmark was exposed to the full extent of occupational rule. In October the Germans decided to remove all Jews from Denmark, German diplomat Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz leaked Nazi plans, and swift action by Danish civilians transported the vast majority of Danish Jews to safety in neutral Sweden in fishing vessels and motorboats. The entire evacuation lasted two months and one man helped ferry more than 1,400 Jews to safety. Unencumbered by government opposition, sabotage increased greatly in frequency and severity, though it was rarely of very serious concern to the Germans. Nonetheless, the Danish resistance movement had some successes, such as on D-Day when the train network in Denmark was disrupted for days, delaying the arrival of German reinforcements in Normandy. An underground government was established, and the illegal press flourished. Allied governments, which had been sceptical about the country&#x27;s commitment to fight Germany, began recognizing Denmark as a full ally.

The permanent secretary of the ministry of foreign affairs, Nils Svenningsen, in January 1944 suggested establishing a Danish camp, to avoid deportations to Germany. Werner Best accepted this suggestion, but on condition that this camp was built close to the German border. Frøslev Prison Camp was set up in August 1944, solely to keep Danish Jews and other prisoners within Denmark&#x27;s borders.

The Gestapo had limited trust in the Danish police force, which had a total 10,000 members; 1,960 of them were arrested and deported to Germany on 19 September 1944.

== Economy ==
Denmark faced some serious economic problems during the war. The Danish economy was fundamentally hurt by the rising cost of raw material imports such as coal and oil. Furthermore, Denmark lost its main trading partner at that point, the UK. During years of occupation the Danish economy was more and more aligned on meeting German demands, which mainly meant agrarian products. The Danish authorities took an active part in the development and even initiated negotiations on a customs union. Those negotiations failed on the question whether the Danish krone should be abolished.

The blockade against Germany affected Denmark too with unfortunate results. Since the country has virtually no natural resources of its own it was very vulnerable to these price shocks and shortages. The government had foreseen the possibility of coal and oil shortages and had stockpiled some before the war, which, combined with rationing, prevented some of the worst potential problems from coming to the country. The disruptions to the European trading network were also damaging to the economy, but all things considered, Denmark did quite well compared to other countries during the war.

The country, at least certain sections of it, did so well that it has been open to the accusation of profiteering from the war. After the war there was some effort to find and punish profiteers, but the consequences and scope of these trials were far less severe than in many other countries, largely a reflection of the general acceptance of the realistic need for cooperation with Germany. On the whole, though the country fared relatively well, this is only a relative measure. Phil Giltner has worked out that Germany had a &quot;debt&quot; of roughly 6.9 billion kroner to Denmark as a whole. This means that they had taken far more out of the Danish economy than they had put in, aside from the negative side effects of the war on trade. The German debt had accumulated due to an arrangement with the Danish central bank, in which the German occupation forces could draw on a special account there to pay their bills from Danish suppliers. Exports to Germany were also largely settled this way. The arrangement was agreed to for fear of German soldiers helping themselves without paying, and the conflicts that might follow. It also meant that the Danish central bank was picking up a large part of the tab for the German occupation, and that the money supply rose drastically as a result.

=== Post-war currency reform ===
The Danish National Bank estimates that the occupation had resulted in the printing press increasing the currency supply from the pre-war figure of 400 million kroner to 1,600 million, much of which ended up in the hands of war profiteers. In July 1945, two months after the liberation of Denmark, the Danish Parliament passed an emergency law initiating a currency reform, making all old banknotes void. A small number of employees at the National Bank had clandestinely begun the production of new banknotes in late 1943. The production of new notes happened without the knowledge of the German forces located at the bank, and by the spring of 1945 the bank&#x27;s stock of notes was sufficient to initiate the exchange. The law required was passed hastily on Friday 20 July and published the same day; it also closed all shops for the weekend. By Monday 23 July, all old notes were officially outlawed as legal tender and any note not declared in a bank by 30 July would lose its value. This law allowed any Dane to exchange a total of 100 kroner to new notes, no questions asked. An amount up to 500 kroner could be exchanged, provided the owner signed a written statement explaining its origins. Any amount above this level would be deposited in an escrow account and only released or exchanged following scrutiny by tax officials examining the validity of the person&#x27;s statement about the origins of this wealth. All existing bank accounts were also scrutinized. Multiple exchanges of cash by the same person were avoided by the requirement that currency would only be exchanged to anybody also handing in a specified ration stamp, previously issued in a different context, which had not yet been authorized for use. The exchange resulted in a significant drop in the currency supply, and around 20% of the 3,000 million kroner property declared had not previously been registered by the tax authorities. Estimates vary for the amounts of currency simply destroyed by its owners. All banknotes issued since the changeover date remain valid indefinitely; earlier ones are not valid.

== Hardship and the end of the war ==
Most of Denmark was liberated from German rule in May 1945 by British forces commanded by Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery; the easternmost island of Bornholm was liberated by Soviet forces, who remained there for almost a year. On 5 April 1946 the last Soviets left Bornholm. The end of German rule is in Denmark known as &quot;Befrielsen&quot; (the Liberation).

Although Denmark was spared many of the difficulties other areas of Europe suffered, its population still experienced hardships, particularly after the Germans took charge in 1943. Yet on the whole, Denmark can be said to have suffered the least of all the European combatants from the war. Many were killed and imprisoned because of their work resisting the German authorities. There were small bombing raids on select targets in the country, but nothing comparable to that suffered by, for instance, neighbouring Norway or the Netherlands. One area that was badly damaged was the island of Bornholm, largely due to Soviet bombardment of the German garrison there in the very last days of the war.

About 380 members of the resistance were killed during the war: they are commemorated in Ryvangen Memorial Park. Roughly 900 Danish civilians were killed in a variety of ways: either by being caught in air raids, killed during civil disturbances, or in reprisal killings, the so-called &quot;clearing&quot; murders. Thirty-nine Danish soldiers were killed or injured during the invasion, and four were killed on 29 August 1943 when the Germans dissolved the Danish government. Some sources estimate that about 360 Danes died in concentration camps. The largest groups of fatalities were amongst Danish merchant sailors, who continued to operate throughout the war, most falling victim to submarines. Some 1,850 sailors died. Just over 100 soldiers died as part of Allied forces.

Approximately 6,000 Danes were sent to concentration camps during World War II, of whom about 600 (10%) died. In comparison with other countries this is a relatively low mortality rate in the concentration camps.

After the war, 40,000 people were arrested on suspicion of collaboration. Of these, 13,500 were punished in some way. 78 received death sentences, of which 46 were carried out. Most received prison sentences of under four years. Many people criticized the process for victimizing &quot;small&quot; people disproportionately, while many politicians and businesses were left untouched. One difficult issue was deciding what to do with collaborators who were essentially &quot;following orders&quot; that their own government had given them, such as business executives who had been encouraged to work with the Germans.

Although some members of the resistance tried to organize new political parties after the war to reshape the political order in Denmark, they were unable to do so. The only party that appeared to receive a significant boost from resistance was the Communist Party. The Communists received about one-eighth of the popular vote in the October 1945 elections.

On 5 May 1945, Denmark was officially free of German control. Citizens all over the country took down the black shades that had been used to cover their windows during bombing raids and made bonfires of them in the streets. Allied troops (mostly Soviet soldiers) were released from prisons all over the country and paraded down streets in Copenhagen, Aarhus, and other cities. In Aarhus, young women known or believed to have had relationships with German soldiers were dragged through the streets before crowds of people and had most of their hair cut off. They were then forced to march down the street to be humiliated.

After the end of hostilities, over two thousand German prisoners of war were made to clear the vast minefields that had been laid on the west coast of Jutland, nearly half of them being either killed or wounded in the process. As part of a controversial agreement reached by the German Commander General Georg Lindemann, the Danish Government and the British Armed Forces, German soldiers with experience in defusing mines were in charge of clearing the mine fields.

== German refugees ==
In the final weeks of the war, between 9 February and 9 May, several hundred thousand German refugees fled across the Baltic Sea, fleeing the advancing Soviet Army. For the most part, the refugees were from East Prussia and Pomerania. Many of the refugees were women, children, or elderly. Many were malnourished, exhausted, or seriously ill. A third of the refugees were younger than 15 years old.

The German authorities gave the refugees a privileged status, seizing Danish schools, church houses, hotels, factories, and sports facilities for refugee housing. At the same time, thousands of Danes were deported to German prisons and concentration camps. German terror against Danish resistance fighters and civilians increased in these final months. The general sentiment among Danes saw the arrival of refugees as a new, violent German occupation.

At the time of the German capitulation there were about 250,000 German refugees in Denmark. Already at the end of April, the German military authorities seemed to have lost control of the situation; many refugees had no food, the sick were not treated, mortality was high, and unburied dead bodies were stored in warehouses and cellars—although this was the result of different priorities in negotiations on aid between German and Danish authorities. The Danish negotiators, led by secretary of state Nils Svenningsen, would only agree provided that approximately 4,000 Danish citizens, mainly policemen, who were being detained in German concentration camps, were liberated. German authorities, on the other hand, would only agree if those policemen would take an active part in defeating the Danish resistance.

At the capitulation, the refugee administration was handed over to Danish authorities. Refugees were gradually moved from over 1,000 smaller locations to new-built camps or previous German military barracks, some of which held over 20,000 refugees. The largest of the camps, Oksbøl Refugee Camp, in Oksbøl on the west coast of Jutland, held 37,000 refugees. Camps were placed behind barbed wire and guarded by military personnel to avoid contact with the Danish population.

In some of the camps, food rations were scarce and medical care was inadequate. In 1945 alone, more than 13,000 people died, among them some 7,000 children under the age of five. The situation was worst in the months right before and after the capitulation when Danish hospitals and doctors were reluctant to treat German refugees. The reason for this was not only anti-German resentment, but also lack of resources, the time needed to rebuild administrative structures, and the fear of epidemic diseases which were highly prevalent among the refugees. Instead, Danish authorities established a camp-internal medical system with German medical personnel which took some time to work adequately. In the camps, there was school education for children up to the upper secondary level, work duty for adults, study circles, theatre, music, and self-issued German newspapers. After initial inadequacy, food rations became more sufficient.

On 24 July 1945, the British occupation force, contrary to Danish expectations, decided that the refugees must stay in Denmark until the situation in Germany had stabilized. The first refugees were returned to Germany in November 1946 and the last ones in February 1949. Very few stayed in Denmark for good.

==Legacy==

The policy of the government, called &quot;samarbejdspolitikken&quot; (cooperation policy) is one of the most controversial issues in Danish history. Some historians argue that the relatively accommodating policy which did not actively resist the occupation was the only realistic way of safeguarding Danish democracy and people. However, others argue that accommodation was taken too far, was uniquely compliant when compared to other democratic governments in Europe, and cannot be seen as part of a coherent long-term strategy to protect democracy in Denmark or Europe. In 2003 Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen characterized the cooperation as &quot;morally unjustifiable,&quot; the only time a Danish leader had condemned the war-era leadership, even though Anders Fogh Rasmussen&#x27;s opponents construed it as a justification for his own ambitions, in connection with the invasion of Iraq in 2003.

== See also ==
* British invasion of Iceland
* Deportation of the Danish police

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Flender, Harold. &quot;Rescue in Denmark&quot;. New York: Holocaust Library, 1963.
* Dethlefsen, Henrik. &quot;Denmark and the German Occupation: Cooperation, Negotiation, or Collaboration,&quot; &quot;Scandinavian Journal of History&quot;. 15:3 (1990), pp. 193–206.
* 
*
*

===in Danish===
* &quot;&quot; (2002).

== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* &quot;Agreement between U.S. Secretary of State and Danish Minister on the status of Greenland April 10, 1941&quot;
* The BBC&#x27;s Danish broadcast, 4 May 1945, 20:30 announcing the surrender of the German army units in Denmark (audio, RealPlayer)
* Podcast with one of 2,000 Danish policemen in Buchenwald. Episode 2 is about Denmark during World War II.
* Besaettelsessamlingen, web museum about Denmark 1940–45</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17" end="29" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="49" end="56" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969638" start="73" end="80" title="Neutral countries in World War II" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="136" end="145" title="Military occupation" label="occupying"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="358" end="378" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Operation Weserübung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503072" start="384" end="401" title="Danish government" label="Danish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="406" end="410" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="559" end="565" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="834" end="844" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="851" end="863" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="1031" end="1036" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q655472" start="1110" end="1128" title="Free Corps Denmark" label="Free Corps Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="1133" end="1142" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="1235" end="1248" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q707428" start="1491" end="1540" title="National Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Denmark" label="National Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108401" start="1542" end="1557" title="Schalburg Corps" label="Schalburg Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992197" start="1559" end="1569" title="HIPO Corps" label="HIPO Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q325034" start="1574" end="1585" title="Peter group" label="Peter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886825" start="1744" end="1774" title="1943 Danish Folketing election" label="1943 Danish Folketing election"/>
<link wikidata="Q708767" start="1947" end="1966" title="Danish resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q514188" start="2030" end="2054" title="Rescue of the Danish Jews" label="Danish Jews were rescued"/>
<link wikidata="Q639425" start="2067" end="2081" title="Sweden in World War II" label="neutral Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2150" end="2163" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="2185" end="2195" title="military occupation" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2406" end="2412" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="2455" end="2470" title="Norwegian campaign" label="Allied response"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="2542" end="2549" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886531" start="2568" end="2587" title="Aalborg Air Base" label="airfield of Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2812" end="2824" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q329505" start="3007" end="3020" title="Southern Jutland" label="South Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692146" start="3129" end="3139" title="Schleswig Plebiscites" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="3159" end="3176" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Versailles Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="3558" end="3565" title="neutral country" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3658" end="3668" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186780" start="3796" end="3807" title="Den Kongelige Livgarde" label="Royal Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575188" start="4120" end="4137" title="Royal Danish Army" label="Royal Danish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067799" start="4338" end="4350" title="Herluf Zahle" label="Herluf Zahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="4757" end="4763" title="panzer" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="4817" end="4835" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="5367" end="5374" title="Zealand (Denmark)" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536150" start="5445" end="5455" title="little Belt Bridge" label="the bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q211008" start="5467" end="5478" title="Little Belt" label="Little Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="5517" end="5522" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="6388" end="6401" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207675" start="6819" end="6824" title="Vágar" label="Vágar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="7175" end="7182" title="Kingdom of Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525920" start="7691" end="7707" title="Henrik Kauffmann" label="Henrik Kauffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="7765" end="7774" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q286977" start="8303" end="8312" title="Province of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="8351" end="8371" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="9223" end="9244" title="agriculture" label="agricultural products"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="9803" end="9809" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="9838" end="9850" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="9896" end="9914" title="Master race" label="Nazi race ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="9956" end="9962" title="Aryan race" label="Aryans"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="10347" end="10362" title="judicial system" label="judicial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="10430" end="10441" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q960541" start="10558" end="10563" title="Reich" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217354" start="10564" end="10579" title="Plenipotentiary" label="Plenipotentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q68438" start="10651" end="10672" title="Cecil von Renthe-Fink" label="Cecil von Renthe-Fink"/>
<link wikidata="Q60714" start="10752" end="10763" title="Werner Best" label="Werner Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="11399" end="11414" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q212101" start="11497" end="11513" title="Social Democrats (Denmark)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q367557" start="11552" end="11569" title="Thorvald Stauning" label="Thorvald Stauning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201901" start="12127" end="12150" title="German-Danish relations" label="German-Danish relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="12301" end="12327" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="attack on the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12384" end="12394" title="Communism" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994564" start="12640" end="12653" title="Horserød camp" label="Horserød camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11981555" start="12748" end="12761" title="Communist Law" label="Communist Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164324" start="12773" end="12792" title="Communist Party of Denmark" label="the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="12926" end="12953" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="13053" end="13072" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="13099" end="13105" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="13115" end="13122" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q708767" start="13195" end="13221" title="Danish resistance movement" label="Danish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="13225" end="13246" title="Manufacturing" label="Industrial production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="14761" end="14774" title="Field Marshal (UK)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="14775" end="14797" title="Bernard Law Montgomery" label="Bernard Law Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q795477" start="15291" end="15305" title="Prime Minister of Denmark" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="15344" end="15361" title="coalition cabinet" label="coalition cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q664052" start="15500" end="15512" title="Vilhelm Buhl" label="Vilhelm Buhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q731504" start="15575" end="15589" title="Erik Scavenius" label="Erik Scavenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="15726" end="15733" title="elitism" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="15870" end="15881" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="16480" end="16487" title="customs union" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="16492" end="16506" title="currency union" label="currency union"/>
<link wikidata="Q164071" start="16864" end="16877" title="South Jutland County" label="South Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="17021" end="17040" title="Nazism" label="National Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886825" start="17073" end="17099" title="1943 Danish Folketing election" label="a relatively free election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="17996" end="18008" title="Danish krone" label="Danish krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="18605" end="18612" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="19064" end="19084" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q655472" start="19092" end="19110" title="Free Corps Denmark" label="Free Corps Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="19266" end="19268" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q707428" start="19273" end="19278" title="National Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Denmark" label="DNSAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243201" start="19313" end="19326" title="Christian Peter Kryssing" label="C.P. Kryssing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="20819" end="20835" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q887417" start="21327" end="21339" title="Bo Lidegaard" label="Bo Lidegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="21898" end="21917" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="23161" end="23183" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354026" start="23412" end="23417" title="Peter Rochegune Munch" label="Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57874" start="24224" end="24232" title="Josef Terboven" label="Terboven"/>
<link wikidata="Q60650" start="25050" end="25070" title="Ernst von Weizsäcker" label="Ernst von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="26443" end="26453" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="26870" end="26879" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="27310" end="27316" title="Führer" label="Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="28387" end="28397" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="28402" end="28412" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="El-Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886970" start="28908" end="28922" title="1939 Danish Folketing election" label="1939 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="29033" end="29040" title="strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q686984" start="29045" end="29062" title="civil disturbance" label="civil disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25331" start="29535" end="29541" title="Odense" label="Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="29807" end="29818" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30077" end="30093" title="Nils Svenningsen" label="Nils Svenningsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493553" start="30268" end="30278" title="Rigsdag" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q325013" start="30497" end="30513" title="Operation Safari" label="Operation Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006452" start="30519" end="30536" title="Royal Danish Navy" label="Royal Danish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304194" start="31138" end="31158" title="coastal defence ship" label="coastal defence ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631174" start="31189" end="31197" title="Isefjord" label="Isefjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050685" start="31207" end="31225" title="Battle of Isefjord" label="attacked by Stukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q549276" start="31329" end="31337" title="flotilla" label="flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10466708" start="31562" end="31585" title="Danish Brigade in Sweden" label="Danish brigade in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363142" start="31902" end="31923" title="John Christmas Møller" label="John Christmas Møller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32040" end="32043" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q215113" start="32227" end="32251" title="Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz" label="Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q514188" start="32275" end="32287" title="Rescue of the Danish Jews" label="swift action"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="32552" end="32560" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q708767" start="32684" end="32710" title="Danish resistance movement" label="Danish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="32742" end="32747" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="32855" end="32863" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q438760" start="32916" end="32929" title="underground press" label="illegal press"/>
<link wikidata="Q325121" start="33358" end="33377" title="Frøslev Prison Camp" label="Frøslev Prison Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260704" start="33595" end="33627" title="deportation of the Danish police" label="arrested and deported to Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451237" start="33730" end="33744" title="Economy of Denmark" label="Danish economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="33828" end="33831" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="33903" end="33905" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="34251" end="34259" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="34358" end="34375" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="34578" end="34587" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60924" start="34943" end="34968" title="war profiteer" label="profiteering from the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q683252" start="36176" end="36196" title="Danmarks Nationalbank" label="Danish National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q338451" start="37426" end="37432" title="escrow" label="escrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q676459" start="37609" end="37621" title="bank account" label="bank account"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="37801" end="37813" title="ration stamp" label="ration stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="38408" end="38426" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q769680" start="38454" end="38462" title="Bornholm" label="Bornholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="39286" end="39292" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359393" start="39458" end="39480" title="Ryvangen Memorial Park" label="Ryvangen Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="40422" end="40435" title="collaborationism" label="collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="40493" end="40507" title="death sentence" label="death sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q603530" start="41314" end="41336" title="1945 Danish Folketing election" label="October 1945 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q60994" start="42267" end="42282" title="Georg Lindemann" label="Georg Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="42660" end="42672" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="42677" end="42686" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q615206" start="44395" end="44414" title="Oksbøl Refugee Camp" label="Oksbøl Refugee Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q202965" start="44419" end="44425" title="Oksbøl" label="Oksbøl"/>
<link wikidata="Q46052" start="46453" end="46474" title="Anders Fogh Rasmussen" label="Anders Fogh Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088915" start="46784" end="46811" title="British invasion of Iceland" label="British invasion of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260704" start="46814" end="46846" title="Deportation of the Danish police" label="Deportation of the Danish police"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276440" wikidata="Q736421" url="?curid=276440" title="Roger III of Sicily">
<text>Roger III (, ; 1175 – 24 December 1193), of the House of Hauteville, was the eldest son and heir of King Tancred of Sicily and Queen Sibylla. He was made Duke of Apulia (as Roger V), probably in 1189, shortly after his father&#x27;s accession. In the summer of 1192 he was crowned co-king with his father. &quot;Follari&quot; were minted at Messina bearing both Tancred&#x27;s and Roger&#x27;s names as kings.

In 1193, Tancred arranged for Roger to marry Irene Angelina, daughter of the Byzantine emperor Isaac II Angelos. Roger died on 24 December 1193, however, upsetting his father&#x27;s plans. Tancred quickly had Roger&#x27;s younger brother, William III, crowned as co-king, but Tancred himself died on 20 February 1194. On 20 November 1194, Holy Roman Emperor Henry VI entered Palermo and William was deposed on 25 December. In 1197 Roger&#x27;s widow, Irene, married Henry VI&#x27;s brother, Duke Philip of Swabia.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736421" start="0" end="9" title="Roger III of Sicily" label="Roger III"/>
<link wikidata="Q952109" start="48" end="67" title="House of Hauteville" label="House of Hauteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q468653" start="105" end="122" title="Tancred of Sicily" label="Tancred of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q299458" start="133" end="140" title="Sibylla of Acerra" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715874" start="154" end="168" title="Duke of Apulia" label="Duke of Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736421" start="173" end="180" title="Roger III of Sicily" label="Roger V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135840" start="312" end="319" title="Follari" label="Follari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="341" end="348" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q119431" start="456" end="470" title="Irene Angelina" label="Irene Angelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="488" end="505" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37135" start="506" end="522" title="Isaac II Angelos" label="Isaac II Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q560005" start="650" end="661" title="William III of Sicily" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="769" end="777" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="786" end="793" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="907" end="923" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276447" wikidata="Q76615" url="?curid=276447" title="Fortune 500">
<text>The &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 is an annual list compiled and published by &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine that ranks 500 of the largest United States corporations by total revenue for their respective fiscal years. The list includes publicly held companies, along with privately held companies for which revenues are publicly available. The concept of the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 was created by Edgar P. Smith, a &quot;Fortune&quot; editor, and the first list was published in 1955. The &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 is more commonly used than its subset &quot;Fortune&quot; 100 or superset &quot;Fortune&quot; 1000.

== History ==
The &quot;Fortune&quot; 500, created by Edgar P. Smith, was first published in January 1955. The original top ten companies were General Motors, Jersey Standard, U.S. Steel, General Electric, Esmark, Chrysler, Armour, Gulf Oil, Mobil, and DuPont.

==Methodology==
The original &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 was limited to companies whose revenues were derived from manufacturing, mining, and energy exploration. At the same time, &quot;Fortune&quot; published companion &quot;&quot;Fortune&quot; 50&quot; lists of the 50 largest commercial banks (ranked by assets), utilities (ranked by assets), life insurance companies (ranked by assets), retailers (ranked by gross revenues) and transportation companies (ranked by revenues). &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine changed its methodology in 1994 to include service companies. With the change came 291 new entrants to the famous list including three in the Top 10.

==Influence==
As of 2020, the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies represent approximately two-thirds of the United States&#x27; gross domestic product with approximately $14.2 trillion in revenue, $1.2 trillion in profits, and $20.4 trillion in total market value. These revenue figures also account for approximately 18% of the gross world product. The companies collectively employ a total of 29.2 million people worldwide, or nearly 0.4% of the world&#x27;s total population.

==Overview==

The following is the list of top 20 companies.
===Breakdown by state===

This is the list of the top 18 states with the most companies within the Fortune 500 as of 2024.

==See also==
* 40 Under 40
* &quot;Fortune&quot; Global 500
* &quot;Fortune&quot; India 500
* &quot;Fortune&quot; 1000
* List of largest companies in the United States by revenue
* List of largest companies by revenue
* List of Fortune 500 computer software and information companies
* List of women CEOs of &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies
* &quot;Forbes&quot; Global 2000
* Total &quot;Fortune&quot; 1000 companies by urban area list
==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Full list of Fortune 500 companies: 1955–2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="4" end="27" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="78" end="85" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="131" end="144" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="145" end="157" title="Joint-stock company#Closely held corporations and publicly traded corporations" label="corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="228" end="251" title="publicly held company" label="publicly held companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="264" end="288" title="Privately held company" label="privately held companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q285800" start="580" end="604" title="Fortune 1000" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="750" end="764" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="766" end="781" title="ExxonMobil" label="Jersey Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="783" end="793" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="795" end="811" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808939" start="813" end="819" title="JBS USA" label="Esmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="821" end="829" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862799" start="831" end="837" title="Armour and Company" label="Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296860" start="839" end="847" title="Gulf Oil" label="Gulf Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088656" start="849" end="854" title="Mobil" label="Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="860" end="866" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1630" end="1672" title="Economy of the United States#GDP" label="United States&amp;#x27; gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050722" start="1851" end="1870" title="gross world product" label="gross world product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="1970" end="1999" title="World population" label="world&amp;#x27;s total population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637428" start="2202" end="2213" title="40 Under 40" label="40 Under 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="2216" end="2246" title="Fortune Global 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472872" start="2249" end="2278" title="Fortune India 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; India 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q285800" start="2281" end="2305" title="Fortune 1000" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860802" start="2308" end="2365" title="List of largest companies in the United States by revenue" label="List of largest companies in the United States by revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q900297" start="2368" end="2404" title="List of largest companies by revenue" label="List of largest companies by revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466684" start="2407" end="2470" title="List of Fortune 500 computer software and information companies" label="List of Fortune 500 computer software and information companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031310" start="2473" end="2528" title="List of women CEOs of Fortune 500 companies" label="List of women CEOs of &amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500 companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="2531" end="2561" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot; Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q285800" start="2564" end="2623" title="Total Fortune 1000 companies by urban area list" label="Total &amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 1000 companies by urban area list"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276453" wikidata="Q543901" url="?curid=276453" title="Netsuke">
<text>A is a miniature sculpture, originating in 17th century Japan. Initially a simply-carved button fastener on the cords of an box, later developed into ornately sculpted objects of craftsmanship.

== History ==
Traditionally, Japanese clothing – first the and its later evolution, the kimono – did not have pockets. Though the sleeves of the kimono could be used to store small items, the men who wore kimono needed a larger and stronger container in which to store personal belongings, such as pipes, tobacco, money and seals, resulting in the development of containers known as , which were hung by cords from the robes&#x27; sashes ().

These containers may have been pouches or small woven baskets, but the most popular were crafted boxes () held shut by , sliding beads on cords. Whatever the form of the container, the fastener which secured the cord at the top of the sash was a carved, button-like toggle called a . , like and , evolved over time from being strictly utilitarian into objects of great artistic merit and an expression of extraordinary craftsmanship. production was most popular during the Edo period (1603–1867).

 and declined as Japanese clothes were gradually westernized from the Meiji period (1868–1912). Because of their popularity amongst Western collectors at the time, some of the greatest collections are now found outside of Japan.

Today, the production of continues, and some modern can command high prices in the UK, Europe, the US, Japan and elsewhere. Inexpensive yet faithful reproductions are available in museums and souvenir shops.

== Etymology ==
The term is formed from the characters and . In American English, the word is usually italicized, while it is usually unitalicized in British English.

== Forms ==











== Materials ==

* Ivory – the most common material used before ivory from live animals became illegal. made from mammoth ivory (huge quantities still exist in the Near East and Siberia) fill part of the tourist trade demand today.
* Boxwood, other hardwoods – popular materials in Edo Japan and still used today
* Metal – used as accents in many and lids
* Hippopotamus tooth – used today in lieu of ivory
* Boar tusk – mostly used by Iwami carvers
* Rhinoceros horn
* Clay/porcelain
* Lacquer
* Cane (woven)

===Unusual materials===
* Hornbill ivory: of the many species of hornbill, only the helmeted hornbill (&quot;Rhinoplax vigil&quot;) furnishes an ivory-like substance. This is a dense, carvable substance that makes up the solid casque growing above the upper mandible (from the bird&#x27;s forehead). It is not ivory, horn, nor bone, yet it has been called ivory for many centuries. It is softer than real ivory and is a creamy yellow in color, becoming red at the top and sides.
* : a species of black coral with dense texture, concentric growth rings, and amber and reddish colored inclusions in the black material. According to Michael Birch, &quot;the literal translation of is &#x27;sea pine&#x27;, and it is also popularly described as &#x27;black coral&#x27;. True coral, however, is a hard calcareous substance secreted by marine polyps for habitation. , on the other hand is a colony of keratinous antipatharian marine organisms.&quot;
* : there are several definitions, some contradictory: According to Bushell, &quot; is a partially fossilized wood, having the general appearance of ebony but showing no grain.&quot; Often called fossilized wood, is not properly a wood, but a &quot;jet&quot; (a variety of lignite), that is often confused with ebony. It is a shiny material that takes an excellent polish, but it has a tendency to split. is petrified wood formed when cedar and pine trees from the Tertiary Age (5 million years ago) were buried underground and then carbonized. The layers of earth where can be found extend under the Aobayama and Yagiyama sections of Sendai, Japan. Pieces made from this material are generally dark brown with a beautiful wood grain and the soft luster of lacquer.
* Walrus tusk: walrus have two large tusks (elongated canine teeth) projecting downward from the upper jaw. These tusks, often reaching two feet in length, have been extensively carved as ivory for centuries in many countries and especially in Japan. Walrus tusk carvings are usually easy to identify, because much of the interior of the tooth is filled with a mottled, almost translucent substance that is harder and more resistant to carving than the rest of the tooth. , especially , invariably show this translucent material at opposite edges of the .
* Baleen: the sperm whale has teeth running the whole length of its enormous lower jaw. Those in the middle tend to be the largest, often obtaining a length of more than six to eight inches. These larger ones are often used by carvers of scrimshaw.
* Whale&#x27;s bone: all bones are hollow, the cavity being filled with a spongy material. Cuts across some bone show a pattern of minute holes looking like dark dots. Lengthwise, such bone displays many narrow channels which appear to be dark lines of varying lengths. Polished, bone is more opaque and less shiny than ivory.
* Teeth: a variety of other teeth are used for , including: boars&#x27;, bears&#x27;, and even tigers&#x27;.

* Tagua nut: the nut from the ivory palm (&quot;Phytelephas aequatorialis&quot;), often referred to as vegetable ivory. Part of the nut&#x27;s shell sometimes remains on carvings. Though often mistaken for or deceptively sold as elephant ivory, items made from the two-to-three-inch nut have none of the striations common to animal ivory, and sometimes the ivory-like nut flesh has a light yellow cast under a rough coconut-shell-like external covering. The nut is very hard when dry, but easily worked into artistic items when wet.
* Walnut (or – natural walnut shell): in the above photo, a rare example of the style, the meat from the nut was removed by various means, one being the insertion of a small worm in a hole in the nut to consume the meat. Following that, elaborate designs were carved, and the string inserted. The carver often removed all of the nut&#x27;s normal surface features and carved through the surface in places to create a latticed effect. Once carved, the resulting was polished and shellacked.
* Bamboo: &quot;bamboo (&quot;Iyo bamboo&quot;) is used for . Bamboo are either a piece of the stem or the root with carving on it.&quot; According to Bernard Rosett: &quot;carvings in the round are usually made from the underground stem of the plant, that small almost solid zone that connects to the creeping rhizome below the ground. Bamboo are not commonly encountered. Occasionally, one comes across a fashioned from bamboo root and can revel in the wonderful texture and patina of the material.&quot;
* Agate: a mineral, streaked with many colors, and which can be given a high polish.
* Ivorine: a material made from the dust created when carving legally obtained new ivory, mammoth ivory, tusks, and teeth, which is then mixed with a clear resin and compressed as it hardens. This was one of the many solutions to the demand of the tourist market trade for carvings after trade in new ivory became illegal. Once hard and dry, ivorine can be carved in exactly the same way as ivory. Though often deceptively sold to the modern tourist trade as elephant ivory, items made from ivorine have none of the striations common to animal ivory, though sometimes, the carving is artificially aged to have the yellowed appearance common to true old ivory carvings.

== Subjects ==
Like many other art forms, reflect the nature of the society that produced them. This effect is particularly pronounced in , owing to long periods of isolation imposed both by geography and internal politics and limited avenues of self-expression for Japanese citizens due to custom and law. As a result, display every aspect of Japanese culture, including its rich folklore and religion, crafts, trades, and professions, all types of people and creatures, both real and imagined, and every kind of object. As in other aspects of Japanese culture, the subjects portrayed by trend, over the long term, away from an initial emphasis on motifs of Chinese derivation toward a focus on objects of more strictly national interest.
* People – famous and anonymous, current, historical, real and fictitious, children, warriors, priests, etc.
* Craft, trades, professions – often depicting actions (fishermen catching fish, woodcutters cutting wood), or examples (i.e., a stylized apple for an orchardist or apple merchant)
* Animals – zodiac animals and others. It is worth noting that traditional style depicts octopus figures as having a tube-like siphon protruding from the &quot;face&quot;, similar to a mouth. If one examines closely, one will find that some octopuses have nine tentacles instead of eight. These octopuses will usually be found embracing beautiful women.
* Plants or plant products – small ones, such as beans or chestnuts, are often carved actual size.
* Deities and mythical creatures – often from Chinese mythology and religion, and Seven Lucky Gods, are the seven gods of good fortune in Japanese mythology and folklore.
* Non-living things – the smallest category. Common examples include roof tiles, coins, and tools.
* Abstract – patterns and other designs.
* Sexual – may depict a male and female in sexual conjugation or may contain only subtle or symbolic sexual references.

Some represent single, simple, objects, and some depict entire scenes from history, mythology, or literature.
== Artists ==

Carvers of are called .
 is the earliest compilation of , which lists over 50 masters. It was published in Osaka in 1781 by Inaba Tsūryū. Some works of art are even illustrated in it.

One of the most renowned artists during the Edo period was the founder of the Nagoya school, , who is listed in the . He was followed in Nagoya by . His pieces can be found in many collections and achieve high prices at auctions.

The listed masters in the are:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Seiyōdō Tomiharu (1733–1810) was founder of the Iwami school of carving.

== Museum collections ==
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, the Toledo Museum of Art, the British Museum, and the Victoria and Albert Museum have many .

In Kyoto, Japan, there is the Kyoto Seishu Netsuke Art Museum, which is the only specialized art museum in Japan. This museum is a traditional Japanese samurai residence built in the late Edo period. It has a collection of over 5,000 and 400 of them are on display and change every 3 months. The collection focuses on modern works, but there are also works from the Edo period.

The Tokyo National Museum has a small exhibition room dedicated to displaying 50 of the 500 contemporary works collected by the Prince and Princess Takamado. The Tokyo National Museum has 274 high quality items collected by and made by famous craftsmen from the Edo period to the Meiji period. They were donated by Go who was concerned that too many were exported from Japan and they were rarely seen in Japan. To mark its 150-year anniversary, the Tokyo National Museum simultaneously exhibited all 274 works from the Go collection from November 2, 2022, to January 22, 2023, and all 500 works from the Prince Takamado collection from November 15, 2022, to December 25, 2022.

== In popular culture ==
* are a central theme in &quot;The Hare with Amber Eyes&quot;, a 2010 memoir by British ceramic artist Edmund de Waal. The book traces the history of a collection of 264 —some of them by well-known craftsmen—which were taken to France in the late 19th century, and purchased by a wealthy art collector who was a member of the Jewish Ephrussi family. They were passed down through the family&#x27;s Vienna branch, where a family servant kept them hidden during the Holocaust when the Nazis confiscated the family&#x27;s other possessions. In 1947, the were taken back to Japan by an heir who went to live in Tokyo.
* In episode 6 season 4 of Downton Abbey; Newley hired gardener ‘Young Peg’ is accused of stealing the Dowager Countess’ that was gifted to the late Lord Grantham by the Swedish King. The countess is shamed by cousin Isobel of being only worried about “Things! Things!”. The netsuke is later retrieved by a housemaid and Young Peg is re-hired. 
* A 2019 episode of Bob&#x27;s Burgers entitled &quot;The Helen Hunt&quot; features a in the role of a MacGuffin; the Belcher family spends the episode searching for one hidden in an old apartment building in an effort to set Teddy up with rich heiress Helen.
* In 1995 Season 3 Episode 4 of the popular TV show Frasier, Niles finds out from the radio station boss Kate that the Natsuke exhibit that’s in town is not showing the “really rare pieces” on account of they weren’t let out of Japan.

== See also ==
* Daruma doll
* , the carvers of 
* , the cord fasteners of 
* , a traditional Japanese drawstring bag
* Chatelaine
* Reticule (handbag)
* , a pipe-shaped writing set
* Japanese handicrafts
* Gothic boxwood miniature
* , small and purely decorative sculptures, often made by the same artists who produced 

==References==
==External links==

* International Netsuke Society This organization publishes a journal for collectors and holds international meetings bi-annually. The Society&#x27;s web site shows examples of different styles. Others can be found by searching the Internet.
* Isaac Kaplan Netsuke Collection. The South African Jewish Museum&#x27;s collection of over 600 netsuke. The museum&#x27;s permanent exhibit displays over 200 netsuke from the 17th-19th centuries.
* Japanese Netsuke History and background on various types of &quot;netsuke&quot;
* Netsuke thumbnail gallery with detailed images at the Bolton Museum web site
* KYOTO SEISHU NETSUKE ART MUSEUM There are many excellent collection that mainly of contemporary pieces, but with some beautiful antique netsuke as well.
* Netsuke: masterpieces from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF)
* Sumo: Netsuke and Okimono: From the collection of Karl-Ludwig Kley, an online catalogue of Sumo themed Netsuke.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="56" end="61" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483444" start="283" end="289" title="kimono" label="kimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1111" end="1121" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="1206" end="1218" title="Meiji (era)" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="1639" end="1655" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="1725" end="1740" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="1785" end="1790" title="Ivory" label="Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="1880" end="1887" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="2000" end="2007" title="Buxus" label="Boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="2015" end="2023" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="2081" end="2086" title="Metal" label="Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="2124" end="2136" title="Hippopotamus" label="Hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185635" start="2180" end="2184" title="tusk" label="tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="2218" end="2228" title="Rhinoceros" label="Rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="2236" end="2240" title="Clay" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="2241" end="2250" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236878" start="2253" end="2260" title="Lacquer" label="Lacquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165263" start="2263" end="2267" title="Arundo" label="Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904066" start="2303" end="2317" title="Hornbill ivory" label="Hornbill ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q226043" start="2361" end="2378" title="helmeted hornbill" label="helmeted hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479472" start="2773" end="2784" title="black coral" label="black coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="3494" end="3501" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056949" start="3656" end="3661" title="Cedar wood" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="3666" end="3670" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="3686" end="3698" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778572" start="3822" end="3830" title="Aobayama" label="Aobayama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3835" end="3843" title="Yagiyama" label="Yagiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="3856" end="3862" title="Sendai" label="Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="3989" end="3995" title="Walrus" label="Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185635" start="4024" end="4028" title="tusk" label="tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q275426" start="4545" end="4551" title="Baleen" label="Baleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="4557" end="4568" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261659" start="4781" end="4790" title="scrimshaw" label="scrimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="4807" end="4811" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="5179" end="5183" title="Wild boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="5192" end="5196" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="5214" end="5219" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q161190" start="5231" end="5240" title="Tagua nut" label="Tagua nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q161190" start="5259" end="5269" title="ivory palm" label="ivory palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709988" start="5277" end="5302" title="Phytelephas aequatorialis" label="Phytelephas aequatorialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="5764" end="5770" title="Walnut" label="Walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="6254" end="6260" title="Bamboo" label="Bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="6761" end="6766" title="Agate" label="Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="7000" end="7005" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8839" end="8848" title="octopus#Etymology and pluralisation" label="octopuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q846858" start="9079" end="9095" title="Seven Lucky Gods" label="Seven Lucky Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="9817" end="9823" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q63346374" start="10080" end="10096" title="Seiyodo Tomiharu" label="Seiyōdō Tomiharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="10183" end="10209" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641836" start="10215" end="10247" title="Los Angeles County Museum of Art" label="Los Angeles County Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q727277" start="10253" end="10286" title="Asian Art Museum (San Francisco)" label="Asian Art Museum of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743116" start="10292" end="10312" title="Toledo Museum of Art" label="Toledo Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="10318" end="10332" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="10342" end="10368" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="10385" end="10390" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="10534" end="10541" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q653433" start="10765" end="10786" title="Tokyo National Museum" label="Tokyo National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856511" start="10889" end="10895" title="Norihito, Prince Takamado" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q448104" start="10900" end="10917" title="Hisako, Princess Takamado" label="Princess Takamado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738901" start="11495" end="11519" title="The Hare with Amber Eyes" label="The Hare with Amber Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287015" start="11567" end="11581" title="Edmund de Waal" label="Edmund de Waal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894644" start="11797" end="11812" title="Ephrussi family" label="Ephrussi family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="11928" end="11937" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="12105" end="12118" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q392396" start="12443" end="12461" title="Bob&amp;#x27;s Burgers" label="Bob&amp;#x27;s Burgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q488733" start="12526" end="12535" title="MacGuffin" label="MacGuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q276107" start="12936" end="12947" title="Daruma doll" label="Daruma doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q493509" start="13039" end="13049" title="Chatelaine (chain)" label="Chatelaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103426" start="13052" end="13070" title="Reticule (handbag)" label="Reticule (handbag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158727" start="13103" end="13123" title="Japanese handicrafts" label="Japanese handicrafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803342" start="13126" end="13150" title="Gothic boxwood miniature" label="Gothic boxwood miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730077" start="14235" end="14251" title="Karl-Ludwig Kley" label="Karl-Ludwig Kley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276456" wikidata="Q246290" url="?curid=276456" title="Oranjestad">
<text>Oranjestad may refer to:
* Oranjestad, Aruba, the capital of Aruba
* Oranjestad, Sint Eustatius, until 10 October 2010 part of the Netherlands Antilles, now part of the Netherlands
* City with a strong connection to the House of Orange-Nassau, particularly members of the Unie van Oranjesteden (Union of Orange Cities):
** Breda, Netherlands
** Buren, Netherlands
** Diest, Belgium
** Dillenburg, Germany
** Orange, Vaucluse, France
** Steenbergen, Netherlands

==See also==
* Orange City (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246290" start="0" end="10" title="Oranjestad" label="Oranjestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131243" start="27" end="44" title="Oranjestad, Aruba" label="Oranjestad, Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q217610" start="69" end="95" title="Oranjestad, Sint Eustatius" label="Oranjestad, Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="220" end="242" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="323" end="328" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q73061" start="345" end="350" title="Buren" label="Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="367" end="372" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q517381" start="385" end="395" title="Dillenburg" label="Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q187796" start="408" end="424" title="Orange, Vaucluse" label="Orange, Vaucluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9870" start="436" end="447" title="Steenbergen" label="Steenbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q440047" start="477" end="505" title="Orange City (disambiguation)" label="Orange City (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276462" wikidata="Q416896" url="?curid=276462" title="Metallothionein">
<text>Metallothionein (MT) is a family of cysteine-rich, low molecular weight (MW ranging from 500 to 14000 Da) proteins. They are localized to the membrane of the Golgi apparatus. MTs have the capacity to bind both physiological (such as zinc, copper, selenium) and xenobiotic (such as cadmium, mercury, silver, arsenic, lead) heavy metals through the thiol group of its cysteine residues, which represent nearly 30% of its constituent amino acid residues.

MT was discovered in 1957 by Vallee and Margoshe from purification of a Cd-binding protein from horse (equine) renal cortex. MT plays a role in the protection against metal toxicity and oxidative stress, and is involved in zinc and copper regulation. There are four main isoforms expressed in humans (family 1, see chart below): MT1 (subtypes A, B, E, F, G, H, L, M, X), MT2, MT3, and MT4. In the human body, large quantities are synthesised primarily in the liver and kidneys. Their production is dependent on availability of the dietary minerals such as zinc, copper, and selenium, as well as the amino acids histidine and cysteine.

Metallothioneins are rich in thiols, causing them to bind a number of trace metals. Metallothionein is one of the few eukaryotic proteins playing a substantial role in metal detoxification. Zinc and Cadmium are tetrahedrally coordinated to cysteine residues, and each metallothionein protein molecule may bind up to 7 atoms of Zn or Cd. The biosynthesis of metallothionein appears to increase several-fold during periods of oxidative stress to shield the cells against cytotoxicity and DNA damage. Metallothionein biosynthesis can also be induced by certain hormones, pharmaceuticals, alcohols, and other compounds. Metallothionein expression is upregulated during fetal development, particularly in liver tissue.

== Structure and classification ==

MTs are present in a vast range of taxonomic groups, ranging from prokaryotes (such as the cyanobacteria &quot;Synechococcus sp.&quot;), protozoa (such as the ciliate &quot;Tetrahymena&quot; genera), plants (such as &quot;Pisum sativum&quot;, &quot;Triticum durum&quot;, &quot;Zea mays&quot;, or &quot;Quercus suber&quot;), yeast (such as &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot;, &quot;Candida albicans&quot;, or &quot;Neurospora crassa&quot;), invertebrates (such as the nematode &quot;Caenorhabditis elegans&quot;, the insect &quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot;, the mollusc &quot;Mytilus edulis&quot;, or the echinoderm &quot;Strongylocentrotus purpuratus&quot;) and vertebrates (such as the chicken &quot;Gallus gallus&quot;, or the mammalian &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; or &quot;Mus musculus&quot;).

The MTs from this diverse taxonomic range represent a high-heterogeneity sequence (regarding molecular weight and number and distribution of Cys residues) and do not show general homology; in spite of this, homology is found inside some taxonomic groups (such as vertebrate MTs).

From their primary structure, MTs have been classified by different methods. The first one dates from 1987, when Fowler &quot;et al.&quot;, established three classes of MTs: Class I, including the MTs which show homology with horse MT, Class II, including the rest of the MTs with no homology with horse MT, and Class III, which includes phytochelatins, Cys-rich enzymatically synthesised peptides.
The second classification was performed by Binz and Kagi in 2001, and takes into account taxonomic parameters and the patterns of distribution of Cys residues along the MT sequence.
It results in a classification of 15 families for proteinaceous MTs. Family 15 contains the plant MTs, which in 2002 have been further classified by Cobbet and Goldsbrough into 4 Types (1, 2, 3 and 4) depending on the distribution of their Cys residues and a Cys-devoid regions (called spacers) characteristic of plant MTs.

A table including the principal aspects of the two latter classifications is included.
More data on this classification are discoverable at the Expasy metallothionein page.

Secondary structure elements have been observed in several MTs SmtA from &quot;Syneccochoccus&quot;, mammalian MT3, Echinoderma SpMTA, fish &quot;Notothenia coriiceps&quot; MT, Crustacean MTH, but until this moment, the content of such structures is considered to be poor in MTs, and its functional influence is not considered.

Tertiary structure of MTs is also highly heterogeneous. While vertebrate, echinoderm and crustacean MTs show a bidominial structure with divalent metals as Zn(II) or Cd(II) (the protein is folded so as to bind metals in two functionally independent domains, with a metallic &quot;cluster&quot; each), yeast and prokaryotic MTs show a monodominial structure (one domain with a single metallic &quot;cluster&quot;). In yeast, the first 40 residues in the protein wrap around the metal by forming two large parallel loops separated by a deep cleft containing the metal cluster. Although no structural data is available for molluscan, nematoda and Drosophila MTs, it is commonly assumed that the former are bidominial and the latter monodominial. No conclusive data are available for Plant MTs, but two possible structures have been proposed: 1) a bidominial structure similar to that of vertebrate MTs; 2) a codominial structure, in which two Cys-rich domains interact to form a single metallic cluster.

Quaternary structure has not been broadly considered for MTs. Dimerization and oligomerization processes have been observed and attributed to several molecular mechanisms, including intermolecular disulfide formation, bridging through metals bound by either Cys or His residues on different MTs, or inorganic phosphate-mediated interactions. Dimeric and polymeric MTs have been shown to acquire novel properties upon metal detoxification, but the physiological significance of these processes has been demonstrated only in the case of prokaryotic Synechococcus SmtA. The MT dimer produced by this organism forms structures similar to zinc fingers and has Zn-regulatory activity.

Metallothioneins have diverse metal-binding preferences, which have been associated with functional specificity. As an example, the mammalian &quot;Mus musculus&quot; MT1 preferentially binds divalent metal ions (Zn(II), Cd(II)...), while yeast CUP1 is selective for monovalent metal ions (Cu(I), Ag(I)...). Strictly metal-selective MTs with metal-specific physiological functions were discovered by Dallinger et al. (1997) in pulmonate snails (Gastropoda, Mollusca). The Roman snail (&quot;Helix pomatia&quot;), for example, possesses a Cd-selective (CdMT) and a Cu-selective isoform (CuMT) involved in Cd detoxification and Cu regulation, respectively. While both isoforms contain unvaried numbers and positions of Cys residues responsible for metal ligation, metal selectivity is apparently achieved by sequence modulation of amino acid residues not directly involved in metal binding (Palacios et al. 2011).

A novel functional classification of MTs as Zn- or Cu-thioneins is currently being developed based on these functional preferences.

== Function ==
The main biological function of metallothioneins is to maintain homeostasis of the essential metals zinc and copper, but metallothioneins also protect against metal toxicity and oxidative stress.

===Metal binding===
Metallothionein has been documented to bind a wide range of metals including cadmium, lead, zinc, mercury, copper, arsenic, silver, etc. Metalation of MT was previously reported to occur cooperatively but recent reports have provided strong evidence that metal-binding occurs via a sequential, noncooperative mechanism. The observation of partially metalated MT (that is, having some free metal binding capacity) suggest that these species are biologically important.

Metallothioneins likely participate in the uptake, transport, and regulation of zinc in biological systems. Mammalian MT binds three Zn(II) ions in its beta domain and four in the alpha domain. Cysteine is a sulfur-containing amino acid, hence the name &quot;-thionein&quot;. However, the participation of inorganic sulfide and chloride ions has been proposed for some MT forms. In some MTs, mostly bacterial, histidine participates in zinc binding. By binding and releasing zinc, metallothioneins (MTs) may regulate zinc levels within the body. Zinc, in turn, is a key element for the activation and binding of certain transcription factors through its participation in the zinc finger region of the protein. Metallothionein also carries zinc ions (signals) from one part of the cell to another. When zinc enters a cell, it can be picked up by thionein (which thus becomes &quot;metallothionein&quot;) and carried to another part of the cell where it is released to another organelle or protein. In this way thionein and metallothionein becomes a key component of the zinc signaling system in cells. This system is particularly important in the brain, where zinc signaling is prominent both between and within nerve cells. It also seems to be important for the regulation of the tumor suppressor protein p53.

=== Control of oxidative stress ===

Cysteine residues from MTs can capture harmful oxidant radicals like the superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. In this reaction, cysteine is oxidized to cystine, and the metal ions which were bound to cysteine are liberated to the media. As explained in the &quot;Expression and regulation&quot; section, this Zn can activate the synthesis of more MTs. This mechanism has been proposed to be an important mechanism in the control of the oxidative stress by MTs. The role of MTs in reducing oxidative stress has been confirmed by MT Knockout mutants, but some experiments propose also a prooxidant role for MTs.

In mammalian cells, spontaneous mutagenesis is caused to a large extent by oxidative DNA damage, and the occurrence of such damage can be blocked by metallothionein.

Metallothionein also plays a role in hematopoietic cell differentiation and proliferation, as well as prevention of apoptosis of early differentiated cells. Induced MT levels were adversely associated with sensitivity to etoposide-induced apoptosis, signifying that MT is a potential negative controller of apoptosis.

== Expression and regulation ==

Metallothionein gene expression is induced by a high variety of stimuli, as metal exposure, oxidative stress, glucocorticoids, Vitamin D, hydric stress, fasting, exercise, etc. Beta-hydroxylbutyration of histone proteins upregulates MT2. The level of the response to these inducers depends on the MT gene. MT genes present in their promoters specific sequences for the regulation of the expression, elements as metal response elements (MRE), glucocorticoid response elements (GRE), GC-rich boxes, basal level elements (BLE), and thyroid response elements (TRE).

==Metallothionein and disease==

=== Cancer ===

Because MTs play an important role in transcription factor regulation, defects in MT function or expression may lead to malignant transformation of cells and ultimately cancer. Studies have found increased expression of MTs in some cancers of the breast, colon, kidney, liver, skin (melanoma), lung, nasopharynx, ovary, prostate, mouth, salivary gland, testes, thyroid and urinary bladder; they have also found lower levels of MT expression in hepatocellular carcinoma and liver adenocarcinoma.

Evidence suggests that greater MT expression may cause resistance to chemotherapy.

===Autism===

Heavy metal toxicity has been proposed as a hypothetical etiology of autism, and dysfunction of MT synthesis and activity may play a role in this. Many heavy metals, including mercury, lead, and arsenic have been linked to symptoms that resemble the neurological symptoms of autism. However, MT dysfunction has not specifically been linked to autistic spectrum disorders. A 2006 study, investigating children exposed to the vaccine preservative thiomersal, found that levels of MT and antibodies to MT in autistic children did not differ significantly from non-autistic children.

A low zinc to copper ratio has been seen as a biomarker for autism and suggested as an indication that the metallothionein system has been affected.

Further, there is indication that the mother&#x27;s zinc levels may affect the developing baby&#x27;s immunological state that may lead to autism and could be again an indication that the metallothionein system has been affected.

== Role of Metallothionein in Cardiovascular disease ==
Metallothionein (MT) is an indirect redox balance regulator which regulates nuclear factor red blood cell 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) in the body. However, MT plays an important role in the anti-injury protection of the cardiovascular system, mainly in its inhibitory effect on ischemia-reperfusion injury. Also, the MT activation of the Nrf2 mediates intermittent hypoxia (IH) cardiomyopathy protection.

Transgenic mice with a deletion of any Nrf2 gene (Nrf2-KO) are highly susceptible to the cardiovascular effects of intermittent hypoxia (IH) via cardiac oxidative damage, inflammation, fibrosis, and dysfunction.

Moreover, the specific overexpression in cardiomyocytes of Nrf2 (Nrf2-TG) in transgenic mice[KC1]  is impervious to cardiac oxidative damage, inflammation, fibrosis, and dysfunction caused by intermittent hypoxia (IH)[KC2] . In response to IH, Nrf2 and its downstream antioxidants are strongly MT-dependent Nrf2 and may [KC3] act as a compensatory response to IH exposure by up-regulating MT (downstream antioxidant target genes) to protect the heart.

Prolonged exposure to IH reduces the binding of Nrf2 factor to the MT promoter gene, thereby inhibiting MT translation and expression. Moreover, a complex PI3K/Akt/GSK3B/Fyn signaling network provides cardio protection against IH when Nrf2 or MT is overexpressed in the heart. By activating the PI3K/Akt/GSK3B/Fyn signaling pathway, MT increaseNrf2 expression and transcriptional function in response to IH exposure. Although not yet proven, these effects suggest that it is possible to activate PI3K/Akt/GSK3B/Fyn dependent signaling pathways through cardiac MT overexpression to prevent chronic IH-induced cardiomyopathy and downregulation of Nrf2.

Therefore, Nrf2 or MT may be a potential treatment to avoid chronic IH-induced cardiomyopathy. 

== See also ==
* Phytochelatin

== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* Expasy metallothionein page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q416896" start="0" end="15" title="Metallothionein" label="Metallothionein"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="36" end="44" title="cysteine" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="55" end="71" title="molecular mass" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="102" end="104" title="Atomic mass unit" label="Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="106" end="113" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="158" end="173" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="233" end="237" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="239" end="245" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="247" end="255" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q409205" start="261" end="271" title="xenobiotic" label="xenobiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="281" end="288" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="290" end="297" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="299" end="305" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="307" end="314" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="316" end="320" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="322" end="334" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="347" end="352" title="thiol" label="thiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="431" end="441" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307492" start="564" end="576" title="renal cortex" label="renal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215775" start="620" end="634" title="toxic metal" label="metal toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="639" end="655" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q609809" start="724" end="732" title="protein isoform" label="isoforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029467" start="796" end="797" title="MT1A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029470" start="799" end="800" title="MT1B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029473" start="802" end="803" title="MT1E" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029476" start="805" end="806" title="MT1F" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029479" start="808" end="809" title="MT1G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029481" start="811" end="812" title="MT1H" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="814" end="815" title="MT1L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029487" start="817" end="818" title="MT1M" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029492" start="820" end="821" title="MT1X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029495" start="824" end="827" title="MT2A" label="MT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029500" start="829" end="832" title="Metallothionein-3" label="MT3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="838" end="841" title="Metallothionein-4" label="MT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="912" end="917" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="922" end="928" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="984" end="999" title="dietary mineral" label="dietary mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="1009" end="1013" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1015" end="1021" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="1027" end="1035" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="1064" end="1073" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q150962" start="1951" end="1964" title="Synechococcus" label="Synechococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198419" start="2013" end="2024" title="Tetrahymena" label="Tetrahymena"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="2062" end="2075" title="Pisum sativum" label="Pisum sativum"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="2089" end="2103" title="Triticum durum" label="Triticum durum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="2117" end="2125" title="Zea mays" label="Zea mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q156137" start="2142" end="2155" title="Quercus suber" label="Quercus suber"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="2185" end="2209" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310443" start="2223" end="2239" title="Candida albicans" label="Candida albicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q133459" start="2256" end="2273" title="Neurospora crassa" label="Neurospora crassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q91703" start="2324" end="2346" title="Caenorhabditis elegans" label="Caenorhabditis elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="2371" end="2394" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q27855" start="2420" end="2434" title="Mytilus edulis" label="Mytilus edulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936405" start="2466" end="2495" title="Strongylocentrotus purpuratus" label="Strongylocentrotus purpuratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184774" start="2546" end="2559" title="Gallus gallus" label="Gallus gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2590" end="2602" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="2618" end="2630" title="Mus musculus" label="Mus musculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q408737" start="3259" end="3272" title="phytochelatin" label="phytochelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430834" start="4147" end="4157" title="Notothenia" label="Notothenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q903495" start="4767" end="4774" title="Residue (chemistry)" label="residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q290042" start="4843" end="4848" title="loop (biochemistry)" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q15687914" start="6412" end="6421" title="Reinhard Dallinger" label="Dallinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q245314" start="6503" end="6516" title="Helix pomatia" label="Helix pomatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="7137" end="7148" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="7173" end="7177" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="7182" end="7188" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215775" start="7232" end="7246" title="metal toxicity" label="metal toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="7251" end="7267" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="7953" end="7961" title="Cysteine" label="Cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="8379" end="8399" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204785" start="8434" end="8445" title="zinc finger" label="zinc finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q112029945" start="8604" end="8612" title="thionein" label="thionein"/>
<link wikidata="Q408626" start="9256" end="9263" title="cystine" label="cystine"/>
<link wikidata="Q149299" start="9747" end="9758" title="mutagenesis" label="mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="9800" end="9810" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="10361" end="10370" title="Vitamin D" label="Vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="10387" end="10394" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="10396" end="10404" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q223092" start="10411" end="10434" title="beta-Hydroxybutyric acid" label="Beta-hydroxylbutyration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36293" start="10438" end="10445" title="histone" label="histone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="10976" end="10990" title="Cell division" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="11015" end="11021" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="11411" end="11423" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904193" start="11440" end="11460" title="Heavy metal toxicity" label="Heavy metal toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689384" start="11470" end="11478" title="thiomersal controversy" label="proposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="11497" end="11505" title="etiology" label="etiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="11509" end="11515" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="11616" end="11623" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="11625" end="11629" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="11635" end="11642" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="11864" end="11871" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411046" start="11885" end="11895" title="thiomersal" label="thiomersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="11925" end="11935" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030088" start="12534" end="12582" title="NFE2L2" label="nuclear factor red blood cell 2-related factor 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326656" start="12808" end="12828" title="intermittent hypoxia" label="intermittent hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408737" start="14294" end="14307" title="Phytochelatin" label="Phytochelatin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276463" wikidata="Q1121317" url="?curid=276463" title="Ehrgeiz">
<text>, fully titled Ehrgeiz: God Bless the Ring, is a fighting game developed by DreamFactory and published by Namco in 1998 for arcades. It was developed as a partnership between Square and DreamFactory. It was ported to the PlayStation, where Square released it internationally while Sony Computer Entertainment published it in Japan, a direct inversion of the companies&#x27; usual publishing deal.

The game includes characters from &quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot;: Cloud Strife, Tifa Lockhart – which are playable in both versions; Sephiroth, Yuffie Kisaragi, Vincent Valentine, and Zack Fair – which were added to the PlayStation&#x27;s roster exclusively.

==Gameplay==
===Battle system===
&quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; differs from most 3D fighting games by drawing heavily from the concepts of wrestling games and DreamFactory&#x27;s own &quot;Tobal&quot; series, which allows for full 360-degree movement and does not require fighters to be facing one another at all times. This restricts the camera to a more or less fixed position, zooming in and out with the action, but not tracking around the arena as would be common in most other 2D and 3D fighting games. Characters can move freely in a 3-dimensional stage which is filled with many interactive objects and changes in elevation, allowing characters to leap on top of crates or use them as weapons, for example. There are four action buttons: guard, high attack, low attack, and special, which is a weapons-based attack that is different for each character.

===Quest Mode===
The PlayStation version includes a Quest Mode, similar to &quot;Tobal No. 1&quot; and &quot;Tobal 2&quot;, titled &quot;Brand New Quest: The Forsaken Dungeon&quot;. Players fight through an extensive dungeon crawl, much like the Blizzard title &quot;Diablo&quot;, and can equip different weapons and items. There are also several smaller minigames, such as a race mode, where players run laps around a course while engaging in combat to slow down their opponent, and a board game similar to Reversi.

Quest Mode is a hack and slash action RPG mode of gameplay in Ehrgeiz. It begins in a dungeon in a parallel universe, and later moves to a nearby inn. The player can explore the town and enter the dungeon, which contains randomly generated maps. Somewhere on each floor of the dungeon will be a stairway to the next level downward in the dungeon. Since the main characters are archaeologists, the goal revolves around going as deep in the dungeon as possible in the hopes of finding great artifacts. Two characters are available for this mode: Clair Andrews and Koji Masuda. The player can switch between the two by visiting the inn. If one character dies in the dungeon, the other can &quot;resurrect&quot; him/her by finding the corpse.

The character development system revolves mainly around a five-point chart representing which statistics will be increased in the character upon raising his/her level. Consuming Protein, Vitamins, Minerals, Carbohydrates, or Lipids will in turn increase Attack, Magic, Dexterity, Speed, or Defense, respectively. The diagram points and stretches towards each of these points. As one point is focused on, the diagram will contract on the other points of the diagram. Thus, increasing how much one stat will raise will lower how much the other stats will raise.

A major facet of the Quest Mode is hunger management. Each monster can drop a food item which will fill the hunger bar slightly, and supply the player with one of the previously mentioned nutrients. Eating while the hunger bar is full will increase the maximum size of their stomach (though the actual size of the bar on the screen remains the same, the number of units represented is greater). This effect also applies when drinking health potions while the HP meter is full.

There are several recipe books hidden throughout the Quest portion of the game&#x27;s dungeon. Wine trading is available after getting the second recipe book and talking to a man in a restaurant in the town. The player can buy and trade wine here much like a stock market, where the value of the wine will go up and down periodically. Players can then trade back the wine either to earn or lose profit.

==Plot==
The sword Ehrgeiz, legendarily powerful, was sealed away and could only be opened with the Ehrgeiz stone. This stone was made a prize for a fighting tournament, and whoever won, would take the sword.

===Characters===
* Ken &quot;Godhand&quot; Mishima – Once a mercenary for Red Scorpion, Godhand decided to leave the organization and take with him the knowledge of the ancient ruin. Resigning from the organization meant cutting off one&#x27;s right hand. As painful as it was, Ken did the deed and then betrayed Red Scorpion by selling the information to a large wealthy syndicate group. Together, they formed an excavation company to seize control of the ancient ruin in the Middle East. As part of his deal, he was given a new prosthetic right arm, plus was told the theory that the Ehrgeiz stone was the key to the door. He now believes he must become the champion and bear the sword. He bears a strong resemblance to Namco&#x27;s &quot;Tekken&quot; character Jin Kazama. Vincent Valentine (FFVII) uses Godhand&#x27;s moveset. His moveset contains moves from Kazuya Mishima, Jin Kazama, Heihachi Mishima, Baek Doo San, and Paul Phoenix from the &quot;Tekken&quot; series. His costume also bears resemblance to that of Bryan Fury&#x27;s costumes in addition to Godhand&#x27;s right hand being cybernetic.
* Han Daehan – A master of taekwondo and a young action star without the need for a stuntman, Han is a popular lad amongst the public. What the public does not know is that his right leg is actually artificial. During a movie shoot a year ago in the Middle East, a mysterious cloud of black smoke engulfed Han&#x27;s leg. Peculiarly, although his leg has disappeared, he continues to retain a sensation of its existence. As he continues to seek an explanation for this particular phenomenon, he stumbles upon information that similar incidents have occurred every few decades in the area containing the ancient ruins. Han is another who becomes drawn to the mysterious surroundings of the ancient ruins. He bears a strong resemblance to &quot;Tekken&quot;″s Hwoarang.
* Prince Doza – His motto is, &quot;I’ll destroy anyone who stands in my path!&quot; Each day, Doza seeks a more powerful opponent. However, in the world of kickboxing, he is already without equal. Able to defeat his opponents with his bare fists, Doza has become bored and is in need of a challenge. In the midst of his unrest, he receives word of the Ehrgeiz tournament, where weapons, psychic powers, and projectile weapons are permitted. Thrilled, he is determined to test his skills. Although he has no interest in the secret that Ehrgeiz holds, his fighting spirit is fueled by the appearance of opponents that are more powerful than he has ever imagined. In order to not be outmatched by distance weapons, Doza enters the fray with a glove weapon that shoots fireballs, not unlike the Hadouken of &quot;Street Fighter&quot; fame. In the Japanese version, he is named Naseem. He bears a strong resemblance to &quot;Tekken&quot;″s Bruce Irvin and &quot;Street Fighter&quot;″s Adon. He seems to also be inspired by the boxer Naseem Hamed.
* &quot;Yoyo&quot; Yoko Kishibojin – Yoko&#x27;s father is an explorer who teaches archaeology, and her mother is an expert in Kishiboujin Ryu jujutsu. At age 10, her parents divorced, leaving her to be raised solely by her mother. Although still in high school, her talents in jujutsu have been acknowledged by the ICPO which enables her to participate in their hand-to-hand combat research team. One day, she received a letter from her estranged father, entrusting her to carry out the duties necessary to acquire Ehrgeiz. In addition to this, she has been ordered by the ICPO to enter the tournament to investigate suspicious activities surrounding Ehrgeiz.
* Lee Shuwen – Known as the master of lethal kenpō, Lee holds the power and technique that can kill a man in a single strike. It has been said that Lee, founder of the Hakkyoku Ken, was killed some time ago through lethal poisoning. However, through the power of a legendary elixir found in the tomb of the first emperor, Lee has miraculously been brought back to life. Not only has this elixir brought him back to life, but it is also making him younger as time proceeds. At this rate, he will ultimately become younger and eventually return to the void. In an attempt to avoid such a fate, he embarks on a mission to acquire the true key to immortality. Thus, he begins his journey to uncover the mystery behind the legendary ancient ruins. He bears resemblance to &quot;Tekken&quot;″s Lei Wulong. He is also based upon the real martial artist of the same name, Li Shuwen.
* Sasuke – Although it is evident by his appearance that he is a ninja, Sasuke&#x27;s true identity remains unknown. Presently, he works as an agent for Red Scorpion, but since he has a mild case of amnesia, he cannot remember his true name. However, during a mission in which he was to assassinate the adventurer, Koji Masuda, he notices a mysterious stone embedded within a broken sword held by Masuda. Believing that this precious stone will enable him to recover his long-lost memories, Sasuke aims to acquire the legendary weapon, Ehrgeiz. Yuffie Kisaragi (FFVII) uses Sasuke&#x27;s moveset. He resembles Ryu Hayabusa from &quot;Ninja Gaiden&quot; and &quot;Dead or Alive&quot;.
* Dasher Inoba – Inoba is a prominent wrestler and a disciple of Karl Schneider, the founder of the Ehrgeiz Tournament. He is also a member of the Ehrgeiz supervising committee. With the recent death of his master, Inoba discovers a note left behind by the late Schneider which suggests that he had been investigating the connection between the stone embedded within the Ehrgeiz and the ancient ruins. Ever since laying eyes upon the mystical stone, Inoba has been fascinated by its presence. Compounded by his urge to obtain the stone and uncover the mystery behind his master&#x27;s investigation, he is determined to get his hands on the legendary weapon. As evidenced by the character&#x27;s name, appearance, fighting style, vocal grunts, and committee status, Inoba is heavily inspired by the Japanese professional wrestler, Antonio Inoki.
* &quot;Wolf Girl&quot; Jo – As an infant, Jo survived an airplane crash in the Amazon while sustaining only minor injuries to her head. Raised by wolves, she gained physical strength that exceeds and surpasses normal human capabilities by as much as three times. Following the death of her &quot;wolf&quot; mother, Jo became known as the &quot;Man-eating wolf girl&quot;, and was eventually captured and imprisoned. There, she exhibited uncontrollable hostility towards her supervising officers. Having heard about this girl through various rumors, Red Scorpion scouts her and gives her the name, Jo. She is given direct orders by Red Scorpion to seek the Ehrgeiz without knowing or understanding the reason why. She uses the dance-like Brazilian fighting style capoeira.
* Koji Masuda – Father of Yoko Kishibojin and third-time consecutive reigning champion of the Ehrgeiz Championship Tournament. He is also an archaeologist seeking to uncover the truth behind the mysteries surrounding the ancient ruin.
* Clair Andrews – A child prodigy who entered the university at the age of sixteen, Clair is one of Koji Masuda&#x27;s archaeology students. Although she is relatively independent, she is still considered naïve. When Koji begins his journey, Clair impulsively joins him as his assistant. Her fighting style is Jeet Kune Do, and thus, shares many moves with &quot;Tekken&quot;″s Marshall Law, although one of her special moves resembles Fei Long&#x27;s Dragon Flame Kick from &quot;Street Fighter&quot;.
* Django / Red Scorpion – Django is a wolf-like character that plays the role of the sub-final boss. He can be unlocked as a playable character by meeting certain conditions in the game. His first costume features gray fur; however, his red-furred alternate costume resembles &quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot;&#x27;s Red XIII. His attack names reference Red XIII, Red&#x27;s father Seto, and &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; summons. Red Scorpion is Django&#x27;s second form, which serves as the final boss.

===&quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot; characters===
* Cloud Strife (available at start in the PlayStation version)
* Tifa Lockhart (available at start in the PlayStation version)
* Sephiroth (available at start; PlayStation version only)
* Vincent Valentine (hidden character; must be unlocked; PlayStation version only)
* Yuffie Kisaragi (hidden character; must be unlocked; PlayStation version only)
* Zack Fair (hidden character; must be unlocked; PlayStation version only)

In the arcade version, Cloud, Tifa, and Sephiroth were revealed after thirty, sixty, and ninety days, respectively, after the initial install and boot of the game.

==Development==
&quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; was developed by DreamFactory, who previously developed the &quot;Tobal&quot; fighting games for Square. The game was directed and designed by &quot;Virtua Fighter&quot; and &quot;Tekken&quot; designer Seiichi Ishii. The game&#x27;s characters, both the original ones and those from &quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot;, were designed by Tetsuya Nomura. &quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; was announced as the first project to result from a licensing agreement allowing Square to develop games for Namco&#x27;s Namco System 12 arcade board, and was exhibited at Namco&#x27;s booth at the February 1998 AOU Show. It was released in arcades in 1998 as a joint venture between Square and Namco. After the game&#x27;s US release on the PlayStation, Square Electronic Arts sponsored the &quot;Ehrgeiz Championship Tour,&quot; a series of contests in which players competed against one another playing the game. The contests were held at Electronics Boutique and Babbage&#x27;s stores across America, beginning on July 10, 1999 in New York. In 2000, &quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; was re-released as part of the Square Millennium Collection in Japan. It included a collectable digital clock and character diorama.

===Music===
&quot;Ehrgeiz Original Soundtrack&quot; contains sixty-one musical tracks from the game. It was composed by Takayuki Nakamura, who previously composed the DreamFactory and Square collaboration Tobal 2. It was released on November 21, 1998 by DigiCube.

==Reception==
In Japan, &quot;Game Machine&quot; listed &quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; on their April 15, 1998 issue as being the sixth most-successful arcade game of the month.

&quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; sold over 222,000 copies in Japan by the end of 1998, and sold 340,937 copies in Japan by December 2004. It has scored a 32 out of 40 points by the Japanese gaming publication &quot;Famitsu&quot;. &quot;IGN&quot; rated the game a 7.5 or &quot;Good&quot;, citing the game&#x27;s beautiful graphics and presentation but noting both its generally simplistic gameplay and very difficult combination move executions. &quot;GameSpot&quot; concurred, writing that the blocking controls were &quot;unintuitive&quot; and generally disappointing minigames outweighed the games beautiful graphics and Full Motion Videos. In November 2000, the game was ranked #73 on the magazine&#x27;s top 100 PlayStation games of all time. &quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; currently has an aggregate score of 76% on GameRankings based on twenty-one media outlets. Later reviews reflected the strange use of famous Square Enix characters with &quot;generic moves&quot; and primarily wrestling-based combat.

&quot;Next Generation&quot; reviewed the PlayStation version of the game, rating it three stars out of five, and stated that &quot;Technologically speaking, &quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; is an impressive fighter, but it does have balance problems, especially the one-button gameplay of the one-player game. Still, it&#x27;s good to see developers straying from the accepted formula with new fighting designs that truly work.&quot;

==See also==
*&quot;Power Stone&quot;
*&quot;Tobal No. 1&quot;
*&quot;Destrega&quot;
*&quot;The Bouncer (video game)&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="49" end="62" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039230" start="76" end="88" title="DreamFactory (game company)" label="DreamFactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q309996" start="106" end="111" title="Namco" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="124" end="131" title="Arcade video game" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="175" end="181" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="221" end="232" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="281" end="308" title="Sony Computer Entertainment" label="Sony Computer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q214232" start="438" end="455" title="Final Fantasy VII" label="Final Fantasy VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798592" start="463" end="475" title="Cloud Strife" label="Cloud Strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199059" start="477" end="490" title="Tifa Lockhart" label="Tifa Lockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q649546" start="530" end="539" title="Sephiroth (Final Fantasy)" label="Sephiroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199411" start="541" end="556" title="Yuffie Kisaragi" label="Yuffie Kisaragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349973" start="558" end="575" title="Vincent Valentine" label="Vincent Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q282800" start="581" end="590" title="Zack Fair" label="Zack Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="728" end="730" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="786" end="795" title="Professional wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q773090" start="836" end="841" title="Tobal No. 1" label="Tobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194763" start="1130" end="1132" title="2D computer graphics" label="2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596087" start="1618" end="1625" title="Tobal 2" label="Tobal 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265717" start="1726" end="1739" title="dungeon crawl" label="dungeon crawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="1755" end="1763" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q220960" start="1776" end="1782" title="Diablo (video game)" label="Diablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192658" start="1864" end="1872" title="minigame" label="minigame"/>
<link wikidata="Q748139" start="2017" end="2024" title="Reversi" label="Reversi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163960" start="2043" end="2057" title="hack and slash" label="hack and slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422746" start="2058" end="2068" title="action RPG" label="action RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="2404" end="2417" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219623" start="5161" end="5167" title="Tekken (series)" label="Tekken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575302" start="5184" end="5194" title="Jin Kazama" label="Jin Kazama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="5555" end="5564" title="taekwondo" label="taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256706" start="7088" end="7096" title="Hadouken (Street Fighter)" label="Hadouken"/>
<link wikidata="Q288035" start="7106" end="7120" title="Street Fighter" label="Street Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7232" end="7243" title="List of Tekken characters#Bruce Irvin" label="Bruce Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355898" start="7325" end="7337" title="Naseem Hamed" label="Naseem Hamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="7482" end="7489" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="7655" end="7659" title="Interpol" label="ICPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q501672" start="8045" end="8050" title="kenpō" label="kenpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153348" start="8788" end="8798" title="Lei Wulong" label="Lei Wulong"/>
<link wikidata="Q697515" start="8864" end="8873" title="Li Shuwen" label="Li Shuwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115836" start="9485" end="9497" title="Ryu Hayabusa" label="Ryu Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q590004" start="9509" end="9521" title="Ninja Gaiden" label="Ninja Gaiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180890" start="9538" end="9551" title="Dead or Alive (series)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q45207" start="10390" end="10403" title="Antonio Inoki" label="Antonio Inoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q159452" start="11168" end="11176" title="capoeira" label="capoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q188923" start="11723" end="11735" title="Jeet Kune Do" label="Jeet Kune Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153348" start="11791" end="11803" title="Marshall Law (Tekken)" label="Marshall Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11849" end="11857" title="Fei Long" label="Fei Long"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12229" end="12237" title="Characters of Final Fantasy VII#Red XIII" label="Red XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798592" start="12464" end="12476" title="Cloud Strife" label="Cloud Strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199059" start="12527" end="12540" title="Tifa Lockhart" label="Tifa Lockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q649546" start="12591" end="12600" title="Sephiroth (Final Fantasy)" label="Sephiroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349973" start="12650" end="12667" title="Vincent Valentine" label="Vincent Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199411" start="12733" end="12748" title="Yuffie Kisaragi" label="Yuffie Kisaragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q282800" start="12814" end="12823" title="Zack Fair" label="Zack Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039230" start="13106" end="13118" title="DreamFactory (game company)" label="DreamFactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415274" start="13238" end="13252" title="Virtua Fighter" label="Virtua Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446705" start="13291" end="13304" title="Seiichi Ishii" label="Seiichi Ishii"/>
<link wikidata="Q355062" start="13420" end="13434" title="Tetsuya Nomura" label="Tetsuya Nomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q442891" start="13578" end="13593" title="Namco System 12" label="Namco System 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220281" start="13669" end="13677" title="AOU Show" label="AOU Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993686" start="13999" end="14019" title="EB Games" label="Electronics Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14024" end="14038" title="GameStop#Babbage&amp;#x27;s Etc. (1996–1999)" label="Babbage&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q929814" start="14385" end="14402" title="Takayuki Nakamura" label="Takayuki Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224647" start="14519" end="14527" title="DigiCube" label="DigiCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="14900" end="14907" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="14921" end="14924" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="15136" end="15144" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192658" start="15254" end="15262" title="minigame" label="minigame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="15308" end="15325" title="Full Motion Video" label="Full Motion Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q40160" start="15495" end="15507" title="GameRankings" label="GameRankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q207784" start="15593" end="15604" title="Square Enix" label="Square Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="15692" end="15707" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713448" start="16128" end="16139" title="Power Stone (video game)" label="Power Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q773090" start="16153" end="16164" title="Tobal No. 1" label="Tobal No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706064" start="16178" end="16186" title="Destrega" label="Destrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601729" start="16200" end="16224" title="The Bouncer (video game)" label="The Bouncer (video game)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276465" wikidata="Q105402" url="?curid=276465" title="Ventricular system">
<text>In neuroanatomy, the ventricular system is a set of four interconnected cavities known as cerebral ventricles in the brain. Within each ventricle is a region of choroid plexus which produces the circulating cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The ventricular system is continuous with the central canal of the spinal cord from the fourth ventricle, allowing for the flow of CSF to circulate.

All of the ventricular system and the central canal of the spinal cord are lined with ependyma, a specialised form of epithelium connected by tight junctions that make up the blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier.

== Structure ==
The system comprises four ventricles:
* lateral ventricles right and left (one for each hemisphere)
* third ventricle
* fourth ventricle

There are several foramina, openings acting as channels, that connect the ventricles. The interventricular foramina (also called the foramina of Monro) connect the lateral ventricles to the third ventricle through which the cerebrospinal fluid can flow.

=== Ventricles ===
The four cavities of the human brain are called ventricles. The two largest are the lateral ventricles in the cerebrum, the third ventricle is in the diencephalon of the forebrain between the right and left thalamus, and the fourth ventricle is located at the back of the pons and upper half of the medulla oblongata of the hindbrain. The ventricles are concerned with the production and circulation of cerebrospinal fluid.

=== Development === 
The structures of the ventricular system are embryologically derived from the neural canal, the centre of the neural tube.

As the part of the primitive neural tube that will develop into the brainstem, the neural canal expands dorsally and laterally, creating the fourth ventricle, whereas the neural canal that does not expand and remains the same at the level of the midbrain superior to the fourth ventricle forms the cerebral aqueduct. The fourth ventricle narrows at the obex (in the caudal medulla), to become the central canal of the spinal cord.

In more detail, around the third week of development, the embryo is a three-layered disc. The embryo is covered on the dorsal surface by a layer of cells called ectoderm. In the middle of the dorsal surface of the embryo is a linear structure called the notochord. As the ectoderm proliferates, the notochord is dragged into the middle of the developing embryo.

As the brain develops, by the fourth week of embryological development three swellings known as brain vesicles have formed within the embryo around the canal, near where the head will develop. The three primary brain vesicles represent different components of the central nervous system: the prosencephalon, mesencephalon and rhombencephalon. These in turn divide into five secondary vesicles. As these sections develop around the neural canal, the inner neural canal becomes known as &quot;primitive&quot; ventricles. These form the ventricular system of the brain: The neural stem cells of the developing brain, principally radial glial cells, line the developing ventricular system in a transient zone called the ventricular zone.
* The prosencephalon divides into the telencephalon, which forms the cortex of the developed brain, and the diencephalon. The ventricles contained within the telencephalon become the lateral ventricles, and the ventricles within the diencephalon become the third ventricle.
* The rhombencephalon divides into a metencephalon and myelencephalon. The ventricles contained within the rhombencephalon become the fourth ventricle, and the ventricles contained within the mesencephalon become the aqueduct of Sylvius.

Separating the anterior horns of the lateral ventricles is the septum pellucidum: a thin, triangular, vertical membrane which runs as a sheet from the corpus callosum down to the fornix. During the third month of fetal development, a space forms between two septal laminae, known as the cave of septum pellucidum (CSP), which is a marker for fetal neural maldevelopment. During the fifth month of development, the laminae start to close and this closure completes from about three to six months after birth. Fusion of the septal laminae is attributed to rapid development of the alvei of the hippocampus, amygdala, septal nuclei, fornix, corpus callosum and other midline structures. Lack of such limbic development interrupts this posterior-to-anterior fusion, resulting in the continuation of the CSP into adulthood.

== Function ==

=== Flow of cerebrospinal fluid ===
The ventricles are filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) which bathes and cushions the brain and spinal cord within their bony confines. CSF is produced by modified ependymal cells of the choroid plexus found in all components of the ventricular system except for the cerebral aqueduct and the posterior and anterior horns of the lateral ventricles. CSF flows from the lateral ventricles via the interventricular foramina into the third ventricle, and then the fourth ventricle via the cerebral aqueduct in the midbrain. From the fourth ventricle it can pass into the central canal of the spinal cord or into the subarachnoid cisterns via three small foramina: the central median aperture and the two lateral apertures.
According to the traditional understanding of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) physiology, the majority of CSF is produced by the choroid plexus, circulates through the ventricles, the cisterns, and the subarachnoid space to be absorbed into the blood by the arachnoid villi.

The fluid then flows around the superior sagittal sinus to be reabsorbed via the arachnoid granulations (or arachnoid villi) into the venous sinuses, after which it passes through the jugular vein and major venous system. CSF within the spinal cord can flow all the way down to the lumbar cistern at the end of the cord around the cauda equina where lumbar punctures are performed.

The cerebral aqueduct between the third and fourth ventricles is very small, as are the foramina, which means that they can be easily blocked.

=== Protection of the brain ===
The brain and spinal cord are covered by the meninges, the three protective membranes of the tough dura mater, the arachnoid mater and the pia mater. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within the skull and spine provides further protection and also buoyancy, and is found in the subarachnoid space between the pia mater and the arachnoid mater.

The CSF that is produced in the ventricular system is also necessary for chemical stability, and the provision of nutrients needed by the brain. The CSF helps to protect the brain from jolts and knocks to the head and also provides buoyancy and support to the brain against gravity. (Since the brain and CSF are similar in density, the brain floats in neutral buoyancy, suspended in the CSF.) This allows the brain to grow in size and weight without resting on the floor of the cranium, which would destroy nervous tissue.

== Clinical significance ==
The narrowness of the cerebral aqueduct and foramina means that they can become blocked, for example, by blood following a hemorrhagic stroke. As cerebrospinal fluid is continually produced by the choroid plexus within the ventricles, a blockage of outflow leads to increasingly high pressure in the lateral ventricles. As a consequence, this commonly leads in turn to hydrocephalus. Medically one would call this post-haemorrhagic acquired hydrocephalus, but is often referred to colloquially by the layperson as &quot;water on the brain&quot;. This is an extremely serious condition regardless of the cause of blockage. An endoscopic third ventriculostomy is a surgical procedure for the treatment of hydrocephalus in which an opening is created in the floor of the third ventricle using an endoscope placed within the ventricular system through a burr hole. This allows the cerebrospinal fluid to flow directly to the basal cisterns, thereby bypassing any obstruction. A surgical procedure to make an entry hole to access any of the ventricles is called a ventriculostomy. This is done to drain accumulated cerebrospinal fluid either through a temporary catheter or a permanent shunt.

Other diseases of the ventricular system include inflammation of the membranes (meningitis) or of the ventricles (ventriculitis) caused by infection or the introduction of blood following trauma or haemorrhage (cerebral haemorrhage or subarachnoid haemorrhage).

During embryogenesis in the choroid plexus of the ventricles, choroid plexus cysts can form.

The scientific study of CT scans of the ventricles in the late 1970s gave new insight into the study of mental disorders. Researchers found that individuals with schizophrenia had (in terms of group averages) larger than usual ventricles. This became the first &quot;evidence&quot; that schizophrenia was biological in origin and led to a renewed interest in its study via the use of imaging techniques. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has superseded the use of CT in research in the role of detecting ventricular abnormalities in psychiatric illness.

Whether enlarged ventricles is a cause or a result of schizophrenia has not yet been established. Enlarged ventricles are also found in organic dementia and have been explained largely in terms of environmental factors. They have also been found to be extremely diverse between individuals, such that the percentage difference in group averages in schizophrenia studies (+16%) has been described as &quot;not a very profound difference in the context of normal variation&quot; (ranging from 25% to 350% of the mean average).

The cave of septum pellucidum has been loosely associated with schizophrenia, post-traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, as well as with antisocial personality disorder. CSP is one of the distinguishing features of individuals displaying symptoms of dementia pugilistica.

== Additional media ==
== See also ==

* Blood–brain barrier
* Circumventricular organs

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q948647" start="3" end="15" title="neuroanatomy" label="neuroanatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="21" end="39" title="Ventricular system" label="ventricular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="90" end="109" title="Ventricular system" label="cerebral ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="117" end="122" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="161" end="175" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="207" end="226" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190634" start="280" end="293" title="central canal" label="central canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="301" end="312" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134467" start="470" end="478" title="ependyma" label="ependyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="502" end="512" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053832" start="526" end="540" title="tight junction" label="tight junction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="559" end="592" title="Choroid plexus#Blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier" label="blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="651" end="669" title="lateral ventricles" label="lateral ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="713" end="728" title="third ventricle" label="third ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069121" start="731" end="747" title="fourth ventricle" label="fourth ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436579" start="767" end="775" title="foramina" label="foramina"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="1322" end="1339" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="1426" end="1445" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="1514" end="1529" title="embryogenesis" label="embryologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127402" start="1547" end="1559" title="neural canal" label="neural canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127402" start="1579" end="1590" title="neural tube" label="neural tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="1661" end="1670" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069121" start="1734" end="1750" title="fourth ventricle" label="fourth ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="1891" end="1908" title="cerebral aqueduct" label="cerebral aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028394" start="1946" end="1950" title="obex" label="obex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190634" start="1990" end="2003" title="central canal" label="central canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="2011" end="2022" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2144" end="2150" title=":wikt:dorsal" label="dorsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="2186" end="2194" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q243469" start="2279" end="2288" title="notochord" label="notochord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2395" end="2409" title="Brain#Development" label="brain develops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299613" start="2484" end="2497" title="brain vesicle" label="brain vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="2652" end="2674" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="2680" end="2694" title="prosencephalon" label="prosencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="2696" end="2709" title="mesencephalon" label="mesencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="2714" end="2729" title="rhombencephalon" label="rhombencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944097" start="2959" end="2976" title="neural stem cells" label="neural stem cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387286" start="3014" end="3031" title="radial glial cell" label="radial glial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455175" start="3104" end="3120" title="ventricular zone" label="ventricular zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="3128" end="3142" title="prosencephalon" label="prosencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="3160" end="3173" title="telencephalon" label="telencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="3191" end="3197" title="cerebral cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="3230" end="3242" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="3305" end="3323" title="lateral ventricles" label="lateral ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="3355" end="3367" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="3379" end="3394" title="third ventricle" label="third ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500793" start="3433" end="3446" title="metencephalon" label="metencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456825" start="3451" end="3465" title="myelencephalon" label="myelencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069121" start="3530" end="3546" title="fourth ventricle" label="fourth ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="3613" end="3632" title="aqueduct of Sylvius" label="aqueduct of Sylvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514754" start="3698" end="3715" title="septum pellucidum" label="septum pellucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="3786" end="3801" title="corpus callosum" label="corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230047" start="3814" end="3820" title="fornix of the brain" label="fornix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051911" start="3922" end="3947" title="cave of septum pellucidum" label="cave of septum pellucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156864" start="4214" end="4219" title="Alveus of hippocampus" label="alvei"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="4227" end="4238" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="4240" end="4248" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452044" start="4250" end="4263" title="septal nuclei" label="septal nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="4538" end="4557" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="4604" end="4615" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134467" start="4672" end="4686" title="ependymal cell" label="ependymal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="4695" end="4709" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="4775" end="4792" title="cerebral aqueduct" label="cerebral aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="4801" end="4810" title="Lateral ventricles" label="posterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="4815" end="4829" title="Lateral ventricles" label="anterior horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="4837" end="4855" title="lateral ventricles" label="lateral ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540833" start="4903" end="4928" title="Interventricular foramina (neural anatomy)" label="interventricular foramina"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="4938" end="4953" title="third ventricle" label="third ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069121" start="4968" end="4984" title="fourth ventricle" label="fourth ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="4993" end="5010" title="cerebral aqueduct" label="cerebral aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="5018" end="5026" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190634" start="5075" end="5088" title="central canal" label="central canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="5096" end="5107" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442272" start="5120" end="5141" title="subarachnoid cisterns" label="subarachnoid cisterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331256" start="5180" end="5195" title="median aperture" label="median aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824021" start="5208" end="5224" title="lateral aperture" label="lateral aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115976" start="5529" end="5552" title="superior sagittal sinus" label="superior sagittal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559311" start="5578" end="5599" title="arachnoid granulation" label="arachnoid granulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322802" start="5631" end="5645" title="venous sinuses" label="venous sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q749592" start="5681" end="5693" title="jugular vein" label="jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="5704" end="5717" title="venous system" label="venous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442272" start="5779" end="5793" title="cistern (neuroanatomy)" label="lumbar cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051445" start="5828" end="5840" title="cauda equina" label="cauda equina"/>
<link wikidata="Q719444" start="5847" end="5862" title="lumbar puncture" label="lumbar puncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="5884" end="5901" title="cerebral aqueduct" label="cerebral aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="5914" end="5919" title="third ventricle" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069121" start="5924" end="5940" title="fourth ventricle" label="fourth ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="6101" end="6109" title="meninges" label="meninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394389" start="6155" end="6165" title="dura mater" label="dura mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647112" start="6171" end="6186" title="arachnoid mater" label="arachnoid mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647118" start="6195" end="6204" title="pia mater" label="pia mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="6247" end="6252" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="6300" end="6308" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="6330" end="6348" title="subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="7249" end="7266" title="lateral ventricle" label="lateral ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7318" end="7331" title="Hydrocephalus#Noncommunicating" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376417" start="7574" end="7606" title="endoscopic third ventriculostomy" label="endoscopic third ventriculostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="7717" end="7732" title="third ventricle" label="third ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q580725" start="7742" end="7751" title="endoscope" label="endoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q472953" start="7799" end="7808" title="burr hole" label="burr hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="7826" end="7845" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056264" start="7870" end="7884" title="basal cisternae" label="basal cisterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920328" start="8008" end="8023" title="ventriculostomy" label="ventriculostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="8218" end="8228" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920329" start="8252" end="8265" title="ventriculitis" label="ventriculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="8277" end="8286" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="8310" end="8315" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="8336" end="8347" title="haemorrhage" label="haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="8349" end="8369" title="cerebral haemorrhage" label="cerebral haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q693442" start="8373" end="8397" title="subarachnoid haemorrhage" label="subarachnoid haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="8408" end="8421" title="embryogenesis" label="embryogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="8429" end="8443" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237766" start="8463" end="8483" title="choroid plexus cysts" label="choroid plexus cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="8499" end="8509" title="scientific method" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="8519" end="8526" title="Computed tomography" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="8599" end="8614" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="8657" end="8670" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="8800" end="8810" title="Biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q115180053" start="8879" end="8897" title="Imaging technology" label="imaging techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="8899" end="8925" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="Magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="9193" end="9201" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051911" start="9579" end="9604" title="cave of septum pellucidum" label="cave of septum pellucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="9638" end="9651" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="9653" end="9683" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="9685" end="9707" title="traumatic brain injury" label="traumatic brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="9725" end="9756" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="9838" end="9858" title="dementia pugilistica" label="dementia pugilistica"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="9902" end="9921" title="Blood–brain barrier" label="Blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q205925" start="9924" end="9948" title="Circumventricular organs" label="Circumventricular organs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276466" wikidata="Q5177925" url="?curid=276466" title="Uppland County">
<text>Uppland County, or &quot;Upplands län&quot;, was a county of the Swedish Empire from 1634 to 1641, and from 1654 to 1714. Between 1641 and 1654, and after 1714, it was split into the Uppsala County and the Stockholm County.

== Governors ==
*Lars Eriksson Sparre av Rossvik (1634-1641)
*Lars Claesson Fleming af Liebelitz (1654)
*Gustaf Persson Banér (1654-1656)
*Svante Svantesson Banér (1656-1660)
*Claes Rålamb (1660-1664)
*Göran Gyllenstierna (1664-1666)
*Axel Axelsson Lillie (1666-1679)
**Carl Gabriel Bååt (acting 1678–1679)
*Gustaf Lilliecrona (1679-1681)
*Lars Claesson Fleming af Liebelitz (1681)
*Fabian Wrede af Elimä (1681-1685)
*Olof Arvidsson Thegner (1685-1689)
*Jakob Gyllenborg (1689-1695)
*Johan Hoghusen (1695-1714)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5177925" start="0" end="14" title="Uppland County" label="Uppland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="51" end="57" title="Counties of Sweden" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="65" end="79" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104926" start="183" end="197" title="Uppsala County" label="Uppsala County"/>
<link wikidata="Q104231" start="206" end="222" title="Stockholm County" label="Stockholm County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="242" end="273" title="Lars Eriksson Sparre av Rossvik" label="Lars Eriksson Sparre av Rossvik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="287" end="321" title="Lars Claesson Fleming af Liebelitz" label="Lars Claesson Fleming af Liebelitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="330" end="350" title="Gustaf Persson Banér" label="Gustaf Persson Banér"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565241" start="364" end="387" title="Svante Svantesson Banér" label="Svante Svantesson Banér"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125016" start="401" end="413" title="Claes Rålamb (1622-1698)" label="Claes Rålamb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="427" end="446" title="Göran Gyllenstierna" label="Göran Gyllenstierna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="460" end="480" title="Axel Axelsson Lillie" label="Axel Axelsson Lillie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="495" end="512" title="Carl Gabriel Bååt" label="Carl Gabriel Bååt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="533" end="551" title="Gustaf Lilliecrona" label="Gustaf Lilliecrona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="565" end="599" title="Lars Claesson Fleming af Liebelitz" label="Lars Claesson Fleming af Liebelitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="608" end="629" title="Fabian Wrede af Elimä" label="Fabian Wrede af Elimä"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="643" end="665" title="Olof Arvidsson Thegner" label="Olof Arvidsson Thegner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="679" end="695" title="Jakob Gyllenborg" label="Jakob Gyllenborg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="709" end="723" title="Johan Hoghusen" label="Johan Hoghusen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276469" wikidata="Q459736" url="?curid=276469" title="Monika Schnarre">
<text>Monika Schnarre (born May 27, 1971) is a Canadian model, actress, television host, and real estate agent.

==Career==
In 1986, at age 15, Schnarre won the Ford Models &quot;Supermodel of the World&quot; contest, becoming the youngest model to ever win. She appeared on the cover of American &quot;Vogue&quot; and in the &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; Swimsuit Issue.

In 1989, she wrote a book about her modelling experiences titled &quot;Monika: Between You and Me&quot;.

She became an actress, appearing in over 50 film and television roles including &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; and &quot;Beastmaster&quot;, and made guest appearances on &quot;Beverly Hills 90210, Andromeda&quot;, &quot;Caroline in the City&quot;, &quot;The King of Queens&quot; and &quot;Cracked&quot;. Schnarre has also made a number of movies, with roles in &quot;Love on the Side&quot;, &quot;Waxwork II: Lost in Time&quot; and &quot;Junior&quot;. She played Oxanna Kristos in the video game &quot;Command &amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun&quot;.

Schnarre went on to study television broadcast journalism at University of California, Los Angeles, and was co-host of &quot;Celebrity RSVP&quot;, a Canadian entertainment news program. She also was a guest correspondent on &quot;etalk&quot; and &quot;ET Canada&quot;.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, Schnarre became a licensed real estate agent and joined the Collingwood, Ontario, office of the luxury realtor Engel &amp; Völkers.

==Personal life==

Schnarre attended Woburn Collegiate Institute to get her diploma and finished with honours. After that, she moved to California to pursue a career in acting.

She married real estate broker Storey Badger in 2010, and subsequently divorced.
Her son, Bode, was born on May 8, 2013.
==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459736" start="0" end="15" title="Monika Schnarre" label="Monika Schnarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374433" start="155" end="166" title="Ford Models" label="Ford Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="297" end="302" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="326" end="344" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="560" end="586" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q813047" start="603" end="614" title="BeastMaster (TV series)" label="Beastmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="658" end="677" title="Beverly Hills 90210" label="Beverly Hills 90210"/>
<link wikidata="Q512977" start="679" end="688" title="Andromeda (TV series)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044593" start="702" end="722" title="Caroline in the City" label="Caroline in the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q826594" start="736" end="754" title="The King of Queens" label="The King of Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538290" start="771" end="778" title="Cracked (Canadian TV series)" label="Cracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872432" start="849" end="865" title="Love on the Side" label="Love on the Side"/>
<link wikidata="" start="879" end="903" title="Waxwork II: Lost in Time" label="Waxwork II: Lost in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q129265" start="920" end="926" title="Junior (1994 film)" label="Junior"/>
<link wikidata="" start="984" end="1019" title="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun" label="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberian Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1089" end="1126" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059209" start="1258" end="1263" title="etalk" label="etalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1309" end="1326" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q519076" start="1355" end="1372" title="real estate agent" label="real estate agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501912" start="1388" end="1408" title="Collingwood, Ontario" label="Collingwood, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341765" start="1439" end="1458" title="Engel &amp;amp; Völkers" label="Engel &amp;amp; Völkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028969" start="1498" end="1525" title="Woburn Collegiate Institute" label="Woburn Collegiate Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276471" wikidata="Q262490" url="?curid=276471" title="Kathy Ireland">
<text>Kathleen Marie Ireland (born March 20, 1963) is an American actress, author, entrepreneur, fashion designer, philanthropist, and former fashion model. Ireland was a supermodel in the 1980s and 1990s, initially known for appearing in 13 consecutive &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; swimsuit issues, including three covers. In 1993, she founded a brand licensing company, kathy ireland Worldwide (kiWW), which has made her one of the wealthiest former models in the world. As a result of her career in business, she earned a $420 million personal fortune by 2015. In 2021 alone, her company generated retail sales of $3.1 billion. The brand became ranked number 15 in the world and Ireland entered the Licensing Hall of Fame.

==Early life==
Kathy Ireland was born in Glendale, California, the middle child of three daughters. Ireland&#x27;s parents are John and Barbara Ireland, a labor relationships executive and a nurse, respectively. The family moved to Santa Barbara, where they continue to reside today.

==Modeling, film and television career==

===Modeling===
When Ireland was sixteen in 1979, she was scouted at her high school by Elite Model Management.

She has appeared on covers for &quot;Vogue&quot;, &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;, &quot;Shape Fitness&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, &quot;Teen&quot; and &quot;Seventeen&quot;. &quot;Forbes&quot;, and &quot;Mademoiselle&quot;.

According to Ireland, a photographer once &quot;crossed the line&quot; with her when she was a teenager and wanted her to pose topless. She did not feel comfortable and he did not respect her &quot;no&quot;. He reportedly pushed her and got physical and she &quot;decked him&quot;.

During &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; swimsuit&#x27;s 50th Anniversary event, Ireland&#x27;s 1989 cover was awarded &quot;The Greatest Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Cover Of All Time&quot; by its publisher.

Ireland&#x27;s successful transformation from a cover girl to a multimillion-dollar entrepreneur has been explicitly cited as inspiring by several active fashion models. After appearing on the cover of &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; magazine in 2012, in a subsequent &quot;Today&quot; show interview, Kate Upton stated that she would like to follow in the footsteps of other cover girls, specifically Heidi Klum and Ireland. Three years later, in an interview with Matt Lauer, Hannah Jeter, the 2015 &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; swimsuit cover model, likewise stated that she &quot;would like to model [her] career after someone like Kathy Ireland.&quot;

===Film and television===
Ireland has appeared in a number of television and film roles. Her first film, 1988&#x27;s &quot;Alien from L.A.&quot;, was later featured during the fifth season of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot;.

Ireland&#x27;s other appearances include &quot;Melrose Place&quot;, &quot;Boy Meets World&quot;, &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot;, &quot;Muppets Tonight&quot;, &quot;Side Out&quot;, &quot;Mr. Destiny&quot;, &quot;Necessary Roughness&quot;, &quot;Mom and Dad Save the World&quot;, &quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Loaded Weapon 1&quot;, &quot;Once Upon a Christmas&quot;, and its sequel &quot;Twice Upon a Christmas&quot;.

She also participated in the ninth season of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;, where Ireland and her partner Tony Dovolani were the third couple eliminated in the second week of competition. Kathy has two TV series, &quot;Worldwide Business&quot; and &quot;Modern Living,&quot; which air on Fox Business and Bloomberg.

In 2016, she made an appearance in the sixth episode of the fourth season of &quot;The Profit&quot;, offering advice for the CEO of Murchison-Hume, Max Kater.

==Entrepreneurship==
===Kathy Ireland Worldwide===
Founded in 1993 as a brand marketing firm in an exclusive business relationship with Kmart, Kathy Ireland Worldwide (or kiWW, for short) became a global licensor after cutting its ties to the department store chain in 2003. In 2019, it stood at No. 26 on License Global&#x27;s &quot;Top 150 Global Licensors&quot; 2019 list with $2.6 billion in retail sales.

====1993–2003====
In 1993, after a line of socks bearing Ireland&#x27;s name sold 100 million pairs, Kmart took notice and gave Ireland her own clothing line.

Buoyed by the initial success, Ireland founded Kathy Ireland Worldwide, at the beginning a brand marketing firm, which she and her related trusts own in its entirety. The company concentrated on building its business in home products after 2003, when it cut its exclusive ties to Kmart.

====2003–2013====
 At the advice of Warren Buffett, Ireland&#x27;s friend and mentor, Kathy Ireland Worldwide entered into the home furnishings business. 

&quot;Forbes&quot; described Ireland as a &quot;prototype for model-turned-mogul&quot; in a 2006 article about the trend of &quot;modelpreneurs&quot;. By 2004, Kathy Ireland Worldwide was marketing products from 16 manufacturers—including those of Nourison and Pacific Coast Lighting—selling them in over 34,000 retail locations in as many as 14 countries.

Between 2005 and 2012, products bearing Ireland&#x27;s brand generated $2 billion in annual retail sales. In a May 2012 &quot;British Vogue&quot; article, Ireland was called the world&#x27;s richest model.

Ireland launched her line of wedding gowns by presenting a runway fashion show at the Festival of Brides held in Disneyland Resort in 2012. 

American Legend launched a Kathy Ireland collection in 2011. Ireland is chief designer for Royal Footwear &amp; Accessories (The RFA Group). She has established a relationship with manufacturer Gorham designing dinnerware, glassware and flatware.

Ireland designed collections of jewelry inspired by Elizabeth Taylor. Ireland launched a collection of pet products called Loved Ones. She teamed up with Worldwise Inc., a pet products company based in San Rafael, California, to create the pet collection.

====2013–present====
In 2013, Kathy Ireland Worldwide entered into a licensing agreement with rug manufacturer Nourison, to create a new collection of area rugs. 

In 2015, &quot;Forbes&quot; named Ireland one of America&#x27;s 50 most successful self-made women (as measured by their net worth) in its first ever list of the kind. Lending her name to several thousands of different products, her company was listed as the 26th biggest licensor in the world in 2019 by License Global.

In 2016, in association with Paul Raps New York, Yaron Turgeman from Taly Diamonds and Roland Krainz from Krainz Creations, Kathy Ireland launched &quot;Diamonds by Kathy Ireland&quot;, a collection of jewelry pieces. The collection premiered at the 2017 Luxury and JCK shows in Las Vegas.

In January 2017, Ireland teamed with Michael Amini to create a new home-furnishings line. The line debuted in October 2017, at the High Point Market trade show.
Also in January 2017, American Family Insurance tapped Kathy Ireland for an ambassador role. To launch their relationship, Ireland was the keynote speaker for their Dream Fearlessly campaign. In July 2018, Fox Business reported that Ireland had ventured into the shipping container business, partnering with SG Blocks, a company which has been designing and constructing container-based buildings and structures in the United States.

On May 8, 2019, singer and actress Vanessa Williams signed a management and partnership agreement with Kathy Ireland Worldwide.

In late 2019, Padlist launched with Kathy Ireland as the Chief Editor &amp; Brand Strategist alongside Co-founders Blake Van Leer and Lindsay Van Leer. In 2020, Ireland&#x27;s company entered into a partnership with Camping World to bring her collections of RV furniture to retail locations and online stores.

In February 2022 Kathy Ireland teamed up with Bagatelle for Outerwear, Dresses and Denim

===Other projects===
====Record label====

In April 2021, Marilyn McCoo and Billy Davis Jr. released a new album called &quot;Blackbird Lennon-McCartney Icons&quot; for the first time in 30 years under Ireland&#x27;s record label EE1 in partnership with BMG. It was produced by Nic Mendoza. The album hit No 1 on its first day on the iTunes R&amp;B Album chart. 

====Fitness videos====
Since 1994, Ireland has published several fitness videos that led to her design of athletic apparel and launched her brand licensing of fitness equipment.

====Writing====
Ireland has written numerous books, most of them for children. In 2020, Ireland released her first novel &quot;Fashion Jungle&quot; with author Rachel Van Dyken. The novel is based on events from her career in the modeling industry.

====Public speaking====
Ireland spoke at the fourth Youth Assembly at the United Nations Headquarters on August 13, 2007, encouraging young people to engage in activities aimed at ending poverty. She delivered the keynote at Licensing International Expo 2012 in Las Vegas.

Ireland was a key speaker at the 2012 AIPAC policy conference in Washington, DC, where she expressed her support for the Israeli people and warned against the dangers posed by the lack of knowledge about the history of the land of Israel.

==Philanthropy==
Kathy Ireland&#x27;s charity work and philanthropic activities have included pro bono work for the non-profit organizations March of Dimes, PTA, Feed the Children and City of Hope.

In addition, Ireland has lent her estates to charitable organizations such as the US Marine Corps&#x27; Toys for Tots to generate funds for charity. According to Major Bill Grein of the US Marine Corps, Ireland&#x27;s company and her book business partner Bendon Publishing International donated $10 million to supplement the 2013 annual Toys for Tots gathering and distribution of Christmas gifts for millions of at-risk children and youths.

On World AIDS Day 2017, Ireland donated $100,000 to the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation (ETAF).

===Activism and ambassador roles===
Ireland is an ambassador for 9-1-1 For Kids, a non-profit organization that specializes in making educational materials to assist emergency dispatchers in teaching children the proper use of 9-1-1 and other general emergency preparedness tips. In an effort to encourage equality in women&#x27;s athletics, Ireland has hosted several LPGA Golf Tournaments, including the Kathy Ireland Championship from 1999 to 2001 and the Kathy Ireland Greens.com LPGA Classic in 2000. On October 15, 2009, Ireland became an international ambassador for the Friends of Sheba Medical Center. The following year, she traveled to Israel to film a promotional documentary for the center; titled &quot;Holy Land Heroes,&quot; the film aims to reveal the work done at Sheba with wounded soldiers and terror victims. In 2019, Ireland was added as the first woman to the board of NFL Players Association. Ireland also joined the Women&#x27;s National Basketball Players Association&#x27;s (WNBPA) Board of Advocates that same year. Kathy Ireland joined the National Pediatric Cancer Foundation in 2020 as International Youth Chair. In March 2022, Ireland launched the National Pediatric Cancer Foundation&#x27;s “Music Funds the Cure’ and joined NPCF&#x27;s International Youth Chair.

===Honors and awards===
On June 23, 2011, Ireland was honored by the Anti-Defamation League with the American Heritage Award, presented by the National Home Furnishings Industry. In 2012, Ireland received the Messenger of Peace Award at the Jewish National Fund Tree of Life Gala. The same year, Ireland was presented with an honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters by the California State University, which stated that she &quot;generously uses her power and influence to benefit others, supporting social causes including empowering women, supporting young girls through mentoring, and providing opportunities for girls and women at risk.&quot; Ireland has been nominated as one of 17 finalists for the first Global Business &amp; Interfaith Peace Award given by the Religious Freedom &amp; Business Foundation (a U.S.-based nonprofit), and the United Nations Global Compact Business for Peace initiative. On October 13, 2017, at the &quot;Meet Kathy Ireland Event&quot; hosted by Amini, Ireland was presented with the key to the city of High Point, North Carolina. On July 15, 2021, Kathy Ireland was awarded the inaugural Business IRF Champion Award at the IRF Summit in Washington DC.

==Personal life ==
Ireland married physician Greg Olsen in 1988, and they have three children: Erik, Lily and Chloe. She is a devout Christian and an anti-abortion advocate.

===Friendship with Elizabeth Taylor===
Elizabeth Taylor and Ireland had a close friendship and attended public events together. After Ireland received outspoken criticism for her uneven performance as an on-air host of ABC&#x27;s 2010 pre-Oscar special, Taylor publicly defended Ireland; &quot;I have never seen anyone epitomize glamour and grace and professionalism like she did.&quot; Ireland publicly credits Taylor as her mentor and for part of her success in life, business, design and philanthropy. Taylor bequeathed her Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award to Ireland, in addition to leaving her a diamond jewelry collection, which Ireland wore at the 2018 American Heart Association&#x27;s &quot;Go Red for Women&quot; Dress Show.

==Filmography==
===Films===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
* 
*Kathy Ireland on WISH-TV</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262490" start="0" end="22" title="Kathy Ireland" label="Kathleen Marie Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="254" end="272" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="764" end="784" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="955" end="968" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q616374" start="1137" end="1159" title="Elite Model Management" label="Elite Model Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="1199" end="1204" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="1218" end="1230" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q327416" start="1244" end="1257" title="Shape (magazine)" label="Shape Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="1271" end="1291" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711354" start="1305" end="1309" title="Teen magazine" label="Teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296499" start="1326" end="1335" title="Seventeen (American magazine)" label="Seventeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="1343" end="1361" title="Forbes (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q738294" start="1367" end="1391" title="Mademoiselle (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mademoiselle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="2091" end="2109" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q231536" start="2184" end="2194" title="Kate Upton" label="Kate Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60036" start="2284" end="2294" title="Heidi Klum" label="Heidi Klum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100609" start="2348" end="2358" title="Matt Lauer" label="Matt Lauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648816" start="2360" end="2372" title="Hannah Jeter" label="Hannah Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124065" start="2664" end="2679" title="Alien from L.A." label="Alien from L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="2739" end="2767" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q550238" start="2823" end="2836" title="Melrose Place" label="Melrose Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q509485" start="2850" end="2865" title="Boy Meets World" label="Boy Meets World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="2879" end="2901" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426628" start="2915" end="2930" title="Muppets Tonight" label="Muppets Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508279" start="2944" end="2952" title="Side Out" label="Side Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951422" start="2966" end="2977" title="Mr. Destiny" label="Mr. Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q676500" start="2991" end="3010" title="Necessary Roughness (film)" label="Necessary Roughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q493865" start="3024" end="3050" title="Mom and Dad Save the World" label="Mom and Dad Save the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q922512" start="3064" end="3103" title="Loaded Weapon 1" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Loaded Weapon 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091806" start="3117" end="3138" title="Once Upon a Christmas (film)" label="Once Upon a Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857879" start="3167" end="3189" title="Twice Upon a Christmas" label="Twice Upon a Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215620" start="3249" end="3271" title="Dancing with the Stars (U.S. season 9)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822251" start="3309" end="3322" title="Tony Dovolani" label="Tony Dovolani"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076395" start="3603" end="3613" title="The Profit (TV series)" label="The Profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="3816" end="3821" title="Kmart (United States)" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="3923" end="3945" title="department store chain" label="department store chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="4192" end="4197" title="Kmart (United States)" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="4575" end="4589" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="4701" end="4707" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351976" start="5179" end="5192" title="British Vogue" label="British Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229066" start="5373" end="5390" title="Disneyland Resort" label="Disneyland Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033907" start="5402" end="5417" title="American Legend" label="American Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q48386771" start="5596" end="5602" title="Gorham Manufacturing Company" label="Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="5702" end="5718" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="6086" end="6092" title="Forbes (magazine)" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="6672" end="6681" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756204" start="6815" end="6832" title="High Point Market" label="High Point Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="6833" end="6843" title="trade show" label="trade show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743730" start="6867" end="6892" title="American Family Insurance" label="American Family Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735740" start="7051" end="7063" title="Fox Business Network" label="Fox Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180158" start="7108" end="7126" title="shipping container" label="shipping container"/>
<link wikidata="Q202801" start="7315" end="7331" title="Vanessa Williams" label="Vanessa Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028383" start="7625" end="7638" title="Camping World" label="Camping World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763597" start="7868" end="7881" title="Marilyn McCoo" label="Marilyn McCoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912436" start="7886" end="7901" title="Billy Davis Jr." label="Billy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q109311694" start="7936" end="7968" title="Blackbird Lennon-McCartney Icons" label="Blackbird Lennon-McCartney Icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="8064" end="8067" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q465328" start="8915" end="8920" title="AIPAC" label="AIPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875556" start="8998" end="9012" title="Israeli people" label="Israeli people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696109" start="9085" end="9114" title="History of Israel" label="history of the land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q127537" start="9211" end="9219" title="pro bono" label="pro bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q751572" start="9258" end="9272" title="March of Dimes" label="March of Dimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q706242" start="9274" end="9277" title="Parent-Teacher Association" label="PTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441193" start="9279" end="9296" title="Feed the Children" label="Feed the Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123723" start="9301" end="9313" title="City of Hope National Medical Center" label="City of Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="9398" end="9413" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071355" start="9420" end="9433" title="Toys for Tots" label="Toys for Tots"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710604" start="9572" end="9603" title="Bendon Publishing International" label="Bendon Publishing International"/>
<link wikidata="Q192373" start="9763" end="9777" title="World AIDS Day" label="World AIDS Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="10227" end="10231" title="LPGA" label="LPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377241" start="10264" end="10290" title="Kathy Ireland Championship" label="Kathy Ireland Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079118" start="10317" end="10354" title="Kathy Ireland Greens.com LPGA Classic" label="Kathy Ireland Greens.com LPGA Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915012" start="10447" end="10467" title="Sheba Medical Center" label="Sheba Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="11225" end="11247" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q696658" start="11397" end="11417" title="Jewish National Fund" label="Jewish National Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189894" start="11418" end="11435" title="Jewish National Fund Tree of Life Award" label="Tree of Life Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="11526" end="11553" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387974" start="12000" end="12029" title="United Nations Global Compact" label="United Nations Global Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575920" start="12170" end="12189" title="List of Keys to the City in the United States" label="the key to the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q631194" start="12193" end="12219" title="High Point, North Carolina" label="High Point, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="12477" end="12486" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="12494" end="12507" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="12558" end="12574" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="12738" end="12741" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q202051" start="13046" end="13078" title="Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award" label="Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="13179" end="13205" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950923" start="13355" end="13362" title="WISH-TV" label="WISH-TV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276485" wikidata="Q65296045" url="?curid=276485" title="Polariton">
<text>In physics, polaritons are bosonic quasiparticles resulting from strong coupling of electromagnetic waves (photon) with an electric or magnetic dipole-carrying excitation (state) of solid or liquid matter (such as a phonon, plasmon, or an exciton). Polaritons describe the crossing of the dispersion of light with any interacting resonance. 

They are an expression of level repulsion (quantum phenomenon), also known as the avoided crossing principle. To this extent polaritons can be thought of as the new normal modes of a given material or structure arising from the strong coupling of the bare modes, which are the photon and the dipolar oscillation. Bosonic quasiparticles are distinct from polarons (fermionic quasiparticle), which is an electron plus an attached phonon cloud.

Polaritons violate the weak coupling limit and the associated photons do not propagate freely in crystals. Instead, propagation speed depends strongly on the frequency of the photon. 

Significant experimental results on various aspects of exciton-polaritons have been gained in the case of copper(I) oxide.

== History ==
Oscillations in ionized gases were observed by Lewi Tonks and Irving Langmuir in 1929. Polaritons were first considered theoretically by Kirill Borisovich Tolpygo. They were termed light-excitons in Soviet scientific literature. That name was suggested by Solomon Isaakovich Pekar, but the term &quot;polariton,&quot; proposed by John Hopfield, was adopted. 

Coupled states of electromagnetic waves and phonons in ionic crystals and their dispersion relation, now known as phonon polaritons, were obtained by Kirill Tolpygo in 1950 and independently by Huang Kun in 1951. Collective interactions were published by David Pines and David Bohm in 1952, and plasmons were described in silver by Herbert Fröhlich and H. Pelzer in 1955. 

R.H Ritchie predicted surface plasmons in 1957, then Ritchie and H.B. Eldridge published experiments and predictions of emitted photons from irradiated metal foils in 1962. Otto first published on surface plasmon-polaritons in 1968. Room-temperature superfluidity of polaritons was observed in 2016 by Giovanni Lerario et al., at CNR NANOTEC Institute of Nanotechnology, using an organic microcavity supporting stable Frenkel exciton-polaritons at room temperature. 

In 2018, scientists reported the discovery of a new three-photon form of light, which may involve polaritons and could be useful in quantum computers.

In 2024 researchers reported ultrastrong coupling of the PEPI layer in a Fabry-Pérot microcavity consisting of two partially reflective mirrors. The PEPI layer is a two-dimensional perovskite made of (PEA)2PbI4 (phenethylammonium lead iodide). Placing a PEPI layer within a Fabry-Pérot microcavity forms polaritons and allows control of exciton-exciton annihilation, increasing solar cell efficiency and ED intensity.

==Types==
A polariton is the result of the combination of a photon with a polar excitation in a material. The following are types of polaritons:
* Phonon polaritons result from coupling of an infrared photon with an optical phonon 
* Exciton polaritons result from coupling of visible light with an exciton
* Intersubband polaritons result from coupling of an infrared or terahertz photon with an intersubband excitation
* Surface plasmon polaritons result from coupling of surface plasmons with light (the wavelength depends on the substance and its geometry)
* Bragg polaritons (&quot;Braggoritons&quot;) result from coupling of Bragg photon modes with bulk excitons
* Plexcitons result from coupling plasmons with excitons
* Magnon polaritons result from coupling of magnon with light
* Pi-tons result from coupling of alternating charge or spin fluctuations with light, distinctly different from magnon or exciton polaritons 
* Cavity polaritons

==See also==
*Atomic coherence
*Polariton laser
*Polariton superfluid
*Polaritonics

== References ==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
* YouTube animation explaining what is polariton in a semiconductor micro-resonator.
* Description of the experimental research on polariton fluids at the Institute of Nanotechnologies.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65296045" start="12" end="22" title="Polariton" label="polaritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="27" end="32" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="35" end="48" title="quasiparticle" label="quasiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="84" end="104" title="electromagnetic wave" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="144" end="150" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361503" start="160" end="170" title="Excitation (magnetic)" label="excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="216" end="222" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58392" start="224" end="231" title="plasmon" label="plasmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858289" start="239" end="246" title="exciton" label="exciton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="289" end="299" title="dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="330" end="339" title="resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535090" start="369" end="384" title="level repulsion" label="level repulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="386" end="393" title="Quantum mechanics" label="quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976990" start="425" end="451" title="Avoided crossing" label="avoided crossing principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="508" end="520" title="normal modes" label="normal modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="656" end="661" title="Boson" label="Boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074844" start="697" end="705" title="polaron" label="polarons"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="707" end="714" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="771" end="777" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="944" end="953" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419659" start="1026" end="1044" title="Exciton-polariton" label="exciton-polaritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q407709" start="1077" end="1092" title="copper(I) oxide" label="copper(I) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536150" start="1156" end="1166" title="Lewi Tonks" label="Lewi Tonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q184286" start="1171" end="1186" title="Irving Langmuir" label="Irving Langmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459848" start="1246" end="1271" title="Kirill Borisovich Tolpygo" label="Kirill Borisovich Tolpygo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348064" start="1365" end="1389" title="Solomon Isaakovich Pekar" label="Solomon Isaakovich Pekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q391237" start="1439" end="1452" title="John Hopfield" label="John Hopfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459848" start="1619" end="1633" title="Kirill Tolpygo" label="Kirill Tolpygo"/>
<link wikidata="Q713524" start="1663" end="1672" title="Huang Kun" label="Huang Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176136" start="1724" end="1735" title="David Pines" label="David Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="1740" end="1750" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q58392" start="1764" end="1771" title="plasmon" label="plasmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q90578" start="1801" end="1817" title="Herbert Fröhlich" label="Herbert Fröhlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q902464" start="2173" end="2184" title="National Research Council (Italy)" label="CNR NANOTEC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2261" end="2287" title="Exciton#Frenkel exciton" label="Frenkel exciton-polaritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="2384" end="2389" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="2443" end="2459" title="quantum computer" label="quantum computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920437" start="2520" end="2524" title="Pepi (disambiguation)" label="PEPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q409787" start="2644" end="2654" title="perovskite" label="perovskite"/>
<link wikidata="Q408805" start="2693" end="2704" title="lead iodide" label="lead iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359945" start="2737" end="2760" title="Fabry–Pérot interferometer" label="Fabry-Pérot microcavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="2942" end="2948" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953253" start="3029" end="3046" title="Phonon polaritons" label="Phonon polaritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3074" end="3082" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="3106" end="3112" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419659" start="3116" end="3134" title="Exciton-polaritons" label="Exciton polaritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="3159" end="3172" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q858289" start="3181" end="3188" title="exciton" label="exciton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057179" start="3191" end="3213" title="Intersubband polariton" label="Intersubband polariton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3242" end="3250" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q647887" start="3254" end="3263" title="Terahertz radiation" label="terahertz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3279" end="3302" title="intersubband excitation" label="intersubband excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916346" start="3305" end="3331" title="Surface plasmon polaritons" label="Surface plasmon polaritons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151829" start="3356" end="3371" title="surface plasmon" label="surface plasmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q900150" start="3513" end="3531" title="Photonic crystal" label="Bragg photon modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q858289" start="3542" end="3549" title="exciton" label="exciton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456714" start="3553" end="3562" title="Plexciton" label="Plexciton"/>
<link wikidata="Q58392" start="3585" end="3592" title="plasmon" label="plasmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377101" start="3652" end="3658" title="magnon" label="magnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817326" start="3847" end="3863" title="Atomic coherence" label="Atomic coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359537" start="3865" end="3880" title="Polariton laser" label="Polariton laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209143" start="3882" end="3902" title="Polariton superfluid" label="Polariton superfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209142" start="3904" end="3916" title="Polaritonics" label="Polaritonics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276489" wikidata="Q262116" url="?curid=276489" title="Kate Mosse">
<text>Katherine Louise Mosse (born 1961) is a British novelist, non-fiction and short story writer and broadcaster. She is best known for her 2005 novel &quot;Labyrinth&quot;, which has been translated into more than 37 languages. She co-founded in 1996 the annual award for best UK-published English-language novel by a woman that is now known as the Women&#x27;s Prize for Fiction.

== Early life and career ==

Mosse was born in Chichester, and raised in Fishbourne, West Sussex, the eldest of three sisters born to a solicitor, Richard (1920–2011) and Barbara (1931–2014). Mosse&#x27;s aunt was involved in the campaign for the ordination of women and her grandfather was a vicar. She was educated at Chichester High School For Girls and New College, Oxford, from where she graduated in 1984 with a BA (Hons) in English. After leaving university, she spent seven years working in publishing in London for Hodder &amp; Stoughton, then Century, and finally as an editorial director at Hutchinson, part of the Random House Group. She was a member of the National Union of Journalists (NUJ) and Women in Publishing.

She left publishing in 1992, for a writing career beginning with the non-fiction, &quot;Becoming a Mother&quot;.

== Career ==

=== Early writing and the Languedoc Trilogy ===

Although best known for her adventure and ghost fiction, inspired by real history, Mosse&#x27;s first two works were non-fiction. &quot;Becoming A Mother&quot; (in its seventh edition) was published by Virago in 1993, followed in 1995 by &quot;The House: Behind the Scenes at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden&quot;, published by BBC Books to accompany the BBC 2 &quot;The House&quot;. She then wrote two contemporary novels. &quot;Eskimo Kissing&quot;, about a young, adopted woman searching for her background, was well received when it was published in 1996. This was followed in 1998 by the biotech thriller, &quot;Crucifix Lane&quot;.

The first of the Languedoc Trilogy, &quot;Labyrinth&quot;, appeared in 2005. A number one bestseller internationally, it has sold millions of copies and was the bestselling title in the UK for 2006. It also won the Richard &amp; Judy Best Book at the British Book Awards 2006 and was named as one of Waterstones Top 25 books of the past 25 years. A &quot;Labyrinth&quot; miniseries was broadcast in 2013.

In October 2007, the second novel in the trilogy, &quot;Sepulchre&quot;, was published. A tale of haunting and Tarot set in fin-de-siècle and 20th-century France, it was also a number one bestseller in the UK and an international bestseller. While Mosse was researching the third and final novel in the trilogy, she released her novel &quot;The Winter Ghosts&quot; in 2009, based on a novella she previously contributed to the Quick Reads Initiative. Film rights have been sold to Ruby Films. &quot;Citadel&quot;, the third novel in the trilogy, came out in 2012 and was also an international bestseller. Inspired by the real history of the resistance in Carcassonne during World War II, it tells the story of an imagined all-female resistance unit.

In October 2013, Mosse&#x27;s collection of short stories, &quot;The Mistletoe Bride &amp; Other Haunting Tales&quot;, was published – a collection of ghost stories inspired by traditional folk tales and country legends from England and France, throughout Sussex, Brittany and the Languedoc.

In September 2014, Mosse published her gothic thriller &quot;The Taxidermist&#x27;s Daughter&quot;, set in 1912 in Fishbourne and Chichester.

In June 2019, Mosse released &quot;The Burning Chambers&quot;, the first of a series of novels, beginning in the French Wars of Religion, spanning 300 years from 1562 in Carcassonne, via Amsterdam to 1862 in Franschhoek, Western Cape, South Africa. The second in the series, &quot;The City of Tears&quot;, was published in 2020.

=== Other writing and plays ===

Mosse has also contributed a number of essays and stories to anthologies and collections, including &quot;Modern Delight&quot; (a book inspired by J. B. Priestley&#x27;s 1949 book &quot;Delight&quot;) published by Waterstone&#x27;s to raise money for Dyslexia Action and the London Library; &quot;Little Black Dress&quot; (edited by Susie Maguire); &quot;Midsummer Nights&quot; (edited by Jeanette Winterson), a collection to celebrate the 75th anniversary of Glyndebourne Opera House in East Sussex; &quot;The Best Little Book Club in Town&quot; and &quot;The Coffee Shop Book Club&quot; in aid of Breast Cancer Care and &quot;Why Willows Weep&quot; (edited by Tracy Chevalier) in aid of the Woodland Trust (2011), &quot;Write&quot; (Guardian Books), &quot;Virago at 40&quot; (edited by Lennie Goodings), &quot;Fifty Shades of Feminism&quot; (edited by Lisa Appignanesi, Rachel Holmes and Susie Orbach), &quot;Writing Historical Fiction&quot; (edited by Celia Brayfield and Duncan Sprott) and &quot;Anthology of World War I Literature for Children&quot; (edited by Michael Morpurgo) in 2014, in aid of the Royal British Legion and SSAFA.

Mosse has also written introductions to reissues of a number of works of fiction and non-fiction including &quot;Writers&#x27; &amp; Artists Yearbook 2009&quot;, &quot;Captain Blood&quot; by Rafael Sabatini, &quot;We Need to Talk About Kevin&quot; by Lionel Shriver, &quot;Treasure Island&quot; by Robert Louis Stevenson, &quot;Goldfinger&quot; by Ian Fleming, &quot;Night Falls on the City&quot; by Sarah Gainham, &quot;A Chichester Miscellany&quot; by Phil Hewitt, &quot;Chichester Harbour: England&#x27;s Coastal Gem&quot; by Liz Sagues, &quot;One Hundred Great Plays by Women&quot; by Lucy Kerbel.

In 2012, she published an anniversary book to celebrate 50 years of the Chichester Festival Theatre. &quot;Chichester Festival Theatre at Fifty&quot; is published by the crowd-funding publishing company Unbound.

Her first play, &quot;Syrinx&quot;, was part of the SkyArts Theatre Live project, devised by Sandi Toksvig. First performed in July 2009, it won a broadcasting press publicity award that same year. Mosse&#x27;s second play &quot;Endpapers&quot; was part of the Bush Theatre&#x27;s 2011 project &quot;Sixty-Six Books&quot;. Her monologue was inspired by the Book of Revelation, the final book in the Bible.

In September 2020, Mosse&#x27;s own adaptation of her 2014 gothic thriller The Taxidermist&#x27;s Daughter, set in 1912 in Fishbourne and Chichester, will première at Chichester Festival Theatre.

=== Journalism and broadcasting ===

Mosse writes for various newspapers and magazines, including &quot;The Times&quot;, &quot;Telegraph&quot;, &quot;Guardian&quot; and &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; and from 2008 to 2011 she wrote a regular column for the book trade magazine, &quot;The Bookseller&quot;. A regular guest on UK radio and television, she presented the BBC Four literary chat show &quot;Readers&#x27; and Writers&#x27; Roadshow&quot; and appears on the &quot;BBC Breakfast News&quot; and BBC2&#x27;s &quot;The Review Show&quot;. She is a guest presenter for &quot;A Good Read&quot; on BBC Radio 4. 

Mosse was the captain of the winning team of alumni from New College, Oxford, on &quot;Christmas Celebrity University Challenge&quot; in 2012. The team included the novelists Rachel Johnson and Patrick Gale.In January 2021, Kate Mosse launched #WomanInHistory, a global campaign of celebration inviting people to nominate a woman from history they thought should be better known.

== Honours and awards ==
Mosse was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2013 Birthday Honours for services to literature and Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2024 New Year Honours for services to literature, women and charity.

In 2000, she was named European Woman of Achievement for her contribution to the arts. In 2006, she was nominated for a Quill Award and won the British Book Awards &quot;Best Read of the Year&quot; for &quot;Labyrinth&quot;. She holds an Honorary MA from the University of Chichester. She was also the 2012 winner of &quot;The Spirit of Everywoman Award&quot;, awarded by NatWest. In 2013, she was named as one of publishing Top 100 most influential people by the &quot;Bookseller&quot; and has appeared in every list since. She was named one of London&#x27;s 1000 most influential people in the arts in 2013 by the &quot;Evening Standard&quot;.

In 2019, she was appointed visiting professor of Contemporary Literature and Creative Writing at the University of Chichester.

==Personal life==
She is married to playwright Greg Mosse and has two adult children.

In 1989, she and her husband bought a small house in Carcassonne in the Languedoc region of southwest France, the inspiration for her bestselling trilogy of historical timeslip novels. She moved back to her home town of Chichester in 1998 when she became the first female executive director of Chichester Festival Theatre.

== Media ==
In June 2023 Mosse was the invited guest on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s long running radio series Desert Island Discs hosted by Lauren Laverne.

== Bibliography ==

=== Fiction ===
* &quot;Eskimo Kissing&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Crucifix Lane&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Cave&quot; (Quick Reads Initiative novella, 2009) 
* &quot;The Winter Ghosts&quot; (2009)
* &quot;The Mistletoe Bride &amp; Other Haunting Tales&quot; (short stories, 2013)
* &quot;The Taxidermist&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (2014)

==== Languedoc trilogy ====
# &quot;Labyrinth&quot; (2005)
# &quot;Sepulchre&quot; (2007)
# &quot;Citadel&quot; (2012)

==== The Burning Chambers series ====
# &quot;The Burning Chambers&quot; (2018)
# &quot;The City of Tears&quot; (2020)
# &quot;The Ghost Ship&quot; (2023)
# &quot;The Map of Bones&quot; (2024)

=== Non-fiction ===

* &quot;Becoming a Mother&quot; (1993)
* &quot;The House: Behind the Scenes at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Chichester Festival Theatre at Fifty&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Warrior Queens &amp; Quiet Revolutionaries: How Women (Also) Built the World&quot; (2022)

=== Plays ===

* &quot;Syrinx&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Endpapers&quot; (2011)
* &quot;The Taxidermist&#x27;s Daughter&quot; – adaptation (2020)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Interview with Martin Goodman at the Philip Larkin Centre
* Listen to Kate Mosse talking about &quot;Sepulchre&quot; on The Interview Online
* Audio: Kate Mosse in conversation on the BBC World Service discussion programme &quot;The Forum&quot;
* Interview on Meet The Writers, Monocle 24 with Georgina Godwin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262116" start="0" end="22" title="Kate Mosse" label="Katherine Louise Mosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="48" end="56" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q947873" start="97" end="108" title="Television presenter" label="broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214567" start="153" end="162" title="Labyrinth (novel)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18884" start="346" end="376" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Prize for Fiction" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207639" start="426" end="436" title="Chichester" label="Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420608" start="452" end="475" title="Fishbourne, West Sussex" label="Fishbourne, West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="515" end="524" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096003" start="699" end="731" title="Chichester High School For Girls" label="Chichester High School For Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="736" end="755" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="903" end="925" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="932" end="939" title="Random House#Divisions and imprints" label="Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q378809" start="981" end="991" title="Hutchinson (publisher)" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="1001" end="1023" title="the Random House Group" label="the Random House Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843420" start="1049" end="1078" title="National Union of Journalists" label="National Union of Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167281" start="1089" end="1108" title="Women in Publishing" label="Women in Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q370233" start="1490" end="1496" title="Virago Press" label="Virago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834796" start="1621" end="1630" title="BBC Books" label="BBC Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="1648" end="1653" title="BBC Two" label="BBC 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740498" start="1660" end="1669" title="The House (television documentary)" label="The House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323530" start="2147" end="2165" title="Richard &amp;amp; Judy" label="Richard &amp;amp; Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575072" start="2183" end="2202" title="British Book Awards" label="British Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q151779" start="2232" end="2243" title="Waterstones" label="Waterstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393783" start="2281" end="2302" title="Labyrinth (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Labyrinth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452387" start="2394" end="2403" title="Sepulchre (Kate Mosse novel)" label="Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q265581" start="2462" end="2475" title="fin-de-siècle" label="fin-de-siècle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807655" start="2679" end="2696" title="The Winter Ghosts" label="The Winter Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271711" start="2765" end="2787" title="Quick Reads Initiative" label="Quick Reads Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="2993" end="3004" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3012" end="3024" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="3345" end="3351" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="3353" end="3361" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969664" start="3443" end="3474" title="The Taxidermist&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="The Taxidermist&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420608" start="3497" end="3507" title="Fishbourne, West Sussex" label="Fishbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q207639" start="3512" end="3522" title="Chichester" label="Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="3712" end="3721" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025086" start="3733" end="3744" title="Franschhoek" label="Franschhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q443528" start="4035" end="4050" title="J. B. Priestley" label="J. B. Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q151779" start="4102" end="4119" title="Waterstone&amp;#x27;s" label="Waterstone&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319473" start="4139" end="4154" title="Dyslexia Action" label="Dyslexia Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q269192" start="4163" end="4177" title="London Library" label="London Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q233584" start="4277" end="4295" title="Jeanette Winterson" label="Jeanette Winterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572925" start="4348" end="4372" title="Glyndebourne Opera House" label="Glyndebourne Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="4376" end="4387" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959766" start="4487" end="4505" title="Breast Cancer Care" label="Breast Cancer Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q232212" start="4550" end="4565" title="Tracy Chevalier" label="Tracy Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q742394" start="4581" end="4595" title="Woodland Trust" label="Woodland Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557782" start="4742" end="4758" title="Lisa Appignanesi" label="Lisa Appignanesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505683" start="4778" end="4790" title="Susie Orbach" label="Susie Orbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057977" start="4843" end="4858" title="Celia Brayfield" label="Celia Brayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442421" start="4863" end="4876" title="Duncan Sprott" label="Duncan Sprott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387224" start="4954" end="4970" title="Michael Morpurgo" label="Michael Morpurgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621811" start="4995" end="5015" title="Royal British Legion" label="Royal British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228470" start="5020" end="5025" title="SSAFA" label="SSAFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113007" start="5141" end="5182" title="Writers&amp;#x27; &amp;amp; Artists&amp;#x27; Yearbook" label="Writers&amp;#x27; &amp;amp; Artists Yearbook 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621164" start="5196" end="5209" title="Captain Blood (novel)" label="Captain Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q345104" start="5219" end="5234" title="Rafael Sabatini" label="Rafael Sabatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107910" start="5242" end="5269" title="We Need to Talk About Kevin" label="We Need to Talk About Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622232" start="5279" end="5293" title="Lionel Shriver" label="Lionel Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="5301" end="5316" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="5326" end="5348" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777426" start="5356" end="5366" title="Goldfinger (novel)" label="Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="5376" end="5387" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975370" start="5395" end="5418" title="Night Falls on the City" label="Night Falls on the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422323" start="5428" end="5441" title="Sarah Gainham" label="Sarah Gainham"/>
<link wikidata="Q293020" start="5937" end="5950" title="Sandi Toksvig" label="Sandi Toksvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001421" start="6105" end="6117" title="Bush Theatre" label="Bush Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752803" start="6144" end="6159" title="Sixty-Six Books" label="Sixty-Six Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="6201" end="6219" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095994" start="6418" end="6445" title="Chichester Festival Theatre" label="Chichester Festival Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="6552" end="6561" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="6575" end="6584" title="The Telegraph (UK)" label="Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6598" end="6606" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="6623" end="6639" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719356" start="6730" end="6744" title="The Bookseller" label="The Bookseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="6814" end="6822" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959457" start="6920" end="6938" title="BBC Breakfast News" label="BBC Breakfast News"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="6949" end="6953" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760530" start="6967" end="6982" title="The Review Show" label="The Review Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657125" start="7025" end="7036" title="A Good Read" label="A Good Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7046" end="7057" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279284" start="7236" end="7250" title="Rachel Johnson" label="Rachel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369465" start="7255" end="7267" title="Patrick Gale" label="Patrick Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="7487" end="7529" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954072" start="7543" end="7564" title="2013 Birthday Honours" label="2013 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="7596" end="7640" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255705" start="7654" end="7675" title="2024 New Year Honours" label="2024 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271984" start="7844" end="7855" title="Quill Award" label="Quill Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575072" start="7868" end="7887" title="British Book Awards" label="British Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551577" start="7983" end="8007" title="University of Chichester" label="University of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="8346" end="8362" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551577" start="8472" end="8496" title="University of Chichester" label="University of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="8639" end="8650" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="8658" end="8667" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="8754" end="8762" title="time travel" label="timeslip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095994" start="8880" end="8907" title="Chichester Festival Theatre" label="Chichester Festival Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="8966" end="8969" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="8970" end="8977" title="BBC Radio 4" label="Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="9011" end="9030" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500287" start="9041" end="9055" title="Lauren Laverne" label="Lauren Laverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271711" start="9189" end="9211" title="Quick Reads Initiative" label="Quick Reads Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807655" start="9236" end="9253" title="The Winter Ghosts" label="The Winter Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214567" start="9440" end="9449" title="Labyrinth (novel)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452387" start="9471" end="9480" title="Sepulchre (Mosse novel)" label="Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775772" start="10221" end="10235" title="Martin J. Goodman" label="Martin Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734915" start="10429" end="10450" title="The Forum (BBC World Service)" label="&amp;quot;The Forum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895312" start="10484" end="10494" title="Monocle 24" label="Monocle 24"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276495" wikidata="Q1109680" url="?curid=276495" title="Small business">
<text>Small businesses are types of corporations, partnerships, or sole proprietorships which have a small number of employees and/or less annual revenue than a regular-sized business or corporation. Businesses are defined as &quot;small&quot; in terms of being able to apply for government support and qualify for preferential tax policy. The qualifications vary depending on the country and industry. Small businesses range from fifteen employees under the Australian &quot;Fair Work Act 2009&quot;, fifty employees according to the definition used by the European Union, and fewer than five hundred employees to qualify for many U.S. Small Business Administration programs. While small businesses can be classified according to other methods, such as annual revenues, shipments, sales, assets, annual gross, net revenue, net profits, the number of employees is one of the most widely used measures.

Small businesses in many countries include service or retail operations such as convenience stores or tradespeople. Some professionals operate as small businesses, such as lawyers, accountants, or medical doctors (although these professionals can also work for large organizations or companies). Small businesses vary a great deal in terms of size, revenues, and regulatory authorization, both within a country and from country to country. Some small businesses, such as a home accounting business, may only require a business license. On the other hand, other small businesses, such as day cares, retirement homes, and restaurants serving liquor are more heavily regulated and may require inspection and certification from various government authorities.

==Characteristics==
Researchers and analysts of small or owner-managed businesses generally behave as if nominal organizational forms (e.g., partnership, sole-trader, or corporation), and the consequent legal and accounting boundaries of owner-managed firms are consistently meaningful. However, owner-managers often do not distinguish between their personal and business interests. Lenders also often skirt organizational (corporate) boundaries by seeking personal guarantees or accepting privately held assets as collateral. Because of this behavior, researchers and analysts may wish to be cautious in assessing the organizational types and implied boundaries relating to owner-managed firms. This includes the analysis of traditional accounting disclosures and studies that treat the firm as defined by a formal organizational structure.

===Concepts of small business, self-employment, entrepreneurship, and startup===
The concepts of small business, self-employment, entrepreneurship, and startup overlap but carry important distinctions. These four concepts are often conflated. Their key differences can be summarized as:
* self-employment: an organization created primarily to provide income to the founders, i.e. sole proprietor operations.
* entrepreneurship: all new organizations.
* startup: a new organization created to grow (and have employees).
* small business: an organization that is small (in employees or revenue) and may or may not have the intention to grow.

Many small businesses are sole proprietor operations consisting only of the owner, but many have additional employees. Some small businesses that offer a product, process or service, do not have growth as their primary objective. In contrast, a business that is created to become a big firm is known as a startup. Startups aim for growth and often offer an innovative product, process, or service. The entrepreneurs of startups typically aim to scale up the company by adding employees, seeking international sales, and so on, a process which is often but not always financed by venture capital and angel investments. Successful entrepreneurs have the ability to lead a business in a positive direction by proper planning, adapting to changing environments, and understand their own strengths and weakness. Spectacular success stories stem from startups that expanded in growth. Examples would be Microsoft, Genentech, and Federal Express which all embody the sense of new venture creation on small businesses.

Self-employment provides work primarily for the founders. Entrepreneurship refers to all new businesses, including self-employment and businesses that never intend to grow big or become registered, but startups refer to new businesses that intend to grow beyond the founders, to have employees, and grow large.

=== Size definitions ===
The legal definition of &quot;small business&quot; varies by country and by industry. In addition to the number of employees, methods used to classify small companies include annual sales (turnover), the value of assets and net profit (balance sheet), alone or as a combination of factors.

* In India, all the manufacturing and service enterprises having investment &quot;Not more than Rs 10 crore&quot; and Annual Turnover &quot;not more than Rs 50 crore&quot; come under this category. 
*In the United States, the Small Business Administration establishes small business size standards on an industry-by-industry basis but generally specifies a small business as having fewer than 500 employees for manufacturing businesses and less than $7.5 million in annual receipts for most non-manufacturing businesses. The definition can vary by circumstance—for example, a small business having fewer than 25 full-time equivalent employees with average annual wages below $50,000 qualifies for a tax credit under the health care reform bill Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. By comparison, a medium-sized business or mid-sized business has fewer than 500 employees.
*The European Union generally defines a small business as one that has fewer than fifty employees and either turnover or balance sheet less than €10 m. but the European Commission is undertaking a review of this definition. By comparison, a medium-sized business has fewer than 250 employees and either turnover less than €50 m. or balance sheet less than €43 m.
*In Australia, a small business is defined by the &quot;Fair Work Act 2009&quot; as one with fewer than 15 employees, although the Australian Bureau of Statistics uses less than 20 employees as its threshold. By comparison, a medium-sized business or mid-sized business has fewer than two hundred employees.
*In South Africa, the National Small Business Amendment Act (Act 26 of 2003) defines businesses in a variety of ways using five categories previously established by the National Small Business Act (Act 102 of 1996), namely, standard industrial sector and subsector classification, size of class, equivalent of paid employees, turnover and asset value excluding fixed property.

Small businesses usually do not dominate their field.

The following table serves as a guide to business size nomenclature.

Business size definitions (by number of employees)

*Most cells reflect sizes not defined in legislation.
*Some definitions are multi-parameter, e.g., by industry, revenue, or market share.

=== Demographics ===
In 2016 a study that examined the demographic of small business owners was published. The study showed that the median American small business owners were above the age of 50. The ages were distributed as 51% over 50 years old, 33% between the ages of 35 and 49, and 16% being under the age of 35. As for sex: 55% were owned by males, 36% by females, and 9% being equal ownership of both males and females. As for race: 72% were white/Caucasian, 13.5% were Latinos, 6.3% were African American, 6.2% were Asian, and 2% as other. As for educational background: 39% had obtained a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, 33% had some college background, and 28% received at least a high school diploma.

The United States census data for the years 2014 and 2015 shows the women&#x27;s ownership share of small businesses by firm size. The data explains percentages owned by women along with the number of employees including the owner. Generally, the smaller the business, the more likely it to be owned by a woman. The data shows that about 22% of small businesses with 100-500 employees were owned by women, a percentage that rises the smaller the business. 41% of businesses with just 2-4 employees were run by women, and in businesses with just one person, that person was a woman in 51% of cases.

===Franchise businesses===
Franchising is a way for small business owners to benefit from the economies of scale of the big corporation (franchiser). McDonald&#x27;s and Subway are examples of a franchise. The small business owner can leverage a strong brand name and purchasing power of the larger company while keeping their own investment affordable. However, some franchisees conclude that they suffer the &quot;worst of both worlds&quot; feeling they are too restricted by corporate mandates and lack true independence. It is an assumption that small business is just franchisees, but the truth is many franchisers are also small businesses. Although considered to be a successful way of doing business, literature has proved that there is a high failure rate in franchising as well, especially in the UK, where research indicates that out of 1658 franchising companies operating in 1984, only 601 remained in 1998, a mere 36%.

===Retailers&#x27; cooperative===
A retailers&#x27; cooperative is a type of cooperative that employs economies of scale on behalf of its retailer members. Retailers&#x27; cooperatives use their purchasing power to acquire discounts from manufacturers and often share marketing expenses. They are often recognized as &quot;local groups&quot; because they own their own stores within the community. It is common for locally owned grocery stores, hardware stores, and pharmacies to participate in retailers&#x27; cooperatives. Ace Hardware, True Value, and NAPA are examples of a retailers&#x27; cooperative. Retail cooperatives allow consumers to supply their own earnings and gain bargaining power outside of the business sector. Retail cooperatives mainly reside within small communities where local businesses are often shut down.

== Advantages and disadvantages ==
Many small businesses can be started at a low cost and on a part-time basis, while a person continues a regular job with an employer or provides care for family members in the home. In developing countries, many small businesses are sole-proprietor operations such as selling products at a market stall or preparing hot food to sell on the street, which provide a small income. In the 2000s, a small business was well suited to Internet marketing; because, it can easily serve specialized niches, something that would have been more difficult before the Internet revolution which began in the late 1990s. Internet marketing gives small businesses the ability to market with smaller budgets. Adapting to change is crucial in business and particularly small business; not being tied to the bureaucratic inertia associated with large corporations, small businesses can respond to changing marketplace demand more quickly. Small business proprietors tend to be in closer personal contact with their customers and clients than large corporations, as small business owners see their customers in person each week.

One study showed that small, local businesses are better for a local economy than the introduction of new chain stores. By opening up new national level chain stores, the profits of locally owned businesses greatly decrease and many businesses end up failing and having to close. This creates an exponential effect. When one store closes, people lose their jobs, other businesses lose business from the failed business, and so on. In many cases, large firms displace just as many jobs as they create.

A disadvantage of having a small business is the challenge of finding and keeping talented employees. Small tech companies have difficulty in retention when larger companies are interested in the same talent. Workers can be acquired from out of country but strict immigration rules are limiting.

===Independence===
Independence is another advantage of owning a small business. A small business owner does not have to report to a supervisor, manager, or a board to report to, which is the situation for a corporation&#x27;s CEO. Many people desire to make their own decisions, take their own risks, and reap the rewards of their efforts. Small business owners possess the flexibility and freedom to make their own decisions within the constraints imposed by economic and other environmental factors. However, entrepreneurs have to work for very long hours and understand that ultimately their customers are their bosses.

Small businesses (often carried out by family members) may adjust quicker to the changing conditions; however, they may also be closed to the absorption of new knowledge and employing new labor from outside.

===Financial reporting===
Small businesses benefit from less extensive accounting and financial reporting requirements than those faced by larger businesses.

The European Union&#x27;s Directive on annual financial statements of 2013 aims to &quot;limit administrative burdens and provide for simple and robust accounting rules, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)&quot;. In the UK, the Companies, Partnerships and Groups (Accounts and Reports) Regulations 2015 transposed the EU Directive into UK law and amended the reporting regime for reduced disclosure accounts for any accounting period commencing on or after 1 January 2016. &quot;Abbreviated accounts&quot; were permitted for smaller entities under &quot;FRSSE&quot;, the &quot;Financial Reporting Standard for Smaller Entities&quot;. Until 2015, companies deemed small under the UK Companies Act 2006 were allowed to use this standard. For accounting years ending on or after 1 January 2016, FRSSE is no longer available, but there are options known as &quot;abridged accounts&quot; and &quot;filleted accounts&quot;:
*Abridged accounts: accounting for profit / loss begins with the declaration of gross profit or loss, not turnover
*Filleted financial statements or filleted accounts: profit and loss accounts are excluded, but balance sheet and balance sheet notes are to be disclosed.
Alternatively, the smallest companies are able to file &quot;micro-entity accounts&quot;. FRS 105 is a Financial Reporting Standard applicable to the Micro-entities Regime.

==Challenges==
Small businesses often face a variety of problems, some of which are related to their size. A frequent cause of bankruptcy is under capitalization. This is often a result of poor planning rather than economic conditions. It is a common rule of thumb that the entrepreneur should have access to a sum of money at least equal to the projected revenue for the first year of business in addition to the anticipated expenses. For example, prospective owners anticipating 100,000 in revenue the first year with 150,000 in start up expenses should have at least 250,000 available. Start-up expenses are often grossly underestimated adding to the burden of the business. Failure to provide this level of funding for the company could leave the owner liable for all of the company&#x27;s debt in bankruptcy court under the theory of undercapitalization. Start-up businesses are often faced with reduced or no credit terms from suppliers due to lack of funds or trading history.

In addition to ensuring that the business has enough capital, the small business owner must be mindful of contribution margin (sales minus variable costs). To break even, the business must be able to reach a level of sales where the contribution margin equals fixed costs. When they first start, many small business owners underprice their products to a point where even at their maximum capacity, it would be impossible to break even. Cost controls or price increases often resolve this problem.

In the United States, some of the largest concerns of small business owners are insurance costs (such as liability and health), energy costs, taxes, and tax compliance. In the United Kingdom and Australia, small business owners tend to be more concerned with perceived excessive governmental red tape.

Contracting fraud has been an ongoing problem for small businesses in the United States. Small businesses are legally obligated to receive a fair portion (23 per cent) of the total value of all the government&#x27;s prime contracts as mandated by the Small Business Act of 1953. Since 2002, a series of federal investigations have found fraud, abuse, loopholes, and a lack of oversight in federal small business contracting, which has led to the diversion of billions of dollars in small business contracts to large corporations.

Another problem for many small businesses is termed the &#x27;Entrepreneurial Myth&#x27; or E-Myth. The mythic assumption is that an expert in a given technical field will be an expert at running that kind of business. Additional business management skills are needed to keep a business running smoothly. Some of this misunderstanding arises from the failure to distinguish between small business managers as entrepreneurs or capitalists. While nearly all owner-managers of small firms are obliged to assume the role of capitalist, only a minority will act as entrepreneurs. The line between an owner-manager and an entrepreneur can be defined by whether or not their business is growth-oriented. In general, small business owners are primarily focused on surviving rather than growing; therefore, not experiencing the five stages of the corporate life cycle (birth, growth, maturity, revival, and decline) as an entrepreneur would.

Another problem for many small businesses is the capacity of much larger businesses to influence or sometimes determine their chances for success. Business networking and social media has been used as a major tool by small businesses in the UK, but most of them just use a &quot;scattergun&quot; approach in a desperate attempt to exploit the market which is not that successful. Over half of small firms lack a business plan, a tool that is considered one of the most important factors for a venture&#x27;s success. Business planning is associated with improved growth prospects. Funders and investors usually require a business plan. A plan also serves as a strategic planning document for owners and CEOs, which can be used as a &quot;bible&quot; for decision-making 

An international trade survey indicated that the British share of businesses that are exporting rose from 32% in 2012 to 39% in 2013. Although this may seem positive, in reality, the growth is slow, as small business owners shy away from exporting due to actual and perceived barriers. Learning the basics of a foreign language could be the solution to open doors to new trade markets, it is a reality that not all foreign business partners speak English. China is stated to grow by 7.6% in 2013 and still, 95% of business owners who want to export to China have no desire and no knowledge to learn their local language.

===Bankruptcy===
When the small business fails, the owner may file for bankruptcy. In most cases, this can be handled through a personal bankruptcy filing. Corporations can file bankruptcy, but if it is out of business and valuable corporate assets are likely to be repossessed by secured creditors, there is little advantage to going to the expense of a corporate bankruptcy. Many states offer exemptions for small business assets so they can continue to operate during and after personal bankruptcy. However, corporate assets are normally not exempt; hence, it may be more difficult to continue operating an incorporated business if the owner files bankruptcy. Researchers have examined small business failures in some depth, with attempts to model the predictability of failure.

===Social responsibility===
Small businesses can encounter several problems related to engaging in corporate social responsibility, due to characteristics inherent in their size. Owners of small businesses often participate heavily in the day-to-day operations of their companies. This results in a lack of time for the owner to coordinate socially responsible efforts, such as supporting local charities or not-for-profit activities. Additionally, a small business owner&#x27;s expertise often falls outside the realm of socially responsible practices, which can contribute to a lack of participation. Small businesses also face a form of peer pressure from larger forces in their respective industries, making it difficult to oppose and work against industry expectations. Furthermore, small businesses undergo stress from shareholder expectations. Because small businesses have more personal relationships with their patrons and local shareholders, they must be prepared to withstand closer scrutiny if they want to share in the benefits of committing to socially responsible practices or not.

===Job quality===
While small businesses employ over half the workforce in the US and have been established as a main driving force behind job creation, the quality of the jobs these businesses create has been called into question. Small businesses generally employ individuals from the Secondary labor market. As a result, in the U.S., wages are 49% higher for employees of large firms. Additionally, many small businesses struggle or are unable to provide employees with benefits they would be given at larger firms. Research from the U.S. Small Business Administration indicates that employees of large firms are 17% more likely to receive benefits including salary, paid leave, paid vacation, bonuses, insurance, and retirement plans. Both lower wages and fewer benefits combine to create a job turnover rate among U.S. small businesses that is three times higher than large firms. Employees of small businesses must adapt to the higher failure rate of small firms, which means that they are more likely to lose their job due to the firm going under. In the U.S. 69% of small businesses last at least two years, but this percentage drops to 51% for firms reaching five years in operation. The U.S. Small Business Administration counts companies with as much as $35.5 million in sales and 1,500 employees as &quot;small businesses&quot;, depending on the industry. Outside government, companies with less than $7 million in sales and fewer than five hundred employees are widely considered small businesses.

=== Cyber crime ===
Cybercrime in the business world can be broken down into 4 main categories. They include loss of reputation and consumer confidence, cost of fixing the issue, loss of capital and assets, and legal difficulties that can come from these problems. Loss of reputation and consumer confidence can be impacted greatly after one attack. Many small businesses will struggle to gain confidence and trust in their customers after being known for having problems prior. The cost of fixing the cyber attack would require experts outside of their field to further the investigation and find the problem. Being down for a business means losing money at the same time. This could halt the online operations and mean the business could potentially be down for a long period of time. Loss of capital and assets ties well in with the cost of fixing the issue. During a cyberattack, a business may lose its funds for that business. Worst-case scenario, a business may actually lose all its working capital and funds. The legal difficulties involved with cybercrime can become pricy and hurt the business itself for not having standard security measures and standards. Security not only for the business but more importantly the customer should be the number one priority when dealing with security protocol.

The monetary dollar damage caused by cybercrime in 2016 equaled out to be over 1.33 billion dollars in the United States alone. In 2016, California alone had over 255 million dollars reported to the IC3. Certain cyber attacks can vary on how long it takes to solve a problem. It can take upwards to 69 days for an average everyday attack on a business. The types of attacks include viruses and malware issues. Employee activities within the workspace can also render a cyber attack. Employees using mobile devices or remote work access off the job makes it easier for a cyber attack to occur.

==Marketing==
Although small businesses have close relationships with their existing customers, finding new customers and reaching new markets is a major challenge for small business owners. Small businesses typically find themselves strapped for time to do marketing, as they have to run the day-to-day aspects of the business. To create a continual stream of new business and find new clients and customers, they must work on marketing their business continuously. Low sales (the result of poor marketing) is one of the major reasons for small business failure. Common marketing techniques for small business include business networking (e.g., attending Chamber of Commerce events or trade fairs), &quot;word of mouth&quot; promotion by existing customers, customer referrals, Yellow pages directories, television, radio, and outdoor ads (e.g., roadside billboards), print ads, email, and Internet marketing. TV ads can be quite expensive, so they are normally intended to create awareness of a product or service. Another means by which small businesses can advertise is through the use of &quot;deal of the day&quot; websites such as Groupon and Living Social. These Internet deals encourage customers to patronize small businesses.

Many small business owners find internet marketing more affordable. Google AdWords and Yahoo! Search Marketing are two popular options of getting small business products or services in front of motivated web searchers. Social media has become an affordable route of marketing for small businesses. It is a fraction of the cost of traditional marketing and small businesses can do it themselves or find small social marketing agencies that they can hire out for a small fee. Statistically, social media marketing has a higher lead-to-close rate than traditional media. Successful online small business marketers are adept at utilizing the most relevant keywords in their website content. Advertising on niche websites that are frequented by potential customers can be effective, but with the long tail of the Internet, it can be time-intensive to advertise on enough websites to garner an effective reach.

Creating a business website has become increasingly affordable with many do-it-yourself programs now available for beginners. A website can provide significant marketing exposure for small businesses when marketed through the Internet and other channels. Some popular services are WordPress, Joomla, Squarespace, and Wix. Social media has proven to be very useful in gaining additional exposure for many small businesses. Many small business owners use Facebook and Twitter as a way to reach out to their loyal customers to give them news about specials of the day or special coupons, generate repeat business and reach out to new potential clients. The relational nature of social media, along with its immediacy and twenty-four-hour presence lend an intimacy to the relationships small businesses can have with their customers while making it more efficient for them to communicate with greater numbers. Facebook ads are a very cost-effective way for small business owners to reach a targeted audience with a very specific message. In addition to the social networking sites, blogs have become a highly effective way for small businesses to position themselves as experts on issues that are important to their customers. This can be done with a proprietary blog and/or by using a back-link strategy wherein the marketer comments on other blogs and leaves a link to the small business&#x27;s own website. Posting to a blog about the company&#x27;s business or service area regularly can increase web traffic to a company website.

Marketing plan
*Market research – To produce a marketing plan for small businesses, research needs to be done on similar businesses, which should include desk research (done online or with directories) and field research. This gives an insight into the target group&#x27;s behavior and shopping patterns. Analyzing the competitor&#x27;s marketing strategies makes it easier for small businesses to gain market share.
*Marketing mix – Marketing mix is a crucial factor for any business to be successful. Especially for a small business, examining a competitor&#x27;s marketing mix can be very helpful. An appropriate market mix, which uses different types of marketing, can help to boost sales.
*Product life cycle – After the launch of the business, crucial points of focus should be the growth phase (adding customers, adding products or services, and/or expanding to new markets) and working towards the maturity phase. Once the business reaches the maturity stage, an extension strategy should be in place. Re-launching is also an option at this stage. Pricing strategy should be flexible and based on the different stages of the product life cycle.
*Promotion techniques – It is preferable to keep promotion expenses as low as possible. ‘Word of mouth’, ‘email marketing’, ‘print-ads’ in local newspapers, etc. can be effective.
*Channels of distribution – Selecting an effective channel of distribution may reduce the promotional expenses as well as overall expenses for a small business.

==Contribution to the economy==
In the US, small businesses (fewer than five hundred employees) account for more than half the non-farm, private GDP and around half the private sector employment. Regarding small business, the top job provider is those with fewer than ten employees, and those with ten or more but fewer than twenty employees comes in as the second, and those with twenty or more but fewer than one hundred employees comes in as the third (interpolation of data from the following references). The most recent data shows firms with fewer than twenty employees account for slightly more than 18% of the employment.

According to &quot;The Family Business Review&quot;, &quot;there are approximately seventeen million sole-proprietorship in the US. It can be argued that a sole-proprietorship (an unincorporated business owned by a single person) is a type of family business&quot; and &quot;there are twenty-two million small businesses (fewer than five hundred employees) in the US and approximately 14,000 big businesses&quot;. It has been found that small businesses created the newest jobs in communities, &quot;In 1979, David Birch published the first empirical evidence that small firms (fewer than 100 employees) created the newest jobs&quot;, and Edmiston claimed that &quot;perhaps the greatest generator of interest in entrepreneurship and small business is the widely held belief that small businesses in the United States create most new jobs. The evidence suggests that small businesses indeed create a substantial majority of net new jobs in an average year.&quot; The U.S. Small Business Administration has found small businesses have created two-thirds of net new private-sector jobs in the US since 2007. Local businesses provide competition to each other and challenge corporate giants. Of the 5,369,068 employer firms in 1995, 78.8 per cent had fewer than ten employees, and 99.7 per cent had fewer than five hundred employees.

==Sources of funding==
Small businesses use various sources available for start-up capital:
* Self-financing by the owner through cash savings, equity loan on his or her home, and or other assets
* Loans or financial gifts from friends or relatives
* Grants from private foundations, government, or other sources
* Private stock issue
* Forming partnerships
* Angel investors
* Loans from banks, credit unions, or other financial institutions
* SME finance, including collateral-based lending and venture capital, given sufficiently sound business venture plans

Some small businesses are further financed through credit card debt—usually a risky choice, given that the interest rate on credit cards is often several times the rate that would be paid on a line of credit at a bank or a bank loan and terms can change unpredictably. Recent research suggests that the use of credit scores in small business lending by community banks is surprisingly widespread. Moreover, the scores employed tend to be the consumer credit scores of the small business owners rather than the more encompassing small business credit scores that include data on the firms as well as on the owners. Many owners seek a bank loan in the name of their business; however, banks will usually insist on a personal guarantee by the business owner.

In October 2010, Alejandro Cremades and Tanya Prive founded the first equity crowdfunding platform for small businesses in history as an alternative source of financing. The platform operates under the name of Rock The Post.

==Government support==
Several organizations in the United States provide help for the small business sector, such as the Internal Revenue Service&#x27;s Small Business and Self-Employed One-Stop Resource. The Small Business Administration (SBA) runs several loan programs that may help a small business secure loans. In these programs, the SBA guarantees a portion of the loan to the issuing bank, and thus, relieves the bank of some of the risk of extending the loan to a small business. The SBA requires business owners to pledge personal assets and sign as a personal guarantee for the loan. The 8(a) Business Development Program assists in the development of small businesses owned and operated by African Americans, Hispanics, and Asians.

Canadian small businesses can take advantage of federally funded programs and services. See Federal financing for small businesses in Canada (grants and loans).

In Bulgaria, government support for small and medium-sized enterprises is handled via the Bulgarian Small and Medium Enterprises Promotion Agency (BSMEPA), based in Sofia.

In the United Kingdom, the Small Business Commissioner (SBC) provides information and advice for small businesses and deals with complaints resolution with specific reference to late payment problems and other unfavourable payment practices. The SBC&#x27;s role is to make non-binding recommendations advising on how the parties can resolve a dispute.

Small businesses are encouraged per public policy on taxation. For example, from January 1, 2020, Armenia introduced a special micro-entrepreneurship tax system with a non-taxable base of 24 million AMD. Accordingly, a micro-business will be exempted from taxes other than income tax which will not exceed 5,000 AMD per employee.

==Business networks and advocacy groups==
Small businesses often join or come together to form organizations to advocate for their causes or to achieve economies of scale that larger businesses benefit from, such as the opportunity to buy cheaper health insurance in bulk. There was a study research done between 1990 and 2002 about how relationships like partnerships and alliances can make a big difference for small businesses. They go deep into the three main ideas, of how a business owns its own resources help, how much they have to rely on outside help and how changes in these relationships affect the businesses . These organizations include local or regional groups such as Chambers of Commerce and independent business alliances, as well as national or international industry-specific organizations. Such groups often serve a dual purpose, as business networks to provide marketing and connect members to potential sales leads and suppliers, and as advocacy groups, bringing together many small businesses to provide a stronger voice in regional or national politics. In the case of independent business alliances, promoting the value of locally owned, independent business (not necessarily small) through public education campaigns is integral to their work.

The largest regional small business group in the United States is the Council of Smaller Enterprises, located in Greater Cleveland.

United Kingdom Trade and Investment gives out research in different markets around the world, and research in program planning and promotional activities to exporters. The BEXA&#x27;s (British Exporters Association) role is to connect new exporters to expert services. It can provide details about regional export contacts, who could be made informally to discuss issues. Trade associations and all major banks often provide links to international groups in foreign markets, and some help set up joint ventures and trade fairs.

Several youth organizations, including 4-H, Junior Achievement, and Scouting, have interactive programs and training to help young people run their own small business under adult supervision.

==See also==
* American Independent Business Alliance
* Big business
* Distributism
* Federation of Small Businesses
* Home business
* Independent telephone company
* Localism (politics) versus transnational corporations
* Market capitalization
* Micro-enterprise
* National Federation of Independent Business
* S corporation
* Small Business Administration
* Small Business Commissioner
* Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
* Small business software
* Small is Profitable
* Small office/home office
* Small-scale project management
* Small start units
==References==
==Further reading==
* Aoyama, Yuko, and Michael B. Teitz. &quot;Small business policy in Japan and the United States: a comparative analysis of objectives and outcomes&quot; (Institute of International Studies, 1996).
* Aoyama, Yuko. &quot;Policy interventions for industrial network formation: contrasting historical underpinnings of the small business policy in Japan and the United States.&quot; &quot;Small Business Economics&quot; 12.3 (1999): 217–231.
* Bannock, Graham. &quot;The economics and management of small business: an international perspective&quot; (Routledge, 2004).
* Bean, Jonathan James. &quot;Beyond the broker state: a history of the federal government&#x27;s policies toward small business, 1936–1961&quot; (PhD Diss. The Ohio State University, 1994).
* Bean, Jonathan. &quot;Big government and affirmative action: The scandalous history of the Small Business Administration&quot; (University Press of Kentucky, 2014) online
* Birch, D. (1979). The job generation process. Unpublished Report, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, prepared for the Economic Development Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
* Birch, David. &quot;Job Creation in America, How our smallest companies put the most people to work&quot; (The Free Press, 1987).
* Blackford, Mansel G. &quot;A history of small business in America&quot; (UNC Press Books, 2003). online
* Conservative Political Centre. &quot;Small business and the rebirth of enterprise in Britain&quot; (1988) online
* Dicke, Thomas S. &quot;The small business tradition.&quot; &quot;OAH Magazine of History&quot; 11.1 (1996): 11–16. in USA online
* Hillstrom, K., and L. C. Hillstrom, eds. &quot;Encyclopedia of Small Business&quot; (Gale, 2 vol. 2nd ed. 2002).
* Lowrey, Ying. &quot;Minority entrepreneurship in the USA.&quot; &quot;International Journal of Business and Globalisation&quot; 1.2 (2007): 176–221.
* Mazzarol, Tim, and Delwyn Clark. &quot;The evolution of small business policy in Australia and New Zealand.&quot; &quot;Small Enterprise Research&quot; 23.3 (2016): 239–261.
* Nopper, Tamara K. &quot;Minority, black and non-black people of color: ‘New’ color-blind racism and the US Small Business Administration&#x27;s approach to minority business lending in the post-civil rights era.&quot; &quot;Critical Sociology&quot; 37.5 (2011): 651-671.
* Schaper, Michael T. &quot;A brief history of small business in Australia, 1970–2010.&quot; &quot;Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy&quot; (2014).
* Weems, Robert E. &quot;Business in black and white: American presidents and black entrepreneurs in the twentieth century&quot; (NYU Press, 2009).
* Wilson, John F. &quot;British business history, 1720–1994&quot; (Manchester University Press, 1995).

===Historiography===
* Blackford, Mansel G. &quot;Small business in America: A historiographic survey.&quot; &quot;Business History Review&quot; 65.1 (1991): 1-26.

==External links==
* Business.usa.gov, the official website for business-related activities in the US
* Federation of Small Business, UK-based resource for small business owners</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="0" end="16" title="Small business" label="Small businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="30" end="41" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q728646" start="44" end="55" title="partnership" label="partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912172" start="61" end="80" title="sole proprietorship" label="sole proprietorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656702" start="470" end="488" title="Fair Work Australia" label="Fair Work Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="552" end="566" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="631" end="660" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="951" end="957" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="977" end="994" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588761" start="999" end="1011" title="tradesman" label="tradespeople"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1069" end="1075" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q326653" start="1078" end="1088" title="accountant" label="accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="1094" end="1108" title="medical doctor" label="medical doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="1484" end="1492" title="day care" label="day care"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908" start="1495" end="1510" title="retirement home" label="retirement home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005490" start="2610" end="2625" title="self-employment" label="self-employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="2627" end="2643" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="2649" end="2656" title="startup" label="startup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="2907" end="2923" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="2950" end="2957" title="startup" label="startup"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="3717" end="3732" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q778274" start="3737" end="3754" title="Angel investor" label="angel investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="4669" end="4674" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="4700" end="4706" title="assets" label="assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="4711" end="4721" title="net profit" label="net profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="5004" end="5033" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18751326" start="5477" end="5487" title="SHOP tax credit" label="tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="5522" end="5564" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5662" end="5676" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656702" start="6076" end="6094" title="Fair Work Australia" label="Fair Work Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="6151" end="6182" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6332" end="6344" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="8364" end="8375" title="Franchising" label="Franchising"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="8487" end="8502" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="8507" end="8513" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746361" start="9307" end="9334" title="retailers&amp;#x27; cooperative" label="retailers&amp;#x27; cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="9373" end="9391" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672981" start="9796" end="9808" title="Ace Hardware" label="Ace Hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847545" start="9810" end="9820" title="True Value" label="True Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970842" start="9826" end="9830" title="National Automotive Parts Association" label="NAPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="10568" end="10576" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="10577" end="10586" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="10928" end="10940" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="12207" end="12212" title="board of directors" label="board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="12953" end="12963" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="13045" end="13059" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538001" start="13365" end="13375" title="transposition (law)" label="transposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155400" start="13744" end="13762" title="Companies Act 2006" label="Companies Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="14086" end="14094" title="Revenue" label="turnover"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="14191" end="14204" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="14551" end="14561" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497802" start="14565" end="14585" title="undercapitalization" label="under capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398821" start="14675" end="14688" title="rule of thumb" label="rule of thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="14698" end="14710" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="15536" end="15541" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q174915" start="15548" end="15561" title="variable cost" label="variable cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q466764" start="15669" end="15679" title="fixed cost" label="fixed cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077518" start="15845" end="15857" title="Cost control" label="Cost control"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="15987" end="15996" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="16012" end="16021" title="Legal liability" label="liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="16026" end="16032" title="health insurance" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="16035" end="16041" title="petroleum" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="16049" end="16052" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16060" end="16074" title="Tax#Cost of compliance" label="tax compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761743" start="16199" end="16207" title="red tape" label="red tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="16222" end="16227" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16845" end="16851" title=":wiki: mythic" label="mythic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360816" start="17822" end="17841" title="Business networking" label="Business networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="17846" end="17858" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="17954" end="17964" title="scattergun" label="scattergun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208034" start="18087" end="18100" title="business plan" label="business plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q674293" start="19197" end="19216" title="personal bankruptcy" label="personal bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146064" start="19217" end="19223" title="filing (legal)" label="filing"/>
<link wikidata="Q218600" start="19951" end="19982" title="corporate social responsibility" label="corporate social responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="20492" end="20505" title="peer pressure" label="peer pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443850" start="21237" end="21259" title="Secondary labor market" label="Secondary labor market"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="21492" end="21521" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="21671" end="21686" title="retirement plan" label="retirement plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="22152" end="22181" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360816" start="24985" end="25004" title="business networking" label="business networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="25022" end="25041" title="Chamber of Commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="25052" end="25062" title="trade fair" label="trade fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="25072" end="25085" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q934552" start="25145" end="25157" title="Yellow pages" label="Yellow pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155133" start="25246" end="25251" title="Email marketing" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323528" start="25257" end="25275" title="Internet marketing" label="Internet marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q852787" start="25504" end="25511" title="Groupon" label="Groupon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12988581" start="25516" end="25529" title="Living Social" label="Living Social"/>
<link wikidata="Q271982" start="25672" end="25686" title="Google AdWords" label="Google AdWords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778702" start="25691" end="25714" title="Yahoo! Search Marketing" label="Yahoo! Search Marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q267114" start="26093" end="26115" title="social media marketing" label="social media marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128340" start="26256" end="26264" title="Index term" label="keywords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="26306" end="26311" title="Niche market" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q534685" start="26395" end="26404" title="long tail" label="long tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q489398" start="26502" end="26507" title="Reach (advertising)" label="reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="26583" end="26597" title="do-it-yourself" label="do-it-yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q13166" start="26791" end="26800" title="WordPress" label="WordPress"/>
<link wikidata="Q13167" start="26802" end="26808" title="Joomla" label="Joomla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582097" start="26810" end="26821" title="Squarespace" label="Squarespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q420506" start="26827" end="26830" title="Wix.com" label="Wix"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="26832" end="26844" title="Social media" label="Social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="26963" end="26971" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="26976" end="26983" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="27416" end="27424" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="27588" end="27593" title="blogs" label="blogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="27769" end="27773" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="27850" end="27855" title="blogs" label="blogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141436" start="28058" end="28073" title="Marketing research" label="Market research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629267" start="28196" end="28209" title="Secondary research" label="desk research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="28248" end="28262" title="field research" label="field research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604680" start="28295" end="28301" title="Target audience" label="target"/>
<link wikidata="Q828814" start="28445" end="28457" title="market share" label="market share"/>
<link wikidata="Q193959" start="28460" end="28473" title="Marketing mix" label="Marketing mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967338" start="28737" end="28755" title="Product lifecycle" label="Product life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394670" start="29098" end="29114" title="Pricing strategies" label="Pricing strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353163" start="29196" end="29216" title="Promotion (marketing)" label="Promotion techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155133" start="29301" end="29316" title="email marketing" label="email marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q867147" start="29376" end="29400" title="Distribution (business)" label="Channels of distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="29809" end="29817" title="employee" label="employee"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="29869" end="29877" title="employee" label="employee"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="29960" end="29968" title="employee" label="employee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="31583" end="31590" title="Financial capital" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="31644" end="31650" title="Ownership equity" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189539" start="31651" end="31655" title="loan" label="loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="31823" end="31828" title="capital stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q728646" start="31845" end="31857" title="partnerships" label="partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q778274" start="31860" end="31874" title="Angel investor" label="Angel investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391159" start="31945" end="31956" title="SME finance" label="SME finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="31997" end="32012" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="32114" end="32125" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787082" start="32256" end="32270" title="line of credit" label="line of credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="32286" end="32290" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q189539" start="32291" end="32295" title="loan" label="loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205050" start="32837" end="32855" title="Alejandro Cremades" label="Alejandro Cremades"/>
<link wikidata="Q348303" start="32897" end="32909" title="crowdfunding" label="crowdfunding"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="33168" end="33192" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="33256" end="33285" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="33646" end="33679" title="8(a) Business Development Program" label="8(a) Business Development Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="33749" end="33765" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440525" start="33884" end="33951" title="Federal financing for small businesses in Canada (grants and loans)" label="Federal financing for small businesses in Canada (grants and loans)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="33957" end="33965" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="34119" end="34124" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111598" start="34154" end="34181" title="Small Business Commissioner" label="Small Business Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495335" start="34305" end="34317" title="Late Payment of Commercial Debts (Interest) Act 1998" label="late payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="34578" end="34585" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="34963" end="34981" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="35058" end="35074" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="35496" end="35516" title="Chambers of Commerce" label="Chambers of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744086" start="35521" end="35551" title="independent business alliances" label="independent business alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605341" start="35666" end="35682" title="business network" label="business network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="35881" end="35889" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176500" start="36154" end="36184" title="Council of Smaller Enterprises" label="Council of Smaller Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600502" start="36197" end="36214" title="Greater Cleveland" label="Greater Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q238139" start="36785" end="36788" title="4-H" label="4-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153045" start="36790" end="36808" title="Junior Achievement" label="Junior Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="36814" end="36822" title="Scouting" label="Scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744086" start="36954" end="36992" title="American Independent Business Alliance" label="American Independent Business Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906718" start="36995" end="37007" title="Big business" label="Big business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229663" start="37010" end="37022" title="Distributism" label="Distributism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440879" start="37025" end="37055" title="Federation of Small Businesses" label="Federation of Small Businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030553" start="37058" end="37071" title="Home business" label="Home business"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985948" start="37074" end="37103" title="Independent telephone company" label="Independent telephone company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149297" start="37106" end="37125" title="Localism (politics)" label="Localism (politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="37133" end="37159" title="transnational corporations" label="transnational corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="37162" end="37183" title="Market capitalization" label="Market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q842410" start="37186" end="37202" title="Micro-enterprise" label="Micro-enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972597" start="37205" end="37248" title="National Federation of Independent Business" label="National Federation of Independent Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901333" start="37251" end="37264" title="S corporation" label="S corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="37267" end="37296" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111598" start="37299" end="37326" title="Small Business Commissioner" label="Small Business Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542693" start="37329" end="37363" title="Small Business Innovation Research" label="Small Business Innovation Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543013" start="37373" end="37396" title="Small business software" label="Small business software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543102" start="37399" end="37418" title="Small is Profitable" label="Small is Profitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106295" start="37421" end="37445" title="Small office/home office" label="Small office/home office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542608" start="37448" end="37478" title="Small-scale project management" label="Small-scale project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125424" start="37481" end="37498" title="Small start units" label="Small start units"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333366" start="38587" end="38622" title="Economic Development Administration" label="Economic Development Administration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276504" wikidata="Q1317763" url="?curid=276504" title="Engineered wood">
<text>Engineered wood, also called mass timber, composite wood, man-made wood, or manufactured board, includes a range of derivative wood products which are manufactured by binding or fixing the strands, particles, fibres, or veneers or boards of wood, together with adhesives, or other methods of fixation to form composite material. The panels vary in size but can range upwards of and in the case of cross-laminated timber (CLT) can be of any thickness from a few inches to or more. These products are engineered to precise design specifications, which are tested to meet national or international standards and provide uniformity and predictability in their structural performance. Engineered wood products are used in a variety of applications, from home construction to commercial buildings to industrial products. The products can be used for joists and beams that replace steel in many building projects. The term &quot;mass timber&quot; describes a group of building materials that can replace concrete assemblies.

Typically, engineered wood products are made from the same hardwoods and softwoods used to manufacture lumber. Sawmill scraps and other wood waste can be used for engineered wood composed of wood particles or fibers, but whole logs are usually used for veneers, such as plywood, medium-density fibreboard (MDF), or particle board. Some engineered wood products, like oriented strand board (OSB), can use trees from the poplar family, a common but non-structural species.

Alternatively, it is also possible to manufacture similar engineered bamboo from bamboo; and similar engineered cellulosic products from other lignin-containing materials such as rye straw, wheat straw, rice straw, hemp stalks, kenaf stalks, or sugar cane residue, in which case they contain no actual wood but rather vegetable fibers.

Flat-pack furniture is typically made out of man-made wood due to its low manufacturing costs and its low weight.

==Types of products==
There are a wide variety of engineered wood products for both structural and non-structural applications. This list is not comprehensive, and is intended to help categorize and distinguish between different types of engineered wood.

=== Wood-based panels ===
Wood-based panels are made from fibres, flakes, particles, veneers, chips, sawdust, slabs, wood powder, strands, or other wood derivate through a binding process with adhesives. Wood structural panels are a collection of flat panel products, used extensively in building construction for sheathing, decking, cabinetry and millwork, and furniture. Examples include plywood and oriented strand board (OSB). Non-structural wood-based panels are flat-panel products, used in non-structural construction applications and furniture. Non-structural panels are usually covered with paint, wood veneer, or resin paper in their final form. Examples include fiberboard and particle board.

==== Plywood ====
Plywood, a wood structural panel, is sometimes called the original engineered wood product. Plywood is manufactured from sheets of cross-laminated veneer and bonded under heat and pressure with durable, moisture-resistant adhesives. By alternating the grain direction of the veneers from layer to layer, or &quot;cross-orienting&quot;, panel strength and stiffness in both directions are maximized. Other structural wood panels include oriented strand boards and structural composite panels.

==== Oriented strand board ====
Oriented strand board (OSB) is a wood structural panel manufactured from rectangular-shaped strands of wood that are oriented lengthwise and then arranged in layers, laid up into mats, and bonded together with moisture-resistant, heat-cured adhesives. The individual layers can be cross-oriented to provide strength and stiffness to the panel. Similar to plywood, most OSB panels are delivered with more strength in one direction. The wood strands in the outermost layer on each side of the board are normally aligned into the strongest direction of the board. Arrows on the product will often identify the strongest direction of the board (the height, or longest dimension, in most cases). Produced in huge, continuous mats, OSB is a solid panel product of consistent quality with no laps, gaps, or voids. OSB is delivered in various dimensions, strengths, and levels of water resistance.

OSB and plywood are often used interchangeably in building construction.

==== Fibreboard ====
Medium-density fibreboard (MDF) and high-density fibreboard (hardboard or HDF) are made by breaking down hardwood or softwood residuals into wood fibers, combining them with wax and a resin binder, and forming panels by applying high temperature and pressure. MDF is used in non-structural applications.

==== Particle board ====
Particle board is manufactured from wood chips, sawmill shavings, or even sawdust, and a synthetic resin or another suitable binder, which is pressed and extruded. Research published in 2017 showed that durable particle board can be produced from agricultural waste products, such as rice husk or guinea corn husk. Particleboard is cheaper, denser, and more uniform than conventional wood and plywood and is substituted for them when the cost is more important than strength and appearance. A major disadvantage of particleboard is that it is very prone to expansion and discoloration due to moisture, particularly when it is not covered with paint or another sealer. Particle board is used in non-structural applications.

=== Structural composite lumber ===
Structural composite lumber (SCL) is a class of materials made with layers of veneers, strands, or flakes bonded with adhesives. Unlike wood structural panels, structural composite lumber products generally have all grain fibers oriented in the same direction. The SCL family of engineered wood products are commonly used in the same structural applications as conventional sawn lumber and timber, including rafters, headers, beams, joists, rim boards, studs, and columns. SCL products have higher dimensional stability and increased strength compared to conventional lumber products.

==== Laminated veneer ====
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL) is produced by bonding thin wood veneers together in a large billet, similar to plywood. The grain of all veneers in the LVL billet is parallel to the long direction (unlike plywood). The resulting product features enhanced mechanical properties and dimensional stability that offer a broader range in product width, depth, and length than conventional lumber.

==== Parallel-strand ====
Parallel-strand lumber (PSL) consists of long veneer strands laid in parallel formation and bonded together with an adhesive to form the finished structural section. The length-to-thickness ratio of strands in PSL is about 300. A strong, consistent material, it has a high load-carrying ability and is resistant to seasoning stresses so it is well suited for use as beams and columns for post and beam construction, and for beams, headers, and lintels for light framing construction.

==== Laminated strand ====
Laminated strand lumber (LSL) and oriented strand lumber (OSL) are manufactured from flaked wood strands that have a high length-to-thickness ratio. Combined with an adhesive, the strands are oriented and formed into a large mat or billet and pressed. LSL and OSL offer good fastener-holding strength and mechanical-connector performance and are commonly used in a variety of applications, such as beams, headers, studs, rim boards, and millwork components. LSL is manufactured from relatively short strands—typically about long—compared to the strands used in PSL. The length-to-thickness ratio of strands is about 150 for LSL and 75 for OSL.

===I-joists===
I-joists are &quot;&quot;-shaped structural members designed for use in floor and roof construction. An I-joist consists of top and bottom flanges of various widths united with webs of various depths. The flanges resist common bending stresses, and the web provides shear performance. I-joists are designed to carry heavy loads over long distances while using less lumber than a dimensional solid wood joist of a size necessary to do the same task. As of 2004, approximately 81% of all wood light framed floors were framed using I-joists.

=== Mass timber ===
Mass timber, also known as engineered timber, is a class of large structural wood components for building construction. Mass timber components are made of lumber or veneers bonded with adhesives or mechanical fasteners. Certain types of mass timber, such as nail-laminated timber and glue-laminated timber, have existed for over a hundred years. Mass timber enjoyed increasing popularity from 2012 onward, due to growing concern around the sustainability of building materials, and interest in prefabrication, off site construction, and modularization, for which mass timber is well suited. The various types of mass timber share the advantage of faster construction times as the components are manufactured off-site, and pre-finished to exact dimensions for simple on-site fastening. Mass timber has been shown to have structural properties competitive with steel and concrete, opening the possibility to build large, tall buildings out of wood. Extensive testing has demonstrated the natural fire resistance properties of mass timber primarily due the creation of a char layer around a column or beam which prevents fire from reaching the inner layers of wood. In recognition of the proven structural and fire performance of mass timber, the International Building Code, a model code that forms the basis of many North American building codes, adopted new provisions in the 2021 code cycle that permit mass timber to be used in high-rise construction up to 18 stories.

==== Cross-laminated timber ====
Cross-laminated timber (CLT) is a versatile multi-layered panel made of lumber. Each layer of boards is placed perpendicular to adjacent layers for increased rigidity and strength. It is relatively new and gaining popularity within the construction industry as it can be used for long spans and all assemblies, e.g. floors, walls, or roofs.

==== Glued laminated timber ====
Glued laminated timber (glulam) is composed of several layers of dimensional timber glued together with moisture-resistant adhesives, creating a large, strong, structural member that can be used as vertical columns or horizontal beams. Glulam can also be produced in curved shapes, offering extensive design flexibility.

==== Dowel-laminated timber ====
Dowel laminated timber (DLT), sometimes referred to as Brettstapel, is a wood-on-wood timber. The biggest benefit of this method is that no glue or metal is needed, thus eliminating VOCs (such as formaldehyde) associated with wood adhesives used in most other engineered timbers.

Similar to CLT, DLT uses a cross laminated pattern with softwoods, but instead of wood adhesives to fix lumbers in place, holes are drilled vertically or in a 45° angle, and 15-20mm dowels made of dry hardwood or densified wood (such as thermal-compressed) are placed between the lumbers.

As the hardwood dowel absorbs moisture from the softwood to reach an equilibrium moisture content, it expands into the surrounding wood, creating a connection and &#x27;locking&#x27; them together through friction. The dowels can be dried (such as through a kiln) prior to fitting, to maximize their expansion.

==== Nail-laminated timber ====
Nail laminated timber (NLT) is a mass timber product that consists of parallel boards fastened with nails. It can be used to create floors, roofs, walls, and elevator shafts within a building. It is one of the oldest types of mass timber, being used in warehouse construction during the Industrial Revolution. Like DLT, no chemical adhesives are used, and wood fibers are oriented in the same direction.

=== Engineered wood flooring ===
Engineered wood flooring is a type of flooring product, similar to hardwood flooring, made of layers of wood or wood-based composite laminated together. The floor boards are usually milled with a tongue-and-groove profile on the edges for consistent joinery between boards.

==== Lamella ====
The lamella is the face layer of the wood that is visible when installed. Typically, it is a sawn piece of timber. The timber can be cut in three different styles: flat-sawn, quarter-sawn, and rift-sawn.

==== Types of core/substrate ====
#Wood ply construction (&quot;sandwich core&quot;): Uses multiple thin plies of wood adhered together. The wood grain of each ply runs perpendicular to the ply below it. Stability is attained from using thin layers of wood that have little to no reaction to climatic change. The wood is further stabilized due to equal pressure being exerted lengthwise and widthwise from the plies running perpendicular to each other.
#Finger core construction: Finger core engineered wood floors are made of small pieces of milled timber that run perpendicular to the top layer (lamella) of wood. They can be 2-ply or 3-ply, depending on their intended use. If it is three-ply, the third ply is often plywood that runs parallel to the lamella. Stability is gained through the grains running perpendicular to each other, and the expansion and contraction of wood are reduced and relegated to the middle ply, stopping the floor from gapping or cupping.
#Fibreboard: The core is made up of medium or high-density fibreboard. Floors with a fibreboard core are hygroscopic and must never be exposed to large amounts of water or very high humidity - the expansion caused by absorbing water combined with the density of the fibreboard, will cause it to lose its form. Fibreboard is less expensive than timber and can emit higher levels of harmful gases due to its relatively high adhesive content.
#An engineered flooring construction that is popular in parts of Europe is the hardwood lamella, softwood core laid perpendicular to the lamella, and a final backing layer of the same noble wood used for the lamella. Other noble hardwoods are sometimes used for the back layer but must be compatible. This is thought by many to be the most stable of engineered floors.

=== Other types of modified wood ===
Techniques have been introduced in the field of engineered wood including transformation of natural wood in laboratories through chemical and/or physical treatments to achieve tailored mechanical, optical, thermal, and conduction properties.

==== Densified wood ====
Densified wood can be made by using a mechanical hot press to compress wood fibers, sometimes in combination with chemical modification of the wood. These processes have been shown to increase the density by a factor of three. This increase in density is expected to enhance the strength and stiffness of the wood by a proportional amount. Studies published in 2018 combined chemical processes with traditional mechanical hot press methods. These chemical processes break down lignin and hemicellulose that are found naturally in the wood. Following dissolution, the cellulose strands that remain are mechanically hot compressed. Compared to the three-fold increase in strength observed from hot pressing alone, chemically processed wood has been shown to yield an 11-fold improvement. This extra strength comes from hydrogen bonds formed between the aligned cellulose nanofibers.

The densified wood possessed mechanical strength properties on par with steel used in building construction, opening the door for applications of densified wood in situations where regular strength wood would fail. Environmentally, wood requires significantly less carbon dioxide to produce than steel.

Synthetic resin densified wood is resin-impregnated densified wood, also known as compreg. Usually phenolic resin is used as impregnation resin to impregnate and laminate plywood layers. Sometimes layers are not impregnated before lamination. It is also possible to impregnate wood chips to produce molded pressed wood components. 

==== Delignified wood ====
Removing lignin from wood has several other applications, apart from providing structural advantages. Delignification alters the mechanical, thermal, optical, fluidic and ionic properties and functions of the natural wood and is an effective approach to regulating its thermal properties, as it removes the thermally conductive lignin component, while generating a large number of nanopores in the cell walls which help reduce temperature change. Delignified wood reflects most incident light and appears white in color. White wood (also known as nanowood) has high reflection haze, as well as high emissivity in the infrared wavelengths. These two characteristics generate a passive radiative cooling effect, with an average cooling power of over a 24-hour period, meaning that this wood does not &quot;absorb&quot; heat and therefore only emits the heat embedded in it. Moreover, white wood not only possesses a lower thermal conductivity than natural wood, and it has better thermal performance than most commercially available insulating materials. The modification of the mesoporous structure of the wood is responsible for the changes in wood performance.

White wood can also be put through a compression process, similar to the process mentioned for densified wood, which increases its mechanical performance compared to natural wood (8.7 times higher in tensile strength and 10 times higher in toughness). The thermal and structural advantages of nanowood make it an attractive material for energy-efficient building construction. However, the changes made in the wood&#x27;s structural properties, like the increase in structural porosity and the partially isolated cellulose nanofibrils, damage the material&#x27;s mechanical robustness. To deal with this issue, several strategies have been proposed, with one being to further densify the structure, and another to use cross-linking. Other suggestions include hybridizing natural wood with other organic particles and polymers to enhance its thermal insulation performance.

==== Moldable wood ====
Using similar chemical modification techniques to chemically densified wood, wood can be made extremely moldable using a combination of delignification and water shock treatment. This is an emerging technology and is not yet used in industrial processes. However, initial tests show promising advantages in improved mechanical properties, with the molded wood exhibiting strength comparable to some metal alloys.

==== Transparent wood composites ====
Transparent wood composites are new materials, as of 2020 are made at the laboratory scale, that combines transparency and stiffness via a chemical process that replaces light-absorbing compounds, such as lignin, with a transparent polymer.

==Environmental benefits==
New construction is in high demand due to growing worldwide population. However, the main materials used in new construction are currently steel and concrete. The manufacturing of these materials creates comparatively high emissions of carbon dioxide () into the atmosphere. Engineered wood has the potential to reduce carbon emissions if it replaces steel and/or concrete in the construction of buildings.

In 2014, steel and cement production accounted for about 1320 megatonnnes (Mt) and 1740 Mt respectively, which made up about 9% of global emissions that year. In a study that did not take the carbon sequestration potential of engineered wood into account, it was found that roughly 50 Mt e (carbon dioxide equivalent) could be eliminated by 2050 with the full uptake of a hybrid construction system utilizing engineered wood and steel. When considering the added effects that carbon sequestration can have over the lifetime of the material, the emissions reductions of engineered wood is even more substantial, as laminated wood that is not incinerated at the end of its lifecycle absorbs around 582 kg of /m3, while reinforced concrete emits 458 kg /m3 and steel 12.087 kg /m3.

There is not a strong consensus for measuring the carbon sequestration potential of wood. In life-cycle assessment, sequestered carbon is sometimes called biogenic carbon. ISO 21930, a standard that governs life cycle assessment, requires the biogenic carbon from a wood product can only be included as a negative input (i.e. carbon sequestration) when the wood product originated in a sustainably managed forest. This generally means that wood needs to be FSC or SFI-certified to qualify as carbon sequestering.

==Advantages==

Engineered wood products are used in a variety of ways, often in applications similar to solid wood products:

* Mass timber (MT) is lightweight allowing the material to be easily handled, manufactured, and transported. This contributes to it being cost effective and easy to use on site.
* MT offers greater strength and stiffness (based on its strength to weight ratio), increased dimensional stability, and uniformity in structures than solid wood.
* When compared to steel/concrete, MT built buildings use up to 15% less energy because of the reduced energy needed to create these wood products.
* MT buildings on average save 20-25% in time when compared to conventional steel/concrete buildings and 4.2% on capital cost.
* MT products sequester carbon and store it within themselves over their lifespan.  Using this instead of concrete and steel in buildings will reduce the embodied emissions in buildings.
* Using MT has an estimated savings of around 20% in embodied carbon when compared to steel or concrete.  This is because MT is a lot lighter when compared to these two materials, so it is less intensive for the machinery to transport both to site and once delivered.
* MT products can provide high levels of airtightness and low coefficients of thermal conductivity meaning that the air inside cannot escape, and heat is not lost easily.
* MT built buildings perform very well in seismic events because they are roughly half the mass and half the stiffness when compared to reinforced concrete buildings.  Reduced stiffness allows MT buildings to be ductile and resist lateral distortion without compromising the structural integrity of the building.
* MT is fire resistant to an extent.  Although it is considered a combustible material, MT burns slowly and in a predictable manner.  When burned, a charred layer forms on the outside that protects the inner layers of the material.  However, if the charred layer comes off, the inner layers will be exposed which can compromise the integrity of the material.

Advantages by product type:

* CLT: Offers high dimensional stability, high strength and stiffness and is easy to manufacture.
* Glulam: Offers high strength and stiffness, is structurally efficient, and can be manufactured into complex shapes.
* NLT: Does not require any specialized equipment to manufacture, is cost effective, and easy to handle.
* DLT: Offers high dimensional stability, is easy and safe to manufacture, and no metal fasteners or adhesive is required.
* SCL: Is able to withstand greater loads compared to solid timber and is not prone to shrinking, splitting or warping.

Engineered wood products may be preferred over solid wood in some applications due to certain comparative advantages:

* Because engineered wood is man-made, it can be designed to meet application-specific performance requirements. Required shapes and dimension do not drive source tree requirements (length or width of the tree)
* Engineered wood products are versatile and available in a wide variety of thicknesses, sizes, grades, and exposure durability classifications, making the products ideal for use in unlimited construction, industrial, and home project application.
* Engineered wood products are designed and manufactured to maximize the natural strength and stiffness characteristics of wood. The products are very stable and some offer greater structural strength than typical wood building materials. 
*Glued laminated timber (glulam) has greater strength and stiffness than comparable dimensional lumber and, pound for pound, is stronger than steel.
* Engineered wood panels are easy to work with using ordinary tools and basic skills. They can be cut, drilled, routed, jointed, glued, and fastened. Plywood can be bent to form curved surfaces without loss of strength. Large panel sizes speeds up construction by reducing the number of pieces that need to be handled and installed.
* Engineered wood products are a more efficient use of wood as they can be made from wood that has defects, underutilized species or smaller pieces of wood which also enables the use of smaller trees
* Wooden trusses are competitive in many roof and floor applications, and their high strength-to-weight ratios permit long spans offering flexibility in floor layouts.
* Sustainable design advocates recommend using engineered wood, which can be produced from relatively small trees, rather than large pieces of solid dimensional lumber, which requires cutting a large tree.

==Disadvantages==

* Like solid wood, when exposed to high moisture conditions or termites, biodeteriorations and/or fungi decay will occur which reduces the structural integrity and durability of the wood product; essentially the wood will start to rot.
* Potential widespread deforestation without a sustainable forestry management plan.
* MT buildings are susceptible to wind driven oscillation because of the relative flexibility of the MT material which may cause discomfort to people in the building.

Disadvantages by product type:

* CLT and Glulam: More costly than solid wood.
* NLT: Labor-intensive to make with potential for human error.
* DLT: Limited panel sizing and thickness.
* SCL: Limited panel sizing and thickness; more suitable for low rise buildings.

When compared to solid wood the following disadvantages are prevalent:
* They require more primary energy for their manufacture than solid lumber.
* The adhesives used in some products may cause harmful emissions. A concern with some resins is the release of formaldehyde in the finished product, often seen with urea-formaldehyde bonded products.

==Properties==
Plywood and OSB typically have a density of . For example, plywood sheathing or OSB sheathing typically has a surface density of . Many other engineered woods have densities much higher than OSB.

==Adhesives==
The types of adhesives used in engineered wood include:
*Urea-formaldehyde resins (UF): most common, cheapest, and not waterproof.
*Phenol formaldehyde resins (PF): yellow/brown, and commonly used for exterior exposure products.
*Melamine-formaldehyde resins (MF): white, heat, and water-resistant, and often used in exposed surfaces in more costly designs.
*Polymeric methylene diphenyl diisocyanate (pMDI) or polyurethane (PU) resins: expensive, generally waterproof, and does not contain formaldehyde, notoriously more difficult to release from platens and engineered wood presses.

A more inclusive term is &quot;structural composites&quot;. For example, fiber cement siding is made of cement and wood fiber, while cement board is a low-density cement panel, often with added resin, faced with fiberglass mesh.

=== Health concerns ===
While formaldehyde is an essential ingredient of cellular metabolism in mammals, studies have linked prolonged inhalation of formaldehyde gases to cancer. Engineered wood composites have been found to emit potentially harmful amounts of formaldehyde gas in two ways: unreacted free formaldehyde and the chemical decomposition of resin adhesives. When excessive amounts of formaldehyde are added to a process, the surplus will not have any additive to bond with and may seep from the wood product over time. Cheap urea-formaldehyde (UF) adhesives are largely responsible for degraded resin emissions. Moisture degrades the weak UF molecules, resulting in potentially harmful formaldehyde emissions. McLube offers release agents and platen sealers designed for those manufacturers who use reduced-formaldehyde UF and melamine-formaldehyde adhesives. Many OSB and plywood manufacturers use phenol-formaldehyde (PF) because phenol is a much more effective additive. Phenol forms a water-resistant bond with formaldehyde that will not degrade in moist environments. PF resins have not been found to pose significant health risks due to formaldehyde emissions. While PF is an excellent adhesive, the engineered wood industry has started to shift toward polyurethane binders like pMDI to achieve even greater water resistance, strength, and process efficiency. pMDIs are also used extensively in the production of rigid polyurethane foams and insulators for refrigeration. pMDIs outperform other resin adhesives, but they are notoriously difficult to release and cause buildup on tooling surfaces.

===Mechanical fasteners===
Some engineered wood products, such as DLT, NLT, and some brands of CLT, can be assembled without the use of adhesives using mechanical fasteners or joinery. These can range from profiled interlocking jointed boards, proprietary metal fixings, nails or timber dowels.

== Building codes and standards ==
Throughout the years mass timber was used in buildings, codes were added to and adopted by the International Building Code (IBC) to create standards for them for the proper use and handling. For example, in 2015, CLT was incorporated into the IBC. The 2021 IBC is the latest issue of building codes, and has added three new codes regarding construction with timber material.  The new three construction types go as follows, IV-A, IV-B, and IV-C, and they allow mass timber to be used in buildings up to 18, 12, and nine stories respectively.

The following technical performance standards are related to engineered wood products:
* EN 300 - Oriented Strand Boards (OSB) — Definitions, classification, and specifications
* EN 309 - Particleboards — Definition and classification
* EN 338 - Structural timber - Strength classes
* EN 386 - Glued laminated timber — performance requirements and minimum production requirements
* EN 313-1 - Plywood — Classification and terminology Part 1: Classification
* EN 313-2 - Plywood — Classification and terminology Part 2: Terminology
* EN 314-1 - Plywood — Bonding quality — Part 1: Test methods
* EN 314-2 - Plywood — Bonding quality — Part 2: Requirements
* EN 315 - Plywood — Tolerances for dimensions
* EN 387 - Glued laminated timber — large finger joints - performance requirements and minimum production requirements
* EN 390 - Glued laminated timber — sizes - permissible deviations
* EN 391 - Glued laminated timber — shear test of glue lines
* EN 392 - Glued laminated timber — Shear test of glue lines
* EN 408 - Timber structures — Structural timber and glued laminated timber — Determination of some physical and mechanical properties
* EN 622-1 - Fibreboards — Specifications — Part 1: General requirements
* EN 622-2 - Fibreboards — Specifications — Part 2: Requirements for hardboards
* EN 622-3 - Fibreboards — Specifications — Part 3: Requirements for medium boards
* EN 622-4 - Fibreboards — Specifications — Part 4: Requirements for soft boards
* EN 622-5 - Fibreboards — Specifications — Part 5: Requirements for dry process boards (MDF)
* EN 1193 - Timber structures — Structural timber and glued laminated timber - Determination of shear strength and mechanical properties perpendicular to the grain
* EN 1194 - Timber structures — Glued laminated timber - Strength classes and determination of characteristic values
* EN 1995-1-1 - Eurocode 5: Design of timber structures — Part 1-1: General — Common rules and rules for buildings
* EN 12369-1 - Wood-based panels — Characteristic values for structural design — Part 1: OSB, particleboards, and fibreboards
* EN 12369-2 - Wood-based panels — Characteristic values for structural design — Part 2: Plywood
* EN 12369-3 - Wood-based panels — Characteristic values for structural design — Part 3: Solid wood panels
* EN 14080 - Timber structures — Glued laminated timber — Requirements
* EN 14081-1 - Timber structures - Strength graded structural timber with rectangular cross-section - Part 1: General requirements
The following product category rules can be used to create environmental product declarations for engineered wood products:
* EN 15804 - Sustainability of construction works - Environmental product declarations - Core rules for the product category of construction products 
* EN 16485 - Round and sawn timber - Environmental Product Declarations - Product category rules for wood and wood-based products for use in construction (complementary-PCR to EN 15804)
* ISO 21930 - Sustainability in buildings and civil engineering works - Core rules for environmental product declarations of construction products and services

== Examples of mass timber structures ==
===Plyscrapers===
Plyscrapers are skyscrapers that are either partially made of wood or entirely made of wood. Around the world, many different plyscrapers have been built, including the Ascent MKE building, Mjostarnet in Norway, and the Stadthaus building.

The Ascent MKE building was built in 2022 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and is the tallest high-rise building using different mass timber components in combination with some steel and concrete.  This plyscraper is 87 meters tall and has 25 stories.

The Stadthaus building is a residential building built in 2009 in Hackney, London.  It has 9 stories reaching 30 meters tall.  It uses CLT panels as load-bearing walls and floor &#x27;slabs&#x27;.

The Black &amp; White Building is an office building topped out in 2023 in Shoreditch, London. It has 6 stories reaching 17.8 meters tall. It uses CLT panels, glulam curtain walling, and LVL columns and beams.

As of 2022, over 84 mass timber buildings at least eight stories tall were in construction or completed worldwide, with numerous other projects in the planning stages. Its environmental benefits and distinctive appearance drive the growing interest in mass timber construction.

===Bridges===
The Mistissini Bridge built in Quebec, Canada, in 2014 is a 160-meter-long bridge that features both glulam beams and CLT panels.  The bridge was designed to cross over the Uupaachikus Pass.

The Placer River Pedestrian Bridge built in Alaska, United States, in 2013.  It spans long and is located in the Chugach National Forest.  This bridge features glulam as it was used create the trusses.

===Parking structures===
The Glenwood CLT Parking Garage in Springfield, Oregon, is going to be a garage that features CLT.  It will be 4 stories tall and hold 360 parking spaces.  The parking garage however is under construction , and the year of completion is not yet known.

==See also==
* Green building and wood
* Natural Fibre Board
* Reclaimed lumber
* Timber recycling

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==

* APA The Engineered Wood Association
* Canadian Wood Council Engineered Wood Products</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="0" end="15" title="Engineered wood" label="Engineered wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="29" end="40" title="Engineered wood" label="mass timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="42" end="56" title="Engineered wood" label="composite wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="58" end="71" title="Engineered wood" label="man-made wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="76" end="94" title="Engineered wood" label="manufactured board"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="127" end="140" title="wood products" label="wood products"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="220" end="227" title="wood veneer" label="veneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="261" end="269" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="309" end="327" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q911043" start="397" end="419" title="cross-laminated timber" label="cross-laminated timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="499" end="509" title="engineering" label="engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="1078" end="1086" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="1092" end="1100" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1122" end="1128" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="1130" end="1137" title="Sawmill" label="Sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="1289" end="1296" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q642231" start="1298" end="1323" title="medium-density fibreboard" label="medium-density fibreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="1334" end="1348" title="particle board" label="particle board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225439" start="1386" end="1407" title="oriented strand board" label="oriented strand board"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="1438" end="1444" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377794" start="1549" end="1566" title="engineered bamboo" label="engineered bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="1603" end="1613" title="cellulose" label="cellulosic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="1634" end="1640" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="1670" end="1673" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="1681" end="1686" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1694" end="1698" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="1706" end="1710" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137540" start="1719" end="1724" title="kenaf" label="kenaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q799856" start="1736" end="1754" title="sugar cane residue" label="sugar cane residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147096" start="1809" end="1824" title="vegetable fiber" label="vegetable fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092595" start="1828" end="1847" title="Ready-to-assemble furniture" label="Flat-pack furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397443" start="2872" end="2882" title="fiberboard" label="fiberboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="2887" end="2901" title="particle board" label="particle board"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="2922" end="2929" title="Plywood" label="Plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225439" start="3447" end="3468" title="Oriented strand board" label="Oriented strand board"/>
<link wikidata="Q642231" start="4433" end="4458" title="Medium-density fibreboard" label="Medium-density fibreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251688" start="4494" end="4503" title="hardboard" label="hardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="4763" end="4777" title="Particle board" label="Particle board"/>
<link wikidata="Q816713" start="4837" end="4844" title="sawdust" label="sawdust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418040" start="4852" end="4867" title="synthetic resin" label="synthetic resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q286388" start="5047" end="5056" title="Rice hulls" label="rice husk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791381" start="6136" end="6159" title="Laminated veneer lumber" label="Laminated veneer lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134929" start="6554" end="6576" title="Parallel-strand lumber" label="Parallel-strand lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141333" start="7503" end="7511" title="Millwork (building material)" label="millwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079600" start="7726" end="7733" title="I-joist" label="I-joist"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="7992" end="7997" title="Shear stress" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q115095345" start="9530" end="9557" title="International Building Code" label="International Building Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="9616" end="9629" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="9716" end="9725" title="high-rise" label="high-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q911043" start="9791" end="9813" title="Cross-laminated timber" label="Cross-laminated timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q643449" start="10166" end="10188" title="Glued laminated timber" label="Glued laminated timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962488" start="10576" end="10587" title="Brettstapel" label="Brettstapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="10703" end="10707" title="Volatile organic compound" label="VOCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="10717" end="10729" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q971298" start="10747" end="10761" title="Wood glue" label="wood adhesives"/>
<link wikidata="Q911043" start="10813" end="10816" title="Cross-laminated timber" label="CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="10858" end="10867" title="Softwood" label="softwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365730" start="10984" end="10990" title="Dowel" label="dowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="11003" end="11011" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419877" start="11039" end="11057" title="Thermally modified wood" label="thermal-compressed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11325" end="11330" title="Wood drying#Methods of drying timber" label="dried"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11350" end="11354" title="Kiln#Wood-drying kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="11723" end="11744" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="14934" end="14940" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407490" start="14945" end="14958" title="hemicellulose" label="hemicellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="15274" end="15288" title="hydrogen bonds" label="hydrogen bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="15742" end="15756" title="phenolic resin" label="phenolic resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007567" start="15768" end="15786" title="impregnation resin" label="impregnation resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="15814" end="15821" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307034" start="15949" end="15961" title="pressed wood" label="pressed wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="16174" end="16179" title="Ionic compound" label="ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q580942" start="16384" end="16392" title="nanopore" label="nanopore"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="16401" end="16410" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q899670" start="16602" end="16612" title="emissivity" label="emissivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="16620" end="16628" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997395" start="16687" end="16704" title="radiative cooling" label="radiative cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="16923" end="16943" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243120" start="17034" end="17054" title="List of insulation materials" label="insulating materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q380049" start="17080" end="17090" title="Mesoporous material" label="mesoporous"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="17679" end="17688" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q898597" start="17884" end="17894" title="cross-link" label="cross-link"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="18007" end="18025" title="thermal insulation" label="thermal insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24817474" start="18516" end="18542" title="Transparent wood composite" label="Transparent wood composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="18721" end="18727" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="18924" end="18929" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="18934" end="18942" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="19021" end="19035" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="19385" end="19405" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070510" start="20592" end="20602" title="solid wood" label="solid wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q643449" start="22658" end="22664" title="Glulam" label="Glulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q643449" start="23966" end="23972" title="Glued laminated timber" label="glulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q523256" start="24793" end="24811" title="Sustainable design" label="Sustainable design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="24940" end="24958" title="dimensional lumber" label="dimensional lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="25926" end="25934" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="26032" end="26044" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q146537" start="26086" end="26103" title="urea-formaldehyde" label="urea-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="26170" end="26177" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625476" start="26221" end="26230" title="Siding (construction)" label="sheathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q146537" start="26405" end="26422" title="Urea-formaldehyde" label="Urea-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="26480" end="26505" title="Phenol formaldehyde resin" label="Phenol formaldehyde resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20180653" start="26578" end="26599" title="Melamine resin" label="Melamine-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370465" start="26707" end="26748" title="Polymeric methylene diphenyl diisocyanate" label="Polymeric methylene diphenyl diisocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="26759" end="26771" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257074" start="27007" end="27026" title="fiber cement siding" label="fiber cement siding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446387" start="27146" end="27161" title="fiberglass mesh" label="fiberglass mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="27194" end="27206" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="27237" end="27256" title="Cellular respiration" label="cellular metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="27260" end="27266" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634333" start="28601" end="28619" title="List of polyurethane applications" label="polyurethane foams"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="28624" end="28634" title="Thermal insulation" label="insulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345906" start="32197" end="32231" title="Environmental Product Declaration" label="environmental product declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455283" start="32819" end="32829" title="Plyscraper" label="Plyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q106298611" start="32988" end="32998" title="Ascent MKE" label="Ascent MKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q56409092" start="33009" end="33019" title="Mjostarnet" label="Mjostarnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596533" start="33039" end="33048" title="Stadthaus" label="Stadthaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="33105" end="33114" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596533" start="33309" end="33318" title="Stadthaus" label="Stadthaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58888182" start="33371" end="33386" title="Hackney, London" label="Hackney, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027127" start="33578" end="33588" title="Shoreditch" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="34038" end="34044" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="34243" end="34249" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="34312" end="34335" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q40268" start="34462" end="34481" title="Springfield, Oregon" label="Springfield, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603458" start="34695" end="34718" title="Green building and wood" label="Green building and wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q130260015" start="34721" end="34740" title="Natural Fibre Board" label="Natural Fibre Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302557" start="34743" end="34759" title="Reclaimed lumber" label="Reclaimed lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804677" start="34762" end="34778" title="Timber recycling" label="Timber recycling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276512" wikidata="Q42627" url="?curid=276512" title="Leopard cat">
<text>The leopard cat (Prionailurus bengalensis) is a small wild cat native to continental South, Southeast, and East Asia. Since 2002 it has been listed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List as it is widely distributed although threatened by habitat loss and hunting in parts of its range.

Historically, the leopard cat of continental Asia was considered the same species as the Sunda leopard cat. As of 2017, the latter is recognised as a distinct species, with the taxonomic name &quot;Prionailurus javanensis&quot;.

Leopard cat subspecies differ widely in fur colour, tail length, skull shape and size of carnassials. Archaeological evidence indicates that the leopard cat was the first cat species domesticated in Neolithic China about 5,000 years ago in Shaanxi and Henan Provinces.

== Characteristics ==
A leopard cat is about the size of a domestic cat, but more slender, with longer legs and well-defined webs between its toes. Its small head is marked with two prominent dark stripes and a short and narrow white muzzle. There are two dark stripes running from the eyes to the ears and smaller white streaks running from the eyes to the nose. The backs of its moderately long and rounded ears are black with central white spots. Body and limbs are marked with black spots of varying size and colour, and along its back are two to four rows of elongated spots. The tail is about half the size of its head-body length and is spotted with a few indistinct rings near the black tip. The background colour of the spotted fur is tawny, with a white chest and belly. However, in their huge range, they vary so much in colouration and size of spots as well as in body size and weight that initially they were thought to be several different species. The fur colour is yellowish brown in the southern populations, but pale silver-grey in the northern ones. The black markings may be spotted, rosetted, or may even form dotted streaks, depending on subspecies. In the tropics, leopard cats weigh , have head-body lengths of , with long tails. In northern China and Siberia, they weigh up to , and have head-body lengths of up to ; generally, they put on weight before winter and become thinner until spring. Shoulder height is about .

==Taxonomy==
&quot;Felis bengalensis&quot; was the scientific name proposed by Robert Kerr in 1792 for a leopard cat from Bengal. In the subsequent decades, 20 more leopard cat specimens were described and named, including:

* &quot;Felis nipalensis&quot; (Horsfield &amp; Vigors, 1829) from Nepal
* &quot;Felis chinensis&quot; (Gray, 1837) from Canton Province, China
* &quot;Leopardus ellioti&quot; (Gray, 1842) from the area of Bombay Presidency
* &quot;Felis horsfieldi&quot; (Gray, 1842) from Bhutan
* &quot;Felis wagati&quot; (Gray, 1867) and &quot;Felis tenasserimensis&quot; (Gray, 1867) from Tenasserim
* &quot;Felis microtis&quot; (Milne-Edwards, 1872) from the Peking area; and also from Tsushima Island.
* &quot;Felis euptilura&quot; (Elliot, 1871) based on two skins from Siberia. One was depicted in Gustav Radde&#x27;s illustration cum description of a wild cat; the other was part of a collection at the Regent&#x27;s Park Zoo. The ground colour of both was light brownish-yellow, strongly mixed with grey and covered with reddish-brown spots, head grey with a dark-red stripe across the cheek. The initial binomial &quot;euptilura&quot; given by Elliott has been incorrectly changed to &quot;&quot;euptilurus&quot; by some later authors, but under the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature Article 31.2.1, nouns and noun phrases are not subject to gender agreement; at present, both terms appear in use, but only the spelling &quot;euptilura&quot;&quot; is correct.
* &quot;Felis manchurica&quot; (Mori, 1922) from the vicinity of Mukden in Manchuria was a light grey spotted skin.
In 1939, Reginald Innes Pocock subordinated them to the genus &quot;Prionailurus&quot;. The collection of the Natural History Museum, London comprised several skulls and large numbers of skins of leopard cats from various regions. Based on this broad variety of skins, he proposed to differentiate between a southern subspecies &quot;P. bengalensis bengalensis&quot; from warmer latitudes to the west and east of the Bay of Bengal, and a northern &quot;P. bengalensis horsfieldi&quot; from the Himalayas, having a fuller winter coat than the southern. His description of leopard cats from the areas of Gilgit and Karachi under the trinomen &quot;Prionailurus bengalensis trevelyani&quot; is based on seven skins that had longer, paler and more greyish fur than those from the Himalayas. He assumed that &quot;trevelyani&quot; inhabits more rocky, less forested habitats than &quot;bengalensis&quot; and &quot;horsfieldi&quot;.

Two more subspecies were proposed and described:

* &quot;P. b. alleni&quot; (Sody, 1949) from Hainan Island
* Iriomote cat &quot;P. b. iriomotensis&quot; (Imaizumi, 1967) from the island of Iriomote, one of the Ryukyu Islands in the Japanese Archipelago; Initially, the Iriomote cat was recognised as a distinct species, but following mtDNA analysis in the 1990s was considered a leopard cat subspecies.

In the 1970s and 1980s, the Russian zoologists Geptner, Gromov and Baranova disagreed with this classification. They emphasized the differences of skins and skulls at their disposal and the ones originating in Southeast Asia, and coined the term Amur forest cat, which they regarded as a distinct species. In 1987, Chinese zoologists pointed out the affinity of leopard cats from northern China, Amur cats and leopard cats from southern latitudes. In view of the morphological similarities they did not support classifying the Amur cat as a species.

Molecular analysis of 39 leopard cat tissue samples clearly showed three clades: a northern lineage and southern lineages 1 and 2. The northern lineage comprises leopard cats from Tsushima Islands, the Korean Peninsula, the continental Far East, Taiwan, and Iriomote Island. Southern lineage 1, comprising Southeast Asian populations, showed higher genetic diversity. Southern lineage 2 is genetically distant from the other lineages.

Following a revision of Felidae taxonomy in 2017, two leopard cat species are now recognised, based on molecular analyses, morphological differences, and biogeographic separation:

* the mainland leopard cat (&quot;P. bengalensis&quot;) is widely distributed on mainland Asia, from Pakistan to Southeast Asia, China, and the Russian Far East.
* the Sunda leopard cat (&quot;P. javanensis&quot;) is native to Java, Bali, Borneo, Sumatra, Palawan, Negros, Cebu, Panay, and possibly the Malay Peninsula.

Two mainland leopard cat subspecies are currently recognised:

* &quot;P. b. bengalensis&quot; (Kerr, 1792) ranges in South and East Asia, from Pakistan to China, and probably the Malay Peninsula; and 
* &quot;P. b. euptilura&quot; (Elliott, 1871) is native to the Russian Far East, Manchuria, Korea, Taiwan, Iriomote and Tsushima Islands.

=== Phylogeny ===
Phylogenetic analysis of the nuclear DNA in tissue samples from all Felidae species revealed that the evolutionary radiation of the Felidae began in Asia in the Miocene around . Analysis of mitochondrial DNA of all Felidae species indicates a radiation at around .

The &quot;Prionailurus&quot; species are estimated to have had a common ancestor between , and .
Both models agree in the rusty-spotted cat (&quot;P. rubiginosus&quot;) having been the first cat of this evolutionary lineage that genetically diverged, followed by the flat-headed cat (&quot;P. planiceps&quot;) and then the fishing cat (&quot;P. viverrinus&quot;). It is estimated to have diverged together with the leopard cat between and .

The following cladogram shows the phylogenetic relationships of the leopard cat as derived through analysis of nuclear DNA:

== Distribution and habitat ==
The leopard cat is the most widely distributed Asian small wild cat. Its range extends from the Amur region in the Russian Far East over the Korean Peninsula, China, Indochina, the Indian Subcontinent to northern Pakistan. It lives in tropical evergreen rainforests and plantations at sea level, in subtropical deciduous and coniferous forests in the foothills of the Himalayas at elevations above . It is able to tolerate human-modified landscapes with vegetation cover to some degree, and inhabits agriculturally used areas such as oil palm and sugar cane plantations.

In 2009, a leopard cat was recorded by a camera trap in Nepal&#x27;s Makalu-Barun National Park at an elevation of . At least six individuals inhabit the survey area, which is dominated by associations of rhododendron, oak and maple. The highest elevation record was obtained in September 2012 at in the Kanchenjunga Conservation Area.

In the northeast of its range it lives close to rivers, valleys and in ravine forests, but avoids areas with more than of snowfall. It is rare in Pakistan&#x27;s arid treeless areas. In Afghanistan, it was reported in the 1970s from Jalalkot and Norgul in the Kunar Valley, and the Waygul forest of Dare Pech.

In Thailand&#x27;s Phu Khiao Wildlife Sanctuary, 20 leopard cats were radio-collared between 1999 and 2003. Home ranges of males ranged from to , and of the six females from to .
In China, it was recorded in the Changqing National Nature Reserve in the Qinling Mountains, in the Tangjiahe National Nature Reserve in the Min Mountains, in Wolong Nature Reserve and other protected areas in the Qionglai Mountains and Daliang Mountains between 2002 and 2008.

In the Japanese archipelago, the leopard cat is currently restricted to the islands of Iriomote and Tsushima. Fossils excavated dating to the Pleistocene period suggest a broader distribution in the past.

== Ecology and behaviour ==

Leopard cats are , except during the breeding season. Some are active during the day, but most hunt at night, preferring to stalk murids, tree shrews and hares. They are agile climbers and quite arboreal in their habits. They rest in trees, but also hide in dense thorny undergrowth on the ground. There, leopard cats feed on a large proportion of rats compared to forested areas.

Leopard cats can swim, but seldom do so. They produce a similar range of vocalisations to the domestic cat. Both sexes scent mark their territory by spraying urine, leaving faeces in exposed locations, head rubbing, and scratching.

===Diet===
Leopard cats are carnivorous, feeding on a variety of small prey including mammals, lizards, amphibians, birds and insects. In most parts of their range, small rodents such as rats and mice form the major part of their diet, which is often supplemented with grass, eggs, poultry, and aquatic prey. They are active hunters, dispatching their prey with a rapid pounce and bite. Unlike many other small cats, they do not &quot;play&quot; with their food, maintaining a tight grip with their claws until the animal is dead. This may be related to the relatively high proportion of birds in their diet, which are more likely to escape when released than are rodents.

===Reproduction and development===
The breeding season of leopard cats varies depending on the climate. In tropical habitats, kittens are born throughout the year. In colder habitats farther north, females give birth in spring. Their gestation period lasts 60–70 days. Litter size varies between two and three kittens. Captive-born kittens weighed at birth and opened their eyes by 15 days of age. Within two weeks, they double their weight and are four times their birth weight at the age of five weeks. At the age of four weeks, their permanent canines break through, and they begin to eat meat. Captive females reach sexual maturity earliest at the age of one year and have their first litter at the age of 13 to 14 months. Captive leopard cats have lived for up to thirteen years.

The estrus period lasts five to nine days.

== Threats ==
In China, leopard cats are hunted mainly for their fur. Between 1984 and 1989, about 200,000 skins were exported yearly. A survey carried out in 1989 among major fur traders revealed more than 800,000 skins on stock. Since the European Union imposed an import ban in 1988, Japan has become the main importing country, and received 50,000 skins in 1989. Although commercial trade is much reduced, the leopard cat continues to be hunted throughout most of its range for fur, food, and for sale as a pet. It is widely viewed as a poultry thief and killed in retribution.

In Myanmar, 483 body parts of at least 443 individuals were observed in four markets surveyed between 1991 and 2006. Numbers were significantly larger than non-threatened species. Three of the surveyed markets are situated on international borders with China and Thailand, and cater to international buyers, although the leopard cat is completely protected under Myanmar&#x27;s national legislation. Implementation and enforcement of CITES is considered inadequate.

==Conservation==

The leopard cat is listed in CITES Appendix II. In Hong Kong, it is protected under the Wild Animals Protection Ordinance Cap 170. The population is well over 50,000 individuals and, although declining, the cat is not endangered.

The Tsushima leopard cat is listed as Critically Endangered on the Japanese Red List of Endangered Species, and has been the focus of a conservation program funded by the Japanese government since 1995. It is threatened by habitat loss, including from logging in the 1950s and 1960s, and a growing deer population which removes undergrowth that the Tsushima cat hunts for rodents in. The historical population has been split into two by the dividing of Tsushima island by a canal, and the southern population was thought extinct until a sighting in 2007. A recorded 122 individuals were killed by cars from 1992 to 2022. A captive breeding program has been initiated, but has not led to any successful reintroductions.

In the United States, the leopard cat is listed as Endangered under the Endangered Species Act since 1976; except under permit, it is prohibited to import, export, sell, purchase and transport leopard cats in interstate commerce. A permit is required for the import or exportation of the Asian Leopard cat. Those who import/export without a CITES permit face large fines.

==Leopard cats and hybrids as pets==
Fossil remains of leopard cats were excavated at Neolithic villages in Central China in 2001. Radiometric dating of these bones showed that they are at least 5,000 years old. These findings indicate that the leopard cat was a human commensal or domesticated in Neolithic China. They were later replaced with domestic cats that originated in the Middle East, some time before the Tang dynasty.

The Bengal cat is a cross breed between the leopard cat and the domestic cat. It was introduced to cat shows in the 1970s. The fifth generation is marked like a leopard cat. This hybrid is usually permitted to be kept as a pet without a license. The founding parents from the F1–F3 generations of breeding are usually reserved for breeding stock purposes or the specialty-pet home environment.

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="4" end="15" title="Leopard cat" label="leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42602" start="48" end="62" title="Felinae" label="small wild cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="85" end="90" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="92" end="101" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="107" end="116" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="151" end="164" title="Least Concern" label="Least Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="172" end="185" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="360" end="367" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693726" start="375" end="392" title="Sunda leopard cat" label="Sunda leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="463" end="472" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="528" end="538" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q280781" start="605" end="615" title="carnassial" label="carnassial"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="715" end="724" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="756" end="763" title="Shaanxi province" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="768" end="782" title="Henan Province" label="Henan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="845" end="857" title="domestic cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1740" end="1747" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368303" start="1890" end="1897" title="Rosette (zoology)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1965" end="1972" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="2062" end="2069" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="2284" end="2299" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q472232" start="2312" end="2323" title="Robert Kerr (writer)" label="Robert Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="2355" end="2361" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114846" start="2410" end="2418" title="zoological specimen" label="specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q507763" start="2490" end="2499" title="Thomas Horsfield" label="Horsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q332479" start="2506" end="2512" title="Nicholas Aylward Vigors" label="Vigors"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="2562" end="2566" title="John Edward Gray" label="Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="2579" end="2594" title="Guangdong" label="Canton Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q891827" start="2664" end="2681" title="Bombay Presidency" label="Bombay Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="2731" end="2737" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="2834" end="2844" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tenasserim"/>
<link wikidata="Q542059" start="2875" end="2888" title="Alphonse Milne-Edwards" label="Milne-Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2905" end="2911" title="Peking" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q52051" start="2932" end="2947" title="Tsushima Island" label="Tsushima Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q383324" start="2980" end="2986" title="Daniel Giraud Elliot" label="Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q62625" start="3047" end="3059" title="Gustav Radde" label="Gustav Radde"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="3153" end="3175" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park Zoo" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="3502" end="3547" title="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681183" start="3756" end="3760" title="Tamezo Mori" label="Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="3789" end="3795" title="Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q174664" start="3849" end="3870" title="Reginald Innes Pocock" label="Reginald Innes Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42592" start="3908" end="3920" title="Prionailurus" label="Prionailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="3950" end="3980" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="4157" end="4167" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="4219" end="4227" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="4257" end="4270" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="4334" end="4343" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q609024" start="4442" end="4448" title="Gilgit" label="Gilgit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="4453" end="4460" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650061" start="4471" end="4479" title="trinomen" label="trinomen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4846" end="4850" title=":nl:Henri Jacob Victor Sody" label="Sody"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="4863" end="4869" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q376135" start="4879" end="4891" title="Iriomote cat" label="Iriomote cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q432124" start="4959" end="4967" title="Iriomote" label="Iriomote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="4980" end="4994" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="5002" end="5022" title="Japanese Archipelago" label="Japanese Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="5104" end="5109" title="mtDNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q641511" start="5221" end="5228" title="Vladimir Geptner" label="Geptner"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="5637" end="5650" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q210506" start="5725" end="5743" title="Molecular genetics" label="Molecular analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="5798" end="5803" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52051" start="5905" end="5921" title="Tsushima Islands" label="Tsushima Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="5927" end="5943" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="5961" end="5969" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q432124" start="5983" end="5998" title="Iriomote Island" label="Iriomote Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="6074" end="6091" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="6227" end="6234" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="6486" end="6502" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693726" start="6510" end="6527" title="Sunda leopard cat" label="Sunda leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="6645" end="6660" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="6946" end="6955" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="7022" end="7034" title="Phylogenetic" label="Phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="7051" end="7062" title="nuclear DNA" label="nuclear DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="7124" end="7146" title="evolutionary radiation" label="evolutionary radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="7183" end="7190" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="7212" end="7229" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="7353" end="7368" title="common ancestor" label="common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q309274" start="7410" end="7427" title="rusty-spotted cat" label="rusty-spotted cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7491" end="7500" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553369" start="7504" end="7511" title="Lineage (genetic)" label="lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="7517" end="7537" title="Genetic divergence" label="genetically diverged"/>
<link wikidata="Q274177" start="7555" end="7570" title="flat-headed cat" label="flat-headed cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190674" start="7611" end="7622" title="fishing cat" label="fishing cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="7744" end="7753" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886" start="7982" end="7986" title="Amur Oblast" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="8001" end="8017" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="8027" end="8043" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="8052" end="8061" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="8067" end="8086" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="8099" end="8107" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="8197" end="8206" title="Deciduous forest" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="8211" end="8228" title="coniferous forest" label="coniferous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="8254" end="8263" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609983" start="8420" end="8428" title="oil palm" label="oil palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="8433" end="8443" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723004" start="8499" end="8510" title="camera trap" label="camera trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="8514" end="8519" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q964013" start="8527" end="8553" title="Makalu-Barun National Park" label="Makalu-Barun National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="8663" end="8675" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="8677" end="8680" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="8685" end="8690" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11060571" start="8762" end="8792" title="Kanchenjunga Conservation Area" label="Kanchenjunga Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042028" start="8866" end="8872" title="ravine" label="ravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="8981" end="8992" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308493" start="9055" end="9067" title="Kunar Valley" label="Kunar Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663248" start="9094" end="9103" title="Dara-I-Pech District" label="Dare Pech"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="9109" end="9117" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471745" start="9125" end="9153" title="Phu Khiao Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Phu Khiao Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="9176" end="9190" title="Radio telemetry" label="radio-collared"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072099" start="9318" end="9351" title="Changqing National Nature Reserve" label="Changqing National Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q863798" start="9359" end="9366" title="Qinling" label="Qinling"/>
<link wikidata="Q728955" start="9426" end="9439" title="Min Mountains" label="Min Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464658" start="9444" end="9465" title="Wolong Nature Reserve" label="Wolong Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q252882" start="9499" end="9517" title="Qionglai Mountains" label="Qionglai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157921" start="9522" end="9539" title="Daliang Mountains" label="Daliang Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="9571" end="9591" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q432124" start="9651" end="9659" title="Iriomote Island" label="Iriomote"/>
<link wikidata="Q52051" start="9664" end="9672" title="Tsushima Island" label="Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="9682" end="9691" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="excavated"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="9706" end="9717" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25916" start="9929" end="9935" title="Muridae" label="murids"/>
<link wikidata="Q231550" start="9937" end="9947" title="tree shrew" label="tree shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="9953" end="9957" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="10300" end="10310" title="scent mark" label="scent mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="10330" end="10344" title="spraying urine" label="spraying urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203399" start="10383" end="10395" title="Bunting (animal behavior)" label="head rubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="11322" end="11331" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="11708" end="11723" title="sexual maturity" label="sexual maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="11878" end="11884" title="estrus" label="estrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="12159" end="12173" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="12504" end="12511" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="12935" end="12940" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="13015" end="13032" title="CITES Appendix II" label="CITES Appendix II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="13037" end="13046" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635509" start="13054" end="13063" title="List of protected species in Hong Kong" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="14009" end="14031" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="14146" end="14165" title="interstate commerce" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="14347" end="14353" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="14383" end="14392" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="excavated"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="14396" end="14405" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="14441" end="14459" title="Radiometric dating" label="Radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="14579" end="14588" title="commensal" label="commensal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="14592" end="14603" title="domesticate" label="domesticate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284498" start="14608" end="14623" title="Neolithic China" label="Neolithic China"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="14664" end="14667" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="14726" end="14738" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42583" start="14745" end="14755" title="Bengal cat" label="Bengal cat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14761" end="14772" title="Cross breed#Interspecific hybrids" label="cross breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293576" start="15017" end="15019" title="F1 generation" label="F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="15072" end="15086" title="breeding stock" label="breeding stock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276513" wikidata="Q1002873" url="?curid=276513" title="Definitive stamp">
<text>A definitive stamp is a postage stamp that is part of the regular issue of a country&#x27;s stamps, available for sale by the post office for an extended period of time and designed to serve the everyday postal needs of the country. The term is used in contrast to a &quot;provisional stamp&quot;, one that is issued for a temporary period until regular stamps are available, or a &quot;commemorative stamp&quot;, a stamp &quot;issued to honor a person or mark a special event&quot; available only for a limited time. Commonly, a definitive issue or series includes stamps in a range of denominations sufficient to cover current postal rates. An &quot;issue&quot; generally means a set that is put on sale all at the same time, while a &quot;series&quot; is spread out over several years, but the terms are not precise. Additional stamps in a series may be produced as needed by changes in postal rates; nevertheless some values may be permanently available, regardless of prevailing rates; examples include 1c or 1p and $1 or £1.

== Range ==
The range of values varies by era and country, but the focus is on coverage; the values should be sufficient to make up all possible charges using as few stamps as possible. Generally the smallest value will be the smallest unit of currency, or smallest fractional postal rate; for instance, the 1925 regular issue of the United States included a -cent stamp because some rates were expressed in fractions of a cent per ounce. The highest value of the series is generally quite large, typically from 50 to 100 times the normal letter rate; typical values include one pound, five dollars, etc. Not often seen by the average person, they are most common for parcels.

The in-between values are usually chosen to &quot;make change&quot; efficiently, for instance 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 in a decimal currency. It is common to include all values between 1 and 10, multiples of 5 from 10 to 50, and multiples of 10 from 50 to 100. Additional &quot;oddball&quot; values may reflect specific common rates, and if the series lasts for a period of time, there may be a number of such unusual values as in the UK QE II Machin series below.

Definitives are the workhorse stamps of a country, and as such, they tend to be small, with designs reflecting local culture and history. The definitives of poorer countries will often be very plain and cheaply printed, unlike the large and decorative commemoratives, which are almost pure profit if bought by foreign collectors and never used for postage.
== Frequency of issue==
Since postal administrations know that many stamp collectors want to own every stamp of a definitive series, and a complete series can be quite expensive, there is always the temptation by governmental bureaucrats to make extra money by frequently issuing new definitive sets, as well as including stamps with very high face values in a set. Collectors&#x27; organizations have recommended that administrations only bring out new definitive issues no more often than every five years, and most administrations of the world follow this policy. An exception would be the death of a monarch, or other prominent leader, necessitating a new definitive series for the new ruler. Sometimes merely the portrait is changed, and the outer design (known as the frame) remains the same throughout several issues. Countries that ignore frequency of issue guidelines and issue volumes of stamps that have little to no practical usage produce what many collectors refer to as &quot;wallpaper&quot;.

== Collecting ==
Since definitive series are issued over a period of time and are reprinted to meet postal demand, they often contain more variation than is typically found in stamps that have a single print run. Switching printing methods and experimenting with phosphors is a common source of variation in modern stamps, while differences in watermarks and perforation are also prevalent, especially in older stamps. Many philatelists study these differences as part of their hobby and try to collect all the varieties of each stamp. Some varieties are particularly rare and can be more valuable than others of the same stamp that may look the same to the casual observer. One notable example of this variation is the Machin stamps of the UK, where philatelists have identified over 1,000 varieties of the same basic design.

Special stamps, such as the Christmas stamps issued annually by various countries, are sometimes regarded as definitives because they are not commemoratives, but they typically only include a limited range of denominations relating specifically to the mail seen on the occasion for which they are issued.

== Notable definitive stamp series ==
* Argentina
** 1935-1951 Patriots and Natural Resources Issue
* Australia
** Kangaroo and Map
** King George V series
* Canada
** Scroll issue
** Queen Elizabeth II issue
** Arch and maple leaf issue
** War issue
* France
**Ceres series
**Navigation and Commerce issue
* Germany
** Germania
** Women in German history series
* Greece
** Hermes Heads
* Norway
** , issued since 1872
* Portugal
** Ceres series
* Russia
** Gold Standard issue, produced by the USSR in 1923–1927
* United Kingdom
** Wilding series
** Machin series
* United States
** 1869 Pictorial Issue
** Series of 1902
** Washington-Franklin Issues
** Presidential Issue
** Liberty issue
** Prominent Americans series
** Americana series
** Great Americans series
** Transportation coils
** Distinguished Americans series

== See also ==
* Canadian definitive postage stamps
* Definitive postage stamps of Ireland
* Definitive stamps of Russia
* Definitive stamps of the Soviet Union

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1002873" start="2" end="18" title="Definitive stamp" label="definitive stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="24" end="37" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968980" start="273" end="290" title="provisional stamp" label="provisional stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="387" end="406" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070579" start="587" end="599" title="Denomination (postage stamp)" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1366" end="1379" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q856075" start="2596" end="2611" title="stamp collector" label="stamp collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577484" start="4257" end="4270" title="List of Machin stamps" label="Machin stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q21652062" start="4365" end="4378" title="Special stamp" label="Special stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145210" start="4393" end="4408" title="Christmas stamp" label="Christmas stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204911" start="4724" end="4770" title="Postage stamps and postal history of Argentina" label="1935-1951 Patriots and Natural Resources Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204906" start="4786" end="4802" title="Kangaroo and Map" label="Kangaroo and Map"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4806" end="4826" title="King George V series" label="King George V series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4839" end="4851" title="Scroll issue" label="Scroll issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270371" start="4855" end="4879" title="Queen Elizabeth II definitive stamp (Canada)" label="Queen Elizabeth II issue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4883" end="4908" title="Arch and maple leaf issue" label="Arch and maple leaf issue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4912" end="4921" title="War issue" label="War issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010345" start="4933" end="4945" title="Ceres series (France)" label="Ceres series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546092" start="4948" end="4977" title="Navigation and Commerce issue" label="Navigation and Commerce issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q460623" start="4991" end="4999" title="Germania (stamp)" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q463408" start="5003" end="5033" title="Women in German history series" label="Women in German history series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134266" start="5046" end="5058" title="Large Hermes head" label="Hermes Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010355" start="5105" end="5117" title="Ceres series (Portugal)" label="Ceres series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4193549" start="5130" end="5149" title="Gold Standard issue" label="Gold Standard issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5167" end="5171" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546103" start="5205" end="5219" title="Wilding series" label="Wilding series"/>
<link wikidata="Q497949" start="5223" end="5236" title="Machin series" label="Machin series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555255" start="5256" end="5276" title="1869 Pictorial Issue" label="1869 Pictorial Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984558" start="5280" end="5294" title="Series of 1902" label="Series of 1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971629" start="5298" end="5324" title="Washington-Franklin Issues" label="Washington-Franklin Issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376820" start="5328" end="5346" title="Presidential Issue" label="Presidential Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541839" start="5350" end="5363" title="Liberty issue" label="Liberty issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249748" start="5367" end="5393" title="Prominent Americans series" label="Prominent Americans series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745584" start="5397" end="5413" title="Americana series" label="Americana series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598651" start="5417" end="5439" title="Great Americans series" label="Great Americans series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835191" start="5443" end="5463" title="Transportation coils" label="Transportation coils"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282976" start="5467" end="5497" title="Distinguished Americans series" label="Distinguished Americans series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030745" start="5516" end="5550" title="Canadian definitive postage stamps" label="Canadian definitive postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251637" start="5553" end="5589" title="Definitive postage stamps of Ireland" label="Definitive postage stamps of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439342" start="5592" end="5619" title="Definitive stamps of Russia" label="Definitive stamps of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439343" start="5622" end="5659" title="Definitive stamps of the Soviet Union" label="Definitive stamps of the Soviet Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276518" wikidata="Q376135" url="?curid=276518" title="Iriomote cat">
<text>The Iriomote cat (Prionailurus bengalensis iriomotensis) is a subspecies of the leopard cat that lives exclusively on the Japanese island of Iriomote. It has been listed as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List since 2008, as the only population comprises fewer than 250 adult individuals and is considered declining. As of 2007, there were an estimated 100–109 individuals remaining.

In Japanese, it is called . In local dialects of the Yaeyama language, it is known as , , and .

==Description==

The fur of the Iriomote cat is mostly dark gray and light brown, with lighter hair on the belly and insides of the limbs. Hair along the jaw is white. There are two dark brown spots on each cheek. There are 5–7 stripes spanning from the forehead to the back of the head, but, unlike the leopard cat, the stripes stop before reaching the shoulders. Dark brown spots cover the sides of the body, and there are 3–4 bands of irregular stripes on the chest. The tail is dark brown; darker spots pattern the back side of the tail while the underside of the tail is solid. The tip of the tail is dark.

The tips of the ears are rounded, with black hair along the edge. There are no tufts of longer hair on the top of the ears. Adult Iriomote cats have a white spot on the back of each ear, much like those found on tigers&#x27; ears. Young Iriomote cats do not have these marks, and even as adults the spots will not be as white as those seen on other leopard cat subspecies.

The Iriomote cat&#x27;s eyes are a light amber color. Its nose is large and flat, with no fur covering the reddish-brown skin. The paw ranges from wide, in contrast to the wide paw of a domestic cat.

The skull is longer and more narrow than that of a domestic cat. When compared to the leopard cat&#x27;s skull, the Iriomote cat&#x27;s is roughly the same size but thicker. Because of this, the Iriomote cat&#x27;s brain is smaller; a male leopard cat&#x27;s brain is about 42 grams, whereas a male Iriomote cat&#x27;s brain is about 30 grams. The occipital bone of the skull and the auditory capsule are not connected. The mandibular symphysis is short.

Male Iriomote cats grow to be long and weigh . Females are smaller at about long and . Its tail is thick from base to tip and long. It has a long body and short, thick limbs. Its neck is also thick, and its shoulders are muscular, though its jumping power is comparatively weak.

The Iriomote cat has six pairs of incisors, two pairs of canine teeth, four pairs of premolars, and two pairs of molars for a total of 28 teeth. Compared to other cats, including small wild cats, the Iriomote cat is lacking one pair of premolars on the top jaw behind the canines. In addition to this, unlike most other subtropical mammals, Iriomote cats&#x27; teeth give details about their year-to-year history. It is expected that these details will help determine the age and behavior of the cats.

The anal glands of the Iriomote cat surround the anus; this contrasts with other cat species&#x27;, where they are inside the anus.

==Distribution==

The Iriomote cat is endemic to the Japanese Iriomote Island, which spans about . Iriomote consists predominantly of low mountains ranging in elevation with subtropical evergreen forest, including extensive belts of mangrove along the waterways. It is the smallest habitat of any wild cat species in the world.

The Iriomote cat lives predominantly in the subtropical forests that cover the island up to an elevation of . It prefers areas near rivers, forest edges, and places with low humidity.

==Ecology and behavior==
Iriomote cats are terrestrial, but climb trees, go into the water and also swim. They are nocturnal and especially active during twilight hours. During the daytime, they sleep in tree hollows or in caves. They mark their territory by urinating and defecating on rocks, tree stumps and bushes. Their home ranges vary from in size.

===Home range===
Iriomote cats are usually solitary. Their home range varies seasonally and also individually, and is smaller during the mating season. In 1998 and 1999, a male and a female Iriomote cat were radio tracked for seven to 13 successive days in the western part of the island. Their home ranges overlapped extensively in all periods. The periodical home range of the male was in size, and the resident female&#x27;s range was .

Iriomote cats are territorial. Home ranges of males and females overlap, and one to two females live within a male&#x27;s home range. Typically, home ranges of same sex cats will not overlap, but partial overlaps are seen. Often, these small overlaps are hunting grounds. It is thought that they patrol their territories during three to four days, marking and hunting as they go.

Young male Iriomote cats and some adult cats are transient, i. e. wandering over the island and waiting for an open home range slot that they can occupy by marking this area. Female cats allow their young to stay in their own home range and mark a new territory once the next breeding season comes.

===Diet===

Iriomote cats are carnivorous and prey on various mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and crustaceans. They typically ingest of food a day. Other wild cats primarily hunt small mammals, such as rodents and rabbits, but because there are no other carnivores to compete with the Iriomote cat on the island, there is no need for them to isolate themselves from the various habitats and food sources that are available. Thus, their diet is quite varied.

Mammalian prey includes black rats, Ryukyu flying foxes and young Ryukyu wild boar. Their prey also includes a wide range of birds, such as the Eastern spot-billed duck, slaty-legged crake, Eurasian scops-owl, pale thrush, and white-breasted waterhen.
Reptiles include various types of snakes and Kishinoue&#x27;s giant skink. They are also known to hunt Sakishima rice frogs, yellow-spotted crickets and crabs. As their hunting grounds tend to be in swamps or on shores, they sometimes swim and dive to catch water birds, fish, and freshwater prawns.
Seasonal dietary changes have been observed. They eat rats and frogs year-round, lizards in the summer and spring, and crickets and bats more often in the fall and winter.

When eating birds that are larger than a dusky thrush, most types of cats will pluck the feathers and then eat it, but the Iriomote cat will eat even large birds whole without removing the feathers. Also, unlike other cats, the Iriomote cat does not kill its prey immediately by breaking the spinal cord. Instead, it holds the animal in its mouth until it stops moving.
===Reproductive behavior===
During the mating season, Iriomote cats become active during the day as well. Breeding females are more active than nonbreeding ones during the late night and morning hours. Outside the mating season the cats live in solitary, but when they begin breeding they act together. The mating season lasts from December to March, and females go into heat several times during this period, with the peak being in January and February. Towards the end of February, they fast for about two weeks. It is during this period that females are most sexually excited. Male and female cats always stay together at this time, and it is thought that conception happens during these two weeks.

Between April and June pregnant female cats give birth to 1–3 kittens in a tree hollow or cavern. The locations chosen for birthing and rearing are dry and have good ventilation. Kittens stay with their mother for about eleven months. They begin to become more independent during the fall and winter months. They stay in their mother&#x27;s home range from anywhere between a few months and years. Kittens reach maturity twenty months after birth.

===Lifespan===
It is estimated that Iriomote cats live for seven to eight years in the wild, and eight to nine years in captivity. Human influences, traffic accidents and traps may lower their lifespan to two to five years. In captivity, an Iriomote cat lived for an estimated 15 years and one month, the longest known lifespan of any Iriomote cat.

==Discovery==
The Iriomote cat was discovered in 1965 by , an author who specialized in works about animals. In 1967, it was first described by Yoshinori Imaizumi, director of the zoological department of the National Museum of Nature and Science in Tokyo.

Prior to its scientific discovery, the Iriomote cat was known locally by various names: , . To distinguish between the Iriomote cat and other cats on the island, locals also gave other cats nicknames such as for stray cats and or for house cats. Others, however, believed that the Iriomote cat was a feral cat.

===Prior to specimen acquisition===
Based on information from local people, from the University of the Ryukyus was able to capture a kitten in 1962, but did not get an adult specimen. In 1964, from the exploration department of Waseda University informed Imaizumi of the rumors of a cat living in the mountains of Iriomote.

In February 1965, Togawa visited the Yaeyama Islands. He had heard in Naha from a newspaper columnist that there were rumors of wild cats living on Iriomote. He at first assumed that, like reports of the extinct Japanese wolf, people must have been mistaking escaped and feral house pets for wild animals. He spoke with colleague Tetsuo Koura who knew of and believed there to be some truth to the rumors. Koura then entrusted Togawa with the task of acquiring evidence. Togawa then traveled to Iriomote to gather information for his own report and to collect information on the Iriomote cat and a specimen.

Upon arriving on the island, Togawa learned that because there wasn&#x27;t enough food on Iriomote, people would cook Iriomote cats that had been caught and use the meat in soup. Cats caught in traps would also be disposed of, which made acquiring samples difficult.

Following these discoveries, he went to the hamlet of on the western side of the island. There, a middle school teacher who had worked under Koura said that he had caught one of the cats in a trap set for wild boar. He had sent the skin to Koura but buried the rest of the body. Togawa dug up the remains and got the skull. He also found two feces samples near the village, and was able to get a skin from a fisherman who lived in , a hamlet along Urauchi River.

He returned to Koura and sent the two skins, the feces, and the skull to Yoshinori Imaizumi at the National Museum of Nature and Science where examined the remains. The analysis was performed on 14 March 1965. The results showed the cat to be either a new species or a new subspecies, but there weren&#x27;t enough samples to confirm. They requested either a complete set of remains or a live specimen. Following the announcement, some members of the society believed the samples to show simple mutations while others believed them to be the remains of wild cats that had previously been brought to and left on the island by foreign ships.

===Live specimen acquisition to announcement===
In June 1965, Togawa returned to Iriomote with Koura in order to obtain a complete set of remains, a live specimen, and information regarding the cat&#x27;s ecology. They brought box traps and silvervine to aid their efforts in catching a live cat. According to hunters, though, only one or two cats per year were caught, and the number of remaining cats was probably quite low. Togawa did not expect to catch one alive.
In May 1965, prior to Togawa&#x27;s return to the island, a group of children from on a field trip to the southern part of the island found a weakened, injured male Iriomote cat at the base of the small on . The teacher in charge of the children took the cat. Another teacher preserved the pelt in formalin and buried the skeleton in a wooden box behind the school. Togawa exhumed the remains, and this cat became the prototype for the species. In addition to this example, the scientists also were able to obtain the crushed skull of a kitten from the neighboring Yubu Island that was later reconstructed by Imaizumi.

In addition to researching the Iriomote cat, Togawa also looked into rumors of a larger cat on the island (see #Yamapikaryaa) and conducted an investigation. Before returning to Tokyo, he offered $100 for any live Iriomote cat and $30 for dead cats that were brought to him. With the aid of the Taketomi mayor and the , he was able to publicize the offer on bulletin boards and in other ways. He also announced rewards for the rumored large cat on the island: $200 if brought in alive, $100 for remains.

Through these offers, he acquired two complete skeletons, two skulls, and three pelts that he brought back with him to Tokyo. One of the pelts was that which the elementary school children helped obtain, and it was confirmed to be that of an Iriomote cat. The sample from Yubu Island was small, and judgment was held back. A sample from Ishigaki Island was discovered to be a house cat.

In January 1966, the body of an Iriomote cat that had been caught in a wild boar trap in the mid-basin of the Nakama River was sent to Koura at the University of the Ryukyus, but there was no more information regarding captures for some time after this. In December 1966, , a hunter at the Nakama River&#x27;s mid-basin, caught a live male cat, but it escaped immediately. He then caught another male cat soon after.

On January 15, 1966, local hunters caught a young female Iriomote cat near . The National Museum of Nature and Science planned on using funds intended for garden repairs to pay for the specimens, but the hunters who caught the cats expected $1000–$3000 per cat. At the persuasion of the director of the District Forestry Office, the hunters accepted an award within the budget as a &quot;daily allowance&quot; or &quot;finder&#x27;s fee&quot;.

During this time, the mayor of Taketomi was making negotiations with the and the Ryukyu government. He traveled to Naha for these discussions, which covered the possibility of offering the two captured Iriomote cats to the emperor with the stated purpose of increasing national knowledge about Iriomote and for the promotion of industrial development on the island. At the same time, the Taketomi town offices, under the premise of obtaining permission from the Ryukyu government to keep the cats, confiscated samples from the staff of the National Museum of Nature and Science and brought them back to their offices.

With Togawa pressuring the newspapers and Yoshinori Imaizumi urging the Ryukyuan government and Southern Japan Liaison Offices through the Ministry of Education, the Southern Japan Liaison Offices denied the possibility of giving the cats to the emperor, and the Ryukyuan government persuaded the mayor not to follow through with his plans. Finally, the specimens were delivered to the museum.

The cats arrived at Haneda airport in March 1967. Yoshinori Imaizumi kept them shortly until Togawa, having been entrusted by the museum to observe them, took charge of them for about two years. The cats were then transferred to the museum for monitoring. The male died on April 25, 1973, and the female on December 13, 1975. The male&#x27;s pelt was temporarily stuffed, the blood was sent off for chromosomal research, and the rest of the body was preserved in formaldehyde. The female was stuffed and put on display in the museum.

In May 1967, The Mammalogical Society of Japan issued their third and fourth issues, announcing in English the discovery of a new genus of cat that was closely related to the primitive cat genus &quot;Metailurus&quot;. The former genus name of &quot;Mayailurus&quot; stems from the word used for &quot;cat&quot; on Iriomote, &quot;maya-&quot;, while &quot;-ailurus&quot; comes ancient Greek and also means &quot;cat&quot;. The subspecies name of &quot;iriomotensis&quot; means &quot;from Iriomote&quot;. The Japanese name of was proposed by Yoshinori Imaizumi, in honor of Togawa who discovered the species, but Togawa turned down the request and instead supported the name based on the Tsushima cat, which was also named after the location at which it was discovered. Koura agreed with Togawa, thus officiating the name.

==Classification and genealogy==
&quot;Mayailurus iriomotensis&quot; was the scientific name proposed by in 1967 for the Iriomote cat. Imaizumi pointed out that, compared to other leopard cats, the Iriomote cat retained some especially primitive features. Judging from these characteristics, he estimated that the Iriomote cat evolved as a species sometime between ten million years ago in the Miocene epoch and three million years ago during the Pliocene epoch. He also thought that they shared many primitive characteristics with fossils of the extinct genus &quot;Metailurus&quot;. He emphasized these points, stating that the Iriomote cat and &quot;Metailurus&quot; shared a common ancestor sometime between ten million and five million years ago, and from that he deducted that the Iriomote cat&#x27;s ancestors must have widened its range from mainland Asia to Iriomote and other areas beginning three million years ago. It appears to be a very ancient species, a ‘missing link’, more closely related to &quot;Pardofelis&quot; and &quot;Profelis&quot; than any other extant species of Prionailurus.

In contrast to Imaizumi&#x27;s assertions about its unique characteristics, other researchers strongly disputed the idea that the Iriomote cat is its own species ever since its discovery. Investigations involving skulls and teeth, samples and living animals, and genetic research were conducted. Because of these study results, it was subordinated under the genus &quot;Prionailurus&quot; as &quot;Prionailurus iriomotensis&quot; in 2005.

The Iriomote cat&#x27;s karyotype, the restriction fragment length of the ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and molecular phylogenetic analyses of the mitochondrial 12S rRNA and cytochrome b have proven to be identical, or nearly so, to the leopard cat&#x27;s. The two cats are assumed to be extremely closely related, their differences being categorized as either intraspecies variations or individual mutations. Also, from the speed of cytochrome b&#x27;s base-pair substitution and its diversity, it is estimated that the Iriomote cat diverged from the leopard cat around 180,000-200,000 years ago. According to marine geologists, the Ryukyu Islands were connected to mainland Asia via a land bridge from about 20,000 years ago to 240,000 years ago. Scientists believe that the Iriomote cat moved its range to the islands during this period. Because of this, it is assumed that there is little genetic variety within the species.

==Threats==

Destruction of habitat due to development, predation by dogs, traffic accidents, and traps set for wild boar and crabs all contribute to the decline in number of Iriomote cats. During the second survey of the island, conducted from 1982–1984, it was estimated that 83–108 Iriomote cats lived on the island. The third survey, conducted from 1993–1994, estimated that 99–110 of the cats were on the island. During the fourth survey, conducted from 2005–2007, there were an estimated 100–109 remaining cats. The method of estimating the numbers differed between the third and fourth surveys, though; if the third estimate were to be revised, there would have been an estimated 108–118 Iriomote cats at the time, meaning that the population is shrinking over time.

Along with the traffic accidents, logging due to development, and development of the swamplands, house pets are also causing problems. House cats and stray cats especially cause issues with competition, disease transmission, and genetic pollution due to hybrids born of inter-species breeding. It is also feared that dogs prey on the Iriomote cats. The government has successfully eliminated the stray cat population on Iriomote.
The primary fear stems from house cats that have become feral or partially feral, but there has been no monitoring of these interactions. Pressure from competition over food, contact with house cats that have contracted feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) and other contagious diseases, as well as decrease in population due to hybridization are all important issues with the Iriomote cat.

In June 1999, the Iriomote Wildlife Protection Center conducted an investigation among 50 house and feral cats and 23 Iriomote cats in order to see if FIV was being transmitted within the populations. FIV was not seen in any of the Iriomote cats, but three of the house and feral cats tested positive. Because of the fears regarding transmission of the disease, starting in 2001 Taketomi Town enacted the Cat Breeding Ordinance which required all residents to register their pet cats. In June 2008, the ordinance was revised to include mandatory FIV testing and vaccinations, spaying and neutering, and microchipping. A new limit to the number of pets allowed per owner was also added.

Furthermore, the cane toad, which secretes a poisonous liquid from glands in its ears, has also appeared on the island. In order to prevent further contamination of Iriomote, residents of Ishigaki Island began extermination measures in 2008.

==Conservation==

===Status===
Since 2008, the Iriomote cat is categorized as &quot;critically endangered&quot; by IUCN.

The Iriomote cat has been designated a natural monument by the Okinawa government. On May 15, 1972, along with the recovery of Okinawa, it was nationally recognized as a natural monument. On March 15, 1977, it was given special status amongst natural monuments, and in 1994 with the Species Protection Act, it was designated as a . This act was adopted on January 28 and enacted on March 1.

===Projects and activities===
In 1977, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh wrote a letter addressed to Crown Prince Akihito regarding the preservation of the Iriomote cat. The report attached to the letter (written by Professor Leyhausen) suggested outlawing any further migration to the island as well as banning the cultivation of the land. In response, Crown Prince Akihito said that he wished for a way that would allow for the preservation of the cats and the continued habitation of people on the island. He also explained that the prime minister at the time, Takeo Fukuda, was considering the implementation of a wildlife sanctuary on Iriomote.
In 1972, the National Museum of Nature and Science prepared for researching the ecology of Iriomote cats, and in November 1973 the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Ministry of the Environment conducted a joint preliminary investigation regarding the cat&#x27;s ecology, and from 1974 the Ministry of the Environment conducted a comprehensive investigation that lasted three years. After that, there were three more investigations beginning in 1982, 1992, and 2005.

In 1979, the EPA began a three-year-long feeding operation in order to increase the survival rate of kittens, but these actions have received some criticism.

Since the Iriomote cat&#x27;s discovery, various investigations have taken place. In 2006, automatic cameras and radio telemetry were used in order to understand the cats&#x27; state of life. Pathological tests regarding the contagiousness of diseases were also conducted, and tests on feces and food leftovers were also done. They also compiled records of cat sightings by locals and tourists.

Part of the Iriomote&#x27;s cat range was designated as on April 18, 1972. With the US&#x27;s return of the Ryukyu Islands to Japanese control on May 15, it became Iriomote-Ishigaki National Park, and in March 1991 11,584.67 hectares of the island was designated the in order to protect the natural environment of the islands. Despite these efforts, not enough land within the cats&#x27; preferred habitat of less than 200 meters above sea level was included. In 1995 the was established to increase preservation work, enforce research, and to increase understanding of the cat&#x27;s ecological needs.
Since the US returned control of the Ryukyu Islands to Japan in 1972, development on Iriomote continued with finances from the Okinawan mainland. In 1977, a prefectural road was built that circles half of the island, which has led to a few Iriomote cat deaths every year due to traffic accidents. The Ministry of the Environment as well as the governments of Okinawa and Taketomi Town began installing road signs to warn people of Iriomote cats crossing the road, tunnels beneath the road for their safe crossing, zebra zones which create loud noises when cars ride over them, wide ditches on the sides of roads, and ditches on the side of the road that are inclined on one side in order to improve the preservation of the cats. However, many residents have objected to restrictions on land cultivation and improvement brought about by the measures in place to protect the Iriomote cat and other species on the island.

In 2023, visitor caps were imposed for the island limiting tourists to 1,200 a day, or 33,000 a year. This is a significant cut from the average 300,000 a year that visited before the COVID-19 pandemic.

===In captivity===
There have been a handful of Iriomote cats kept in captivity. A five-week-old male kitten that had been separated from its mother was found on June 14, 1979. He was named Keita and was kept at the Okinawa Zoo until he died of old age at approximately thirteen years and two months of age. A female specimen was also kept at the National Museum of Nature and Science. She was believed to have been approximately nine years and seven months old when she died. On August 6, 1996, a male kitten that would later be known as Yon was taken into care at the Iriomote Wildlife Protection Center after being involved in a traffic accident.

===Yon===

====Discovery and hospitalization====

On August 6, 1996, a young Iriomote cat was involved in a traffic accident near Nadara Bridge on the northern part of the island. He weighed 1.6 kilograms and was assumed to have been born in early March, making him about five months old. It is possible that he had just been separated from his mother. The next morning he had regained consciousness, but he wasn&#x27;t able to regulate his body temperature due to the serious injuries he received. He was transferred to Ishigaki Island at 9 am to receive medical care at Ishigaki Veterinary Clinic. He spent 24 days under their care.

Following the accident he couldn&#x27;t move on his own, but he regained his ability to walk while on Ishigaki. He was brought back to the Iriomote Wildlife Preservation Center for rehabilitation on August 31. Originally labeled W-48 due to the fact that he was the forty-eighth confirmed sighting of an Iriomote cat on the western part of the island, he eventually was given the name Yon.

====Rehabilitation====
By September 2, Yon weighed 1.9 kilograms. Despite his progress, his caretakers noticed a tendency for him to turn to the right because of the effects of his accident.

From the beginning, Yon&#x27;s caretakers took careful measures in order to avoid acclimation to humans so that one day he could be released back into the wild. Only three staff members were allowed to feed him directly. Other people, including center staff, were only allowed to view him via video camera monitoring. The media were also prohibited from taking direct photographs.

From the time he was discharged until February 3, 1999, Yon&#x27;s rehabilitation was restricted to a room within the center. Thin logs were used to make a jungle gym so that he would be able to practice walking, jumping, and climbing trees. Rice plants were also grown in his room as a substitute for grass that cats use to help regurgitate. Once he was healthy enough, he was moved to an outdoor cage where he lived until his health began deteriorating on December 20, 2010.

====Death====
On December 20, 2010, Yon was found to be curled up and unmoving near a dried stream. He was brought into the center&#x27;s rehabilitation room, where it was discovered that he had pulmonary edema, which had nearly killed him; however, he was able to eat by the next day and gradually got better. He was unable to walk for the remainder of December, though by the end of January he had regained this ability and, during February and March, he improved enough to be able to walk up and down stairs. However, his condition then took a turn for the worse, and he died on the night of April 9 at an estimated fifteen years and one month old. He weighed 3.5 kilograms and was 78.5 centimeters long. He is the oldest Iriomote cat on record.

====Influence on research====
Yon was the first Iriomote cat to be kept for an extended period of time, the only to be saved after an accident, and the first to go through rehabilitation. Other Iriomote cats that were rescued either died immediately or shortly after being brought in for care.

Though he was never returned to the wild, the recorded observations of Yon are extremely important regarding Iriomote cat preservation. Every day, records were taken including what he did at what time, weight, and anything else of note. Because of difficulties in researching Iriomote cats in the wild, observations of Yon are currently the best example of the cats&#x27; natural behavior. There are also very few cases of the cats being cared for by people, so records of his health care may help injured and sick Iriomote cats in the future.

==In culture==

In July 2010, the Taketomi Tourist Association invited residents to create a design for a local mascot. A Komi Elementary School sixth grader&#x27;s design, which was based on the Iriomote cat, was chosen. The island of Iriomote is pictured on the mascot&#x27;s chest. It was named in the same manner it was designed; in August 2010, the name was chosen based on the submission of an Ishigaki resident who drew inspiration from the local nickname of the cat, &quot;yamapikaryaa&quot;.
The town of Taketomi initiated an &quot;Iriomote Wild Cat Day&quot; () in 2015. In July 2016, Taketomi signed a partnership with Tsushima based on their common endemic wild cats. Tsushima hosts the Tsushima cat, another leopard cat subspecies.
The island also has several statues representing the Iriomote cat. In the south-east of the island, spanning across the Nakama River, the Nakama bridge is guarded on each side by two stone statues of the cat in various positions. And in 2017, the town of Taketomi revealed two new bronze statues, one in a rest area on the west coast of the Iriomote island, and the other at the beginning of a bridge in the North of the island.

==Yamapikaryaa==
In general, names such as &quot;yamapikaryaa&quot; are used in reference to the Iriomote cat, but some locals claim to have seen another type of cat on the island. This cat is described as being twice as large as a house cat with a tail that is 60 centimeters long and a coat pattern that is different from what the Iriomote cat displays. It has been sighted several times. Locals have given it several nicknames. In the neighborhoods of Sonai and Komi they call it and , respectively, and on Aragusu Island they call it . It is not thought to be a house cat, stray cat, or an Iriomote cat.

In 1965, Togawa spoke with a local hunter who claimed to have killed a large cat with fur like a tiger&#x27;s. He disposed of the body, and Haemi on the southern part of the island, where the body was disposed of, was searched. The hunter said that, until ten days prior to the interview, the cat&#x27;s skeleton was still where he had left it, but the recent rains had washed it away. He described that cat as having a shoulder height that reached an adult human&#x27;s knee, a tail that was 60 centimeters long, a body twice as large as a house cat&#x27;s, and greenish striped fur.

On June 2, 1982, the Yomiuri Shimbun published an article about &quot;yamapikaryaa&quot;. An experienced boar hunter claimed to have seen yamapikaryaa about ten times in the mountains around Mount Dedou. He also said that he caught and ate one once. On another occasion, he said he saw an adult female yamapikaryaa with a kitten.

Other articles regarding &quot;yamapikaryaa&quot; have also been published, including on September 14, 2007. Professor of Shimane University, who was staying on Iriomote in order to research fish, spotted a cat larger than the Iriomote cat with a long tail and spots. He saw the cat on on the seldom-visited western part of the island.

, on the other hand, spoke with a hunter in 1994 who had the skull of what he believed was a large wild cat. Tadaaki Imaizumi determined that it was a house cat.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* BBC 2008: &quot;Iriomote cat&quot;
* New York Times: &quot;As a Japanese Island Grows Less Remote, a Wildcat Grows More Endangered&quot;, February 2008
* National Geographic : &quot;Rare Japanese Wildcat Edging Closer to Extinction&quot;, August 2007
* Iriomote Wildlife Conservation Center website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q376135" start="4" end="16" title="Iriomote cat" label="Iriomote cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="62" end="72" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="80" end="91" title="leopard cat" label="leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="122" end="127" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432124" start="141" end="149" title="Iriomote Island" label="Iriomote"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="173" end="194" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="202" end="215" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="394" end="402" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34203" start="444" end="460" title="Yaeyama language" label="Yaeyama language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="1313" end="1318" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="1661" end="1673" title="domestic cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16317" start="2024" end="2038" title="occipital bone" label="occipital bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661740" start="2100" end="2120" title="mandibular symphysis" label="mandibular symphysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="2446" end="2454" title="incisors" label="incisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="2469" end="2481" title="canine teeth" label="canine teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="2497" end="2506" title="premolars" label="premolars"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="2525" end="2531" title="molars" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q484645" start="2919" end="2929" title="anal gland" label="anal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="2964" end="2968" title="anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="3086" end="3093" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3101" end="3106" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432124" start="3110" end="3125" title="Iriomote Island" label="Iriomote Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024867" start="3234" end="3250" title="evergreen forest" label="evergreen forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="3281" end="3289" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="3421" end="3432" title="subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="3605" end="3616" title="Terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="3677" end="3686" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q164160" start="3716" end="3724" title="twilight" label="twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="3808" end="3817" title="territory (animal)" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="3821" end="3830" title="urinating" label="urinating"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="3835" end="3845" title="defecating" label="defecating"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="4126" end="4139" title="Radio telemetry" label="radio tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="4377" end="4388" title="Territoriality" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="5070" end="5081" title="carnivorous" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="5111" end="5116" title="birds" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="5118" end="5126" title="reptiles" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="5128" end="5138" title="amphibians" label="amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="5140" end="5144" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="5150" end="5161" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="5254" end="5261" title="rodents" label="rodents"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="5266" end="5273" title="rabbits" label="rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="5535" end="5545" title="black rats" label="black rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q575969" start="5547" end="5564" title="Ryukyu flying fox" label="Ryukyu flying fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="5584" end="5593" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268169" start="5655" end="5679" title="Eastern spot-billed duck" label="Eastern spot-billed duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q679123" start="5681" end="5699" title="slaty-legged crake" label="slaty-legged crake"/>
<link wikidata="Q171563" start="5701" end="5719" title="Eurasian scops-owl" label="Eurasian scops-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589031" start="5721" end="5732" title="pale thrush" label="pale thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q862825" start="5738" end="5761" title="white-breasted waterhen" label="white-breasted waterhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167601" start="5808" end="5836" title="Eumeces kishinouyei" label="Kishinoue&amp;#x27;s giant skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108367" start="5866" end="5886" title="rice frog" label="Sakishima rice frogs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5888" end="5911" title="yellow-spotted crickets" label="yellow-spotted crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="5916" end="5921" title="crabs" label="crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="5962" end="5968" title="swamps" label="swamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="5975" end="5980" title="shore" label="shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591651" start="6277" end="6289" title="dusky thrush" label="dusky thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="6528" end="6539" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914623" start="6645" end="6658" title="mating season" label="mating season"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="7265" end="7275" title="fertilisation" label="conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="7721" end="7729" title="sexual maturity" label="maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34168" start="7929" end="7934" title="animal trapping" label="traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11377239" start="8252" end="8270" title="Yoshinori Imaizumi" label="Yoshinori Imaizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q74940" start="8317" end="8354" title="National Museum of Nature and Science" label="National Museum of Nature and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="8358" end="8363" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="8666" end="8671" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195900" start="8763" end="8788" title="University of the Ryukyus" label="University of the Ryukyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="8906" end="8923" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q696496" start="9040" end="9055" title="Yaeyama Islands" label="Yaeyama Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q181966" start="9073" end="9077" title="Naha" label="Naha"/>
<link wikidata="Q375750" start="9215" end="9228" title="Japanese wolf" label="Japanese wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="9274" end="9279" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4521517" start="10328" end="10341" title="Urauchi River" label="Urauchi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="11190" end="11197" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357333" start="11226" end="11236" title="Actinidia polygama" label="silvervine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="11752" end="11760" title="formalin" label="formalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700908" start="12019" end="12030" title="Yubu Island" label="Yubu Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12185" end="12198" title="#Yamapikaryaa" label="#Yamapikaryaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="12252" end="12257" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q699764" start="12369" end="12377" title="Taketomi, Okinawa" label="Taketomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q714339" start="12916" end="12931" title="Ishigaki Island" label="Ishigaki Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378628" start="13077" end="13089" title="Nakama River" label="Nakama River"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="14053" end="14060" title="Emperor of Japan" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054379" start="14588" end="14609" title="Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="14864" end="14878" title="Haneda airport" label="Haneda airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q243237" start="15207" end="15214" title="Taxidermy" label="stuffed"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="15243" end="15254" title="chromosomal" label="chromosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="15307" end="15319" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002390" start="15580" end="15590" title="Metailurus" label="Metailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="16279" end="16294" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="16596" end="16609" title="Miocene epoch" label="Miocene epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="16649" end="16663" title="Pliocene epoch" label="Pliocene epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="16734" end="16740" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002390" start="16769" end="16779" title="Metailurus" label="Metailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="17061" end="17065" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134690" start="17218" end="17228" title="Pardofelis" label="Pardofelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192231" start="17245" end="17253" title="Profelis" label="Profelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42592" start="17293" end="17305" title="Prionailurus" label="Prionailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42592" start="17678" end="17690" title="Prionailurus" label="Prionailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189967" start="17772" end="17781" title="karyotype" label="karyotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="17822" end="17835" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="17848" end="17870" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="17887" end="17900" title="mitochondrial" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774486" start="17914" end="17926" title="cytochrome b" label="cytochrome b"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="17977" end="17995" title="Leopard cat" label="leopard cat&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="18139" end="18148" title="mutations" label="mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415380" start="18194" end="18216" title="base-pair substitution" label="base-pair substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050578" start="18351" end="18368" title="marine geology" label="marine geologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="18374" end="18388" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="18427" end="18438" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="18633" end="18648" title="genetic variety" label="genetic variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141144" start="19674" end="19691" title="genetic pollution" label="genetic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="19699" end="19706" title="hybrid (biology)" label="hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129598" start="20095" end="20124" title="feline immunodeficiency virus" label="feline immunodeficiency virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321087" start="20970" end="20979" title="cane toad" label="cane toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="21381" end="21388" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21488" end="21504" title="Monuments of Japan#Natural Monuments and Special Natural Monuments" label="natural monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="21749" end="21781" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37979" start="21823" end="21830" title="Akihito" label="Akihito"/>
<link wikidata="Q315584" start="22273" end="22285" title="Takeo Fukuda" label="Takeo Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="22490" end="22516" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125558" start="22525" end="22552" title="Ministry of the Environment (Japan)" label="Ministry of the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23466" end="23524" title="History of the Ryukyu Islands#Post-war occupation" label="US&amp;#x27;s return of the Ryukyu Islands to Japanese control"/>
<link wikidata="Q703967" start="23546" end="23577" title="Iriomote-Ishigaki National Park" label="Iriomote-Ishigaki National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="23607" end="23615" title="hectares" label="hectares"/>
<link wikidata="Q83872291" start="25089" end="25106" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Japan" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25325" end="25336" title="Okinawa Zoo" label="Okinawa Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q74940" start="25456" end="25493" title="National Museum of Nature and Science" label="National Museum of Nature and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="28034" end="28049" title="pulmonary edema" label="pulmonary edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q699764" start="29463" end="29471" title="Taketomi, Okinawa" label="Taketomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q991032" start="30059" end="30067" title="Tsushima, Nagasaki" label="Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="30128" end="30140" title="Tsushima cat" label="Tsushima cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378628" start="30294" end="30306" title="Nakama River" label="Nakama River"/>
<link wikidata="Q645218" start="31820" end="31835" title="Yomiuri Shimbun" label="Yomiuri Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072918" start="32252" end="32270" title="Shimane University" label="Shimane University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276524" wikidata="Q658429" url="?curid=276524" title="Vector bundle">
<text>In mathematics, a vector bundle is a topological construction that makes precise the idea of a family of vector spaces parameterized by another space formula_1 (for example formula_1 could be a topological space, a manifold, or an algebraic variety): to every point formula_3 of the space formula_1 we associate (or &quot;attach&quot;) a vector space formula_5 in such a way that these vector spaces fit together to form another space of the same kind as formula_1 (e.g. a topological space, manifold, or algebraic variety), which is then called a vector bundle over formula_1.

The simplest example is the case that the family of vector spaces is constant, i.e., there is a fixed vector space formula_8 such that formula_9 for all formula_3 in formula_1: in this case there is a copy of formula_8 for each formula_3 in formula_1 and these copies fit together to form the vector bundle formula_15 over formula_1. Such vector bundles are said to be &quot;trivial&quot;. A more complicated (and prototypical) class of examples are the tangent bundles of smooth (or differentiable) manifolds: to every point of such a manifold we attach the tangent space to the manifold at that point. Tangent bundles are not, in general, trivial bundles. For example, the tangent bundle of the sphere is non-trivial by the hairy ball theorem. In general, a manifold is said to be parallelizable if, and only if, its tangent bundle is trivial.

Vector bundles are almost always required to be &quot;locally trivial&quot;, which means they are examples of fiber bundles. Also, the vector spaces are usually required to be over the real or complex numbers, in which case the vector bundle is said to be a real or complex vector bundle (respectively). Complex vector bundles can be viewed as real vector bundles with additional structure. In the following, we focus on real vector bundles in the category of topological spaces.

==Definition and first consequences==

A real vector bundle consists of:
# topological spaces formula_1 (&quot;base space&quot;) and formula_18 (&quot;total space&quot;)
# a continuous surjection formula_19 (&quot;bundle projection&quot;)
# for every formula_3 in formula_1, the structure of a finite-dimensional real vector space on the fiber formula_22

where the following compatibility condition is satisfied: for every point formula_23 in formula_1, there is an open neighborhood formula_25 of formula_23, a natural number formula_27, and a homeomorphism

:formula_28

such that for all formula_3 in formula_30,

* formula_31 for all vectors formula_32 in formula_33, and
* the map formula_34 is a linear isomorphism between the vector spaces formula_33 and formula_22.

The open neighborhood formula_30 together with the homeomorphism formula_38 is called a local trivialization of the vector bundle. The local trivialization shows that &quot;locally&quot; the map formula_39 &quot;looks like&quot; the projection of formula_40 on formula_30.

Every fiber formula_22 is a finite-dimensional real vector space and hence has a dimension formula_43. The local trivializations show that the function formula_44 is locally constant, and is therefore constant on each connected component of formula_1. If formula_43 is equal to a constant formula_27 on all of formula_1, then formula_27 is called the rank of the vector bundle, and formula_18 is said to be a vector bundle of rank formula_27. Often the definition of a vector bundle includes that the rank is well defined, so that formula_43 is constant. Vector bundles of rank 1 are called line bundles, while those of rank 2 are less commonly called plane bundles.

The Cartesian product formula_53, equipped with the projection formula_54, is called the trivial bundle of rank formula_27 over formula_1.

===Transition functions===
Given a vector bundle formula_57 of rank formula_27, and a pair of neighborhoods formula_30 and formula_8 over which the bundle trivializes via

:formula_61

the composite function
:formula_62

is well-defined on the overlap, and satisfies
:formula_63

for some formula_64-valued function
:formula_65

These are called the transition functions (or the coordinate transformations) of the vector bundle.

The set of transition functions forms a Čech cocycle in the sense that
:formula_66

for all formula_67 over which the bundle trivializes satisfying formula_68. Thus the data formula_69 defines a fiber bundle; the additional data of the formula_70 specifies a formula_64 structure group in which the action on the fiber is the standard action of formula_64.

Conversely, given a fiber bundle formula_69 with a formula_64 cocycle acting in the standard way on the fiber formula_33, there is associated a vector bundle. This is an example of the fibre bundle construction theorem for vector bundles, and can be taken as an alternative definition of a vector bundle.

===Subbundles===
One simple method of constructing vector bundles is by taking subbundles of other vector bundles. Given a vector bundle formula_76 over a topological space, a subbundle is simply a subspace formula_77 for which the restriction formula_78 of formula_39 to formula_80 gives formula_81 the structure of a vector bundle also. In this case the fibre formula_82 is a vector subspace for every formula_83.

A subbundle of a trivial bundle need not be trivial, and indeed every real vector bundle over a compact space can be viewed as a subbundle of a trivial bundle of sufficiently high rank. For example, the Möbius band, a non-trivial line bundle over the circle, can be seen as a subbundle of the trivial rank 2 bundle over the circle.

==Vector bundle morphisms==
A morphism from the vector bundle 1: &quot;E&quot;1 → &quot;X&quot;1 to the vector bundle 2: &quot;E&quot;2 → &quot;X&quot;2 is given by a pair of continuous maps &quot;f&quot;: &quot;E&quot;1 → &quot;E&quot;2 and &quot;g&quot;: &quot;X&quot;1 → &quot;X&quot;2 such that
: &quot;g&quot; ∘ 1 = 2 ∘ &quot;f&quot;
: for every &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot;1, the map 1−1({&quot;x&quot;}) → 2−1({&quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)}) induced by &quot;f&quot; is a linear map between vector spaces.

Note that &quot;g&quot; is determined by &quot;f&quot; (because 1 is surjective), and &quot;f&quot; is then said to cover &quot;g&quot;.

The class of all vector bundles together with bundle morphisms forms a category. Restricting to vector bundles for which the spaces are manifolds (and the bundle projections are smooth maps) and smooth bundle morphisms we obtain the category of smooth vector bundles. Vector bundle morphisms are a special case of the notion of a bundle map between fiber bundles, and are sometimes called (vector) bundle homomorphisms.

A bundle homomorphism from &quot;E&quot;1 to &quot;E&quot;2 with an inverse which is also a bundle homomorphism (from &quot;E&quot;2 to &quot;E&quot;1) is called a (vector) bundle isomorphism, and then &quot;E&quot;1 and &quot;E&quot;2 are said to be isomorphic vector bundles. An isomorphism of a (rank &quot;k&quot;) vector bundle &quot;E&quot; over &quot;X&quot; with the trivial bundle (of rank &quot;k&quot; over &quot;X&quot;) is called a trivialization of &quot;E&quot;, and &quot;E&quot; is then said to be trivial (or trivializable). The definition of a vector bundle shows that any vector bundle is locally trivial.

We can also consider the category of all vector bundles over a fixed base space &quot;X&quot;. As morphisms in this category we take those morphisms of vector bundles whose map on the base space is the identity map on &quot;X&quot;. That is, bundle morphisms for which the following diagram commutes:

(Note that this category is &quot;not&quot; abelian; the kernel of a morphism of vector bundles is in general not a vector bundle in any natural way.)

A vector bundle morphism between vector bundles 1: &quot;E&quot;1 → &quot;X&quot;1 and 2: &quot;E&quot;2 → &quot;X&quot;2 covering a map &quot;g&quot; from &quot;X&quot;1 to &quot;X&quot;2 can also be viewed as a vector bundle morphism over &quot;X&quot;1 from &quot;E&quot;1 to the pullback bundle &quot;g&quot;*&quot;E&quot;2.

==Sections and locally free sheaves==

Given a vector bundle : &quot;E&quot; → &quot;X&quot; and an open subset &quot;U&quot; of &quot;X&quot;, we can consider sections of on &quot;U&quot;, i.e. continuous functions &quot;s&quot;: &quot;U&quot; → &quot;E&quot; where the composite  ∘ &quot;s&quot; is such that for all &quot;u&quot; in &quot;U&quot;. Essentially, a section assigns to every point of &quot;U&quot; a vector from the attached vector space, in a continuous manner. As an example, sections of the tangent bundle of a differential manifold are nothing but vector fields on that manifold.

Let &quot;F&quot;(&quot;U&quot;) be the set of all sections on &quot;U&quot;. &quot;F&quot;(&quot;U&quot;) always contains at least one element, namely the zero section: the function &quot;s&quot; that maps every element &quot;x&quot; of &quot;U&quot; to the zero element of the vector space −1({&quot;x&quot;}). With the pointwise addition and scalar multiplication of sections, &quot;F&quot;(&quot;U&quot;) becomes itself a real vector space. The collection of these vector spaces is a sheaf of vector spaces on &quot;X&quot;.

If &quot;s&quot; is an element of &quot;F&quot;(&quot;U&quot;) and α: &quot;U&quot; → R is a continuous map, then α&quot;s&quot; (pointwise scalar multiplication) is in &quot;F&quot;(&quot;U&quot;). We see that &quot;F&quot;(&quot;U&quot;) is a module over the ring of continuous real-valued functions on &quot;U&quot;. Furthermore, if O&quot;X&quot; denotes the structure sheaf of continuous real-valued functions on &quot;X&quot;, then &quot;F&quot; becomes a sheaf of O&quot;X&quot;-modules.

Not every sheaf of O&quot;X&quot;-modules arises in this fashion from a vector bundle: only the locally free ones do. (The reason: locally we are looking for sections of a projection &quot;U&quot; × R&quot;k&quot; → &quot;U&quot;; these are precisely the continuous functions &quot;U&quot; → R&quot;k&quot;, and such a function is a &quot;k&quot;-tuple of continuous functions &quot;U&quot; → R.)

Even more: the category of real vector bundles on &quot;X&quot; is equivalent to the category of locally free and finitely generated sheaves of O&quot;X&quot;-modules.

So we can think of the category of real vector bundles on &quot;X&quot; as sitting inside the category of sheaves of O&quot;X&quot;-modules; this latter category is abelian, so this is where we can compute kernels and cokernels of morphisms of vector bundles.

A rank &quot;n&quot; vector bundle is trivial if and only if it has &quot;n&quot; linearly independent global sections.

== Operations on vector bundles ==
Most operations on vector spaces can be extended to vector bundles by performing the vector space operation &quot;fiberwise&quot;.

For example, if &quot;E&quot; is a vector bundle over &quot;X&quot;, then there is a bundle &quot;E*&quot; over &quot;X&quot;, called the dual bundle, whose fiber at &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;X&quot; is the dual vector space (&quot;Ex&quot;)*. Formally &quot;E*&quot; can be defined as the set of pairs (&quot;x&quot;, φ), where &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;X&quot; and φ ∈ (&quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot;)*. The dual bundle is locally trivial because the dual space of the inverse of a local trivialization of &quot;E&quot; is a local trivialization of &quot;E*&quot;: the key point here is that the operation of taking the dual vector space is functorial.

There are many functorial operations which can be performed on pairs of vector spaces (over the same field), and these extend straightforwardly to pairs of vector bundles &quot;E&quot;, &quot;F&quot; on &quot;X&quot; (over the given field). A few examples follow.

* The Whitney sum (named for Hassler Whitney) or direct sum bundle of &quot;E&quot; and &quot;F&quot; is a vector bundle &quot;E&quot; ⊕ &quot;F&quot; over &quot;X&quot; whose fiber over &quot;x&quot; is the direct sum &quot;Ex&quot; ⊕ &quot;Fx&quot; of the vector spaces &quot;Ex&quot; and &quot;Fx&quot;.
* The tensor product bundle &quot;E&quot; ⊗ &quot;F&quot; is defined in a similar way, using fiberwise tensor product of vector spaces.
* The Hom-bundle Hom(&quot;E&quot;, &quot;F&quot;) is a vector bundle whose fiber at &quot;x&quot; is the space of linear maps from &quot;Ex&quot; to &quot;Fx&quot; (which is often denoted Hom(&quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot;, &quot;Fx&quot;) or &quot;L&quot;(&quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot;, &quot;F&quot;&quot;x&quot;)). The Hom-bundle is so-called (and useful) because there is a bijection between vector bundle homomorphisms from &quot;E&quot; to &quot;F&quot; over &quot;X&quot; and sections of Hom(&quot;E&quot;, &quot;F&quot;) over &quot;X&quot;.
* Building on the previous example, given a section &quot;s&quot; of an endomorphism bundle Hom(&quot;E&quot;, &quot;E&quot;) and a function &quot;f&quot;: &quot;X&quot; → R, one can construct an eigenbundle by taking the fiber over a point &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;X&quot; to be the &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)-eigenspace of the linear map &quot;s&quot;(&quot;x&quot;): &quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot; → &quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot;. Though this construction is natural, unless care is taken, the resulting object will not have local trivializations. Consider the case of &quot;s&quot; being the zero section and &quot;f&quot; having isolated zeroes. The fiber over these zeroes in the resulting &quot;eigenbundle&quot; will be isomorphic to the fiber over them in &quot;E&quot;, while everywhere else the fiber is the trivial 0-dimensional vector space.
* The dual vector bundle &quot;E*&quot; is the Hom bundle Hom(&quot;E&quot;, R × &quot;X&quot;) of bundle homomorphisms of &quot;E&quot; and the trivial bundle R × &quot;X&quot;. There is a canonical vector bundle isomorphism Hom(&quot;E&quot;, &quot;F&quot;) = &quot;E*&quot; ⊗ &quot;F&quot;.

Each of these operations is a particular example of a general feature of bundles: that many operations that can be performed on the category of vector spaces can also be performed on the category of vector bundles in a functorial manner. This is made precise in the language of smooth functors. An operation of a different nature is the pullback bundle construction. Given a vector bundle &quot;E&quot; → &quot;Y&quot; and a continuous map &quot;f&quot;: &quot;X&quot; → &quot;Y&quot; one can &quot;pull back&quot; &quot;E&quot; to a vector bundle &quot;f*E&quot; over &quot;X&quot;. The fiber over a point &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;X&quot; is essentially just the fiber over &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ∈ &quot;Y&quot;. Hence, Whitney summing &quot;E&quot; ⊕ &quot;F&quot; can be defined as the pullback bundle of the diagonal map from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;X&quot; × &quot;X&quot; where the bundle over &quot;X&quot; × &quot;X&quot; is &quot;E&quot; × &quot;F&quot;.

Remark: Let &quot;X&quot; be a compact space. Any vector bundle &quot;E&quot; over &quot;X&quot; is a direct summand of a trivial bundle; i.e., there exists a bundle &quot;E&quot;″ such that &quot;E&quot; ⊕ &quot;E&quot;″ is trivial. This fails if &quot;X&quot; is not compact: for example, the tautological line bundle over the infinite real projective space does not have this property.

==Additional structures and generalizations==
Vector bundles are often given more structure. For instance, vector bundles may be equipped with a vector bundle metric. Usually this metric is required to be positive definite, in which case each fibre of &quot;E&quot; becomes a Euclidean space. A vector bundle with a complex structure corresponds to a complex vector bundle, which may also be obtained by replacing real vector spaces in the definition with complex ones and requiring that all mappings be complex-linear in the fibers. More generally, one can typically understand the additional structure imposed on a vector bundle in terms of the resulting reduction of the structure group of a bundle. Vector bundles over more general topological fields may also be used.

If instead of a finite-dimensional vector space, the fiber &quot;F&quot; is taken to be a Banach space then a Banach bundle is obtained. Specifically, one must require that the local trivializations are Banach space isomorphisms (rather than just linear isomorphisms) on each of the fibers and that, furthermore, the transitions
:formula_84
are continuous mappings of Banach manifolds. In the corresponding theory for C&quot;p&quot; bundles, all mappings are required to be C&quot;p&quot;.

Vector bundles are special fiber bundles, those whose fibers are vector spaces and whose cocycle respects the vector space structure. More general fiber bundles can be constructed in which the fiber may have other structures; for example sphere bundles are fibered by spheres.

==Smooth vector bundles==

A vector bundle (&quot;E&quot;, &quot;p&quot;, &quot;M&quot;) is smooth, if &quot;E&quot; and &quot;M&quot; are smooth manifolds, p: &quot;E&quot; → &quot;M&quot; is a smooth map, and the local trivializations are diffeomorphisms. Depending on the required degree of smoothness, there are different corresponding notions of &quot;Cp&quot; bundles, infinitely differentiable &quot;C&quot;∞-bundles and real analytic &quot;C&quot;ω-bundles. In this section we will concentrate on &quot;C&quot;∞-bundles. The most important example of a &quot;C&quot;∞-vector bundle is the tangent bundle (&quot;TM&quot;, &quot;TM&quot;, &quot;M&quot;) of a &quot;C&quot;∞-manifold &quot;M&quot;.

A smooth vector bundle can be characterized by the fact that it admits transition functions as described above which are &quot;smooth&quot; functions on overlaps of trivializing charts &quot;U&quot; and &quot;V&quot;. That is, a vector bundle &quot;E&quot; is smooth if it admits a covering by trivializing open sets such that for any two such sets &quot;U&quot; and &quot;V&quot;, the transition function
:formula_85
is a smooth function into the matrix group GL(k,R), which is a Lie group.

Similarly, if the transition functions are:

* &quot;Cr&quot; then the vector bundle is a &quot;Cr&quot; vector bundle,
* &quot;real analytic&quot; then the vector bundle is a real analytic vector bundle (this requires the matrix group to have a real analytic structure),
* &quot;holomorphic&quot; then the vector bundle is a holomorphic vector bundle (this requires the matrix group to be a complex Lie group),
* &quot;algebraic functions&quot; then the vector bundle is an algebraic vector bundle (this requires the matrix group to be an algebraic group).

The &quot;C&quot;∞-vector bundles (&quot;E&quot;, &quot;p&quot;, &quot;M&quot;) have a very important property not shared by more general &quot;C&quot;∞-fibre bundles. Namely, the tangent space &quot;Tv&quot;(&quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot;) at any &quot;v&quot; ∈ &quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot; can be naturally identified with the fibre &quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot; itself. This identification is obtained through the &quot;vertical lift&quot; &quot;vl&quot;&quot;v&quot;: &quot;Ex&quot; → &quot;T&quot;&quot;v&quot;(&quot;E&quot;&quot;x&quot;), defined as

:formula_86

The vertical lift can also be seen as a natural &quot;C&quot;∞-vector bundle isomorphism &quot;p*E&quot; → &quot;VE&quot;, where (&quot;p*E&quot;, &quot;p*p&quot;, &quot;E&quot;) is the pull-back bundle of (&quot;E&quot;, &quot;p&quot;, &quot;M&quot;) over &quot;E&quot; through &quot;p&quot;: &quot;E&quot; → &quot;M&quot;, and &quot;VE&quot; := Ker(&quot;p&quot;*) ⊂ &quot;TE&quot; is the &quot;vertical tangent bundle&quot;, a natural vector subbundle of the tangent bundle (&quot;TE&quot;, &quot;TE&quot;, &quot;E&quot;) of the total space &quot;E&quot;.

The total space &quot;E&quot; of any smooth vector bundle carries a natural vector field &quot;V&quot;&quot;v&quot; := vl&quot;v&quot;&quot;v&quot;, known as the &quot;canonical vector field&quot;. More formally, &quot;V&quot; is a smooth section of (&quot;TE&quot;, &quot;TE&quot;, &quot;E&quot;), and it can also be defined as the infinitesimal generator of the Lie-group action formula_87 given by the fibrewise scalar multiplication. The canonical vector field &quot;V&quot; characterizes completely the smooth vector bundle structure in the following manner. As a preparation, note that when &quot;X&quot; is a smooth vector field on a smooth manifold &quot;M&quot; and &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;M&quot; such that &quot;X&quot;&quot;x&quot; = 0, the linear mapping
:formula_88

does not depend on the choice of the linear covariant derivative ∇ on &quot;M&quot;. The canonical vector field &quot;V&quot; on &quot;E&quot; satisfies the axioms

# The flow (&quot;t&quot;, &quot;v&quot;) → Φ&quot;t&quot;&quot;V&quot;(&quot;v&quot;) of &quot;V&quot; is globally defined.
# For each &quot;v&quot; ∈ &quot;V&quot; there is a unique limt→∞ Φ&quot;t&quot;&quot;V&quot;(&quot;v&quot;) ∈ &quot;V&quot;.
# &quot;C&quot;v(&quot;V&quot;)∘&quot;C&quot;v(&quot;V&quot;) = &quot;C&quot;v(&quot;V&quot;) whenever &quot;V&quot;&quot;v&quot; = 0.
# The zero set of &quot;V&quot; is a smooth submanifold of &quot;E&quot; whose codimension is equal to the rank of &quot;C&quot;v(&quot;V&quot;).

Conversely, if &quot;E&quot; is any smooth manifold and &quot;V&quot; is a smooth vector field on &quot;E&quot; satisfying 1–4, then there is a unique vector bundle structure on &quot;E&quot; whose canonical vector field is &quot;V&quot;.

For any smooth vector bundle (&quot;E&quot;, &quot;p&quot;, &quot;M&quot;) the total space &quot;TE&quot; of its tangent bundle (&quot;TE&quot;, &quot;TE&quot;, &quot;E&quot;) has a natural secondary vector bundle structure (&quot;TE&quot;, &quot;p&quot;*, &quot;TM&quot;), where &quot;p&quot;* is the push-forward of the canonical projection &quot;p&quot;: &quot;E&quot; → &quot;M&quot;. The vector bundle operations in this secondary vector bundle structure are the push-forwards +*: &quot;T&quot;(&quot;E&quot; × &quot;E&quot;) → &quot;TE&quot; and λ*: &quot;TE&quot; → &quot;TE&quot; of the original addition +: &quot;E&quot; × &quot;E&quot; → &quot;E&quot; and scalar multiplication λ: &quot;E&quot; → &quot;E&quot;.

==K-theory==
The K-theory group, , of a compact Hausdorff topological space is defined as the abelian group generated by isomorphism classes of complex vector bundles modulo the relation that, whenever we have an exact sequence
formula_89
then 
formula_90 in topological K-theory. KO-theory is a version of this construction which considers real vector bundles. K-theory with compact supports can also be defined, as well as higher K-theory groups.

The famous periodicity theorem of Raoul Bott asserts that the K-theory of any space is isomorphic to that of the , the double suspension of .

In algebraic geometry, one considers the K-theory groups consisting of coherent sheaves on a scheme , as well as the K-theory groups of vector bundles on the scheme with the above equivalence relation. The two constructs are naturally isomorphic provided that the underlying scheme is smooth.

==See also==
===General notions===
* Grassmannian: classifying spaces for vector bundle, among which projective spaces for line bundles
* Characteristic class
* Splitting principle
* Stable bundle

===Topology and differential geometry===
* Connection: the notion needed to differentiate sections of vector bundles.
* Gauge theory: the general study of connections on vector bundles and principal bundles and their relations to physics.

===Algebraic and analytic geometry===
* Algebraic vector bundle
* Picard group
* Holomorphic vector bundle

==Notes==
==Sources==
*.
*, see section 1.5.
*.
* see Ch.5


==External links==
* Why is it useful to study vector bundles ? on MathOverflow
* Why is it useful to classify the vector bundles of a space ?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="18" end="31" title="Vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="37" end="48" title="topological" label="topological"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="95" end="101" title="Family of sets" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="105" end="117" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q472971" start="144" end="149" title="space (mathematics)" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="194" end="211" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="215" end="223" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="231" end="248" title="algebraic variety" label="algebraic variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="548" end="576" title="Vector bundle" label="vector bundle over formula_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q126695" start="724" end="731" title="for all" label="for all"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="948" end="967" title="Fiber bundle#Trivial bundle" label="&amp;quot;trivial&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="1033" end="1047" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="1052" end="1088" title="manifold" label="smooth (or differentiable) manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="1138" end="1151" title="tangent space" label="tangent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077741" start="1305" end="1323" title="hairy ball theorem" label="hairy ball theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014612" start="1362" end="1376" title="Parallelizable manifold" label="parallelizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="1536" end="1548" title="fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1611" end="1615" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1619" end="1633" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705746" start="1730" end="1751" title="Complex vector bundle" label="Complex vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="1874" end="1904" title="category of topological spaces" label="category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2081" end="2091" title="continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="2092" end="2102" title="surjection" label="surjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q929302" start="2201" end="2219" title="Hamel dimension" label="finite-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2220" end="2224" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="2225" end="2237" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="2245" end="2250" title="Fiber bundle" label="fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="2374" end="2391" title="open neighborhood" label="open neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="2420" end="2434" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="2453" end="2466" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="2546" end="2553" title="Euclidean vector" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="2610" end="2616" title="linear map" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="2617" end="2628" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="2771" end="2791" title="local trivialization" label="local trivialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="3038" end="3047" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="3100" end="3108" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762213" start="3123" end="3139" title="locally constant" label="locally constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q865967" start="3175" end="3194" title="Locally connected space" label="connected component"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509762" start="3548" end="3559" title="line bundle" label="line bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="3629" end="3646" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="3954" end="3972" title="Composite Function" label="composite function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="4115" end="4135" title="Transition map" label="transition functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="4199" end="4202" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095535" start="4235" end="4247" title="Čech cocycle" label="Čech cocycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="4390" end="4402" title="fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="4494" end="4500" title="Group action" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q427018" start="4684" end="4694" title="associated bundle" label="associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446357" start="4738" end="4771" title="fibre bundle construction theorem" label="fibre bundle construction theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q728435" start="5057" end="5065" title="Linear subspace" label="subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308999" start="5091" end="5102" title="Restriction of a map" label="restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="5479" end="5490" title="Möbius band" label="Möbius band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509762" start="5506" end="5517" title="line bundle" label="line bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="5639" end="5647" title="morphism" label="morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098095" start="6060" end="6067" title="induced map" label="induced"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="6090" end="6100" title="linear map" label="linear map"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="6334" end="6342" title="category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997547" start="6593" end="6603" title="bundle map" label="bundle map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="6612" end="6624" title="fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q338057" start="6752" end="6759" title="Inverse element" label="inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="7513" end="7525" title="identity function" label="identity map"/>
<link wikidata="Q621542" start="7602" end="7610" title="commutative diagram" label="commutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q318737" start="7657" end="7664" title="abelian category" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920416" start="7670" end="7676" title="kernel (category theory)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200951" start="8048" end="8063" title="pullback bundle" label="pullback bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="8255" end="8263" title="Section (fiber bundle)" label="sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="8663" end="8675" title="vector field" label="vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468740" start="8955" end="8987" title="zero vector" label="zero element of the vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q122391649" start="9018" end="9027" title="pointwise" label="pointwise"/>
<link wikidata="Q126736" start="9041" end="9062" title="scalar multiplication" label="scalar multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="9184" end="9189" title="sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="9471" end="9477" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="9487" end="9491" title="Ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="9506" end="9526" title="real-valued function" label="real-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="9818" end="9830" title="locally free sheaf" label="locally free"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="10069" end="10074" title="tuple" label="tuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082992" start="10187" end="10197" title="Equivalence of categories" label="equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340572" start="10234" end="10251" title="Finitely generated module" label="finitely generate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18695611" start="10395" end="10428" title="sheaf of modules" label="sheaves of O&amp;quot;X&amp;quot;-modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q574844" start="10495" end="10502" title="Kernel (algebra)" label="kernels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156511" start="10507" end="10515" title="cokernel" label="cokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="10596" end="10610" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="10632" end="10652" title="linearly independent" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="10711" end="10721" title="Operation (mathematics)" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310186" start="10976" end="10987" title="dual bundle" label="dual bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="11041" end="11058" title="dual vector space" label="dual vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="11279" end="11289" title="transpose" label="dual space"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="11469" end="11479" title="functorial" label="functorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q742072" start="11776" end="11791" title="Hassler Whitney" label="Hassler Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142861" start="11955" end="11965" title="direct sum of modules" label="direct sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098871" start="12060" end="12081" title="tensor product bundle" label="tensor product bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="12157" end="12171" title="tensor product" label="tensor product"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="12562" end="12571" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340800" start="12805" end="12817" title="endomorphism" label="endomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13043" end="13053" title="Eigenvector#Eigenspace and spectrum" label="eigenspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310186" start="13586" end="13604" title="dual bundle" label="dual vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051857" start="14007" end="14032" title="category of vector spaces" label="category of vector spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="14094" end="14101" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546421" start="14153" end="14167" title="smooth functor" label="smooth functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200951" start="14212" end="14227" title="pullback bundle" label="pullback bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="14874" end="14887" title="compact space" label="compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397465" start="15138" end="15162" title="tautological line bundle" label="tautological line bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333768" start="15378" end="15398" title="metric (vector bundle)" label="vector bundle metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182685" start="15438" end="15455" title="definite bilinear form" label="positive definite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="15509" end="15524" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553426" start="15549" end="15566" title="Linear complex structure" label="complex structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705746" start="15584" end="15605" title="complex vector bundle" label="complex vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553426" start="15737" end="15751" title="Complex linear structure" label="complex-linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511959" start="15890" end="15934" title="reduction of the structure group of a bundle" label="reduction of the structure group of a bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="15969" end="15986" title="topological field" label="topological field"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="16097" end="16109" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853761" start="16117" end="16130" title="Banach bundle" label="Banach bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554819" start="16375" end="16390" title="Banach manifold" label="Banach manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="16525" end="16537" title="fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51544038" start="16736" end="16749" title="sphere bundle" label="sphere bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="16915" end="16931" title="manifold" label="smooth manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058314" start="17017" end="17031" title="diffeomorphism" label="diffeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="17070" end="17080" title="smoothness" label="smoothness"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="17127" end="17141" title="continuously differentiable" label="&amp;quot;Cp&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="17151" end="17176" title="infinitely differentiable" label="infinitely differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="17204" end="17217" title="real analytic" label="real analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="17281" end="17295" title="C-infinity" label="&amp;quot;C&amp;quot;∞"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="17373" end="17387" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050120" start="17929" end="17941" title="matrix group" label="matrix group"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="17962" end="17971" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="18107" end="18115" title="Analytic function" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289328" start="18300" end="18325" title="holomorphic vector bundle" label="holomorphic vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156554" start="18366" end="18383" title="complex Lie group" label="complex Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="18449" end="18472" title="algebraic vector bundle" label="algebraic vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695400" start="18514" end="18529" title="algebraic group" label="algebraic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098482" start="20019" end="20035" title="Lie group action" label="Lie-group action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287715" start="20478" end="20498" title="covariant derivative" label="covariant derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="20991" end="20999" title="zero set" label="zero set"/>
<link wikidata="Q125539" start="21029" end="21040" title="submanifold" label="submanifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778247" start="21064" end="21075" title="codimension" label="codimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443885" start="21562" end="21595" title="secondary vector bundle structure" label="secondary vector bundle structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969983" start="21674" end="21686" title="Pushforward (differential)" label="push-forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="22143" end="22152" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="22189" end="22202" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="22216" end="22233" title="isomorphism class" label="isomorphism class"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705746" start="22239" end="22260" title="complex vector bundle" label="complex vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107223533" start="22273" end="22281" title="Relation (mathematics)" label="relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326955" start="22308" end="22322" title="exact sequence" label="exact sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111307" start="22354" end="22374" title="topological K-theory" label="topological K-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111307" start="22376" end="22385" title="KO-theory" label="KO-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136376" start="22471" end="22486" title="compact support" label="compact support"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948983" start="22556" end="22575" title="Bott periodicity" label="periodicity theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q441185" start="22579" end="22589" title="Raoul Bott" label="Raoul Bott"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="22691" end="22709" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="22759" end="22775" title="coherent sheaf" label="coherent sheaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="22781" end="22787" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="22868" end="22888" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546425" start="22973" end="22979" title="smooth morphism" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129638" start="23019" end="23031" title="Grassmannian" label="Grassmannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128445" start="23033" end="23050" title="classifying space" label="classifying space"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="23083" end="23099" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509762" start="23105" end="23116" title="line bundle" label="line bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062978" start="23120" end="23140" title="Characteristic class" label="Characteristic class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578745" start="23143" end="23162" title="Splitting principle" label="Splitting principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325488" start="23165" end="23178" title="Stable bundle" label="Stable bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q521075" start="23223" end="23233" title="Connection (vector bundle)" label="Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356881" start="23300" end="23312" title="Gauge theory (mathematics)" label="Gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="23460" end="23483" title="Algebraic vector bundle" label="Algebraic vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042963" start="23486" end="23498" title="Picard group" label="Picard group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289328" start="23501" end="23526" title="Holomorphic vector bundle" label="Holomorphic vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298493" start="23656" end="23668" title="MathOverflow" label="MathOverflow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276526" wikidata="Q1154996" url="?curid=276526" title="Fiber bundle">
<text>In mathematics, and particularly topology, a fiber bundle (&quot;Commonwealth English&quot;: fibre bundle) is a space that is a product space, but may have a different topological structure. Specifically, the similarity between a space formula_1 and a product space formula_2 is defined using a continuous surjective map, formula_3 that in small regions of formula_1 behaves just like a projection from corresponding regions of formula_2 to formula_6 The map formula_7 called the [[Projection (mathematics)|projection]] or [[Fiber bundle|submersion]] of the bundle, is regarded as part of the structure of the bundle. The space formula_1 is known as the total space of the fiber bundle, formula_9 as the base space, and formula_10 the fiber.

In the &quot;trivial&quot; case, formula_1 is just formula_12 and the map formula_13 is just the projection from the product space to the first factor. This is called a trivial bundle. Examples of non-trivial fiber bundles include the Möbius strip and Klein bottle, as well as nontrivial covering spaces. Fiber bundles, such as the tangent bundle of a manifold and other more general vector bundles, play an important role in differential geometry and differential topology, as do principal bundles.

Mappings between total spaces of fiber bundles that &quot;commute&quot; with the projection maps are known as bundle maps, and the class of fiber bundles forms a category with respect to such mappings. A bundle map from the base space itself (with the identity mapping as projection) to formula_1 is called a section of formula_15 Fiber bundles can be specialized in a number of ways, the most common of which is requiring that the transition maps between the local trivial patches lie in a certain topological group, known as the structure group, acting on the fiber formula_10.

== History ==
In topology, the terms fiber (German: &quot;Faser&quot;) and fiber space (&quot;gefaserter Raum&quot;) appeared for the first time in a paper by Herbert Seifert in 1933, but his definitions are limited to a very special case. The main difference from the present day conception of a fiber space, however, was that for Seifert what is now called the base space (topological space) of a fiber (topological) space &quot;E&quot; was not part of the structure, but derived from it as a quotient space of &quot;E&quot;. The first definition of fiber space was given by Hassler Whitney in 1935 under the name sphere space, but in 1940 Whitney changed the name to sphere bundle.

The theory of fibered spaces, of which vector bundles, principal bundles, topological fibrations and fibered manifolds are a special case, is attributed to Herbert Seifert, Heinz Hopf, Jacques Feldbau, Whitney, Norman Steenrod, Charles Ehresmann, Jean-Pierre Serre, and others.

Fiber bundles became their own object of study in the period 1935–1940. The first general definition appeared in the works of Whitney.

Whitney came to the general definition of a fiber bundle from his study of a more particular notion of a sphere bundle, that is a fiber bundle whose fiber is a sphere of arbitrary dimension.

== Formal definition ==

A fiber bundle is a structure formula_17 where formula_18 and formula_10 are topological spaces and formula_20 is a continuous surjection satisfying a &quot;local triviality&quot; condition outlined below. The space formula_9 is called the &#x27; of the bundle, formula_1 the &#x27;, and formula_10 the &#x27;. The map formula_13 is called the &#x27; (or ). We shall assume in what follows that the base space formula_9 is connected.

We require that for every formula_26, there is an open neighborhood formula_27 of formula_28 (which will be called a trivializing neighborhood) such that there is a homeomorphism formula_29 (where formula_30 is given the subspace topology, and formula_31 is the product space) in such a way that formula_13 agrees with the projection onto the first factor. That is, the following diagram should commute:

where formula_33 is the natural projection and formula_29 is a homeomorphism. The set of all formula_35 is called a of the bundle.

Thus for any formula_36, the preimage formula_37 is homeomorphic to formula_10 (since this is true of formula_39) and is called the fiber over formula_40 Every fiber bundle formula_20 is an open map, since projections of products are open maps. Therefore formula_9 carries the quotient topology determined by the map formula_43

A fiber bundle formula_44 is often denoted
 that, in analogy with a short exact sequence, indicates which space is the fiber, total space and base space, as well as the map from total to base space.

A is a fiber bundle in the category of smooth manifolds. That is, formula_18 and formula_10 are required to be smooth manifolds and all the functions above are required to be smooth maps.

== Examples ==

=== Trivial bundle ===

Let formula_47 and let formula_20 be the projection onto the first factor. Then formula_13 is a fiber bundle (of formula_10) over formula_6 Here formula_1 is not just locally a product but &quot;globally&quot; one. Any such fiber bundle is called a . Any fiber bundle over a contractible CW-complex is trivial.

=== Nontrivial bundles ===

==== Möbius strip ====
Perhaps the simplest example of a nontrivial bundle formula_1 is the Möbius strip. It has the circle that runs lengthwise along the center of the strip as a base formula_9 and a line segment for the fiber formula_10, so the Möbius strip is a bundle of the line segment over the circle. A neighborhood formula_56 of formula_57 (where formula_58) is an arc; in the picture, this is the length of one of the squares. The preimage formula_30 in the picture is a (somewhat twisted) slice of the strip four squares wide and one long (i.e. all the points that project to formula_56).

A homeomorphism (formula_61 in ) exists that maps the preimage of formula_56 (the trivializing neighborhood) to a slice of a cylinder: curved, but not twisted. This pair locally trivializes the strip. The corresponding trivial bundle formula_63 would be a cylinder, but the Möbius strip has an overall &quot;twist&quot;. This twist is visible only globally; locally the Möbius strip and the cylinder are identical (making a single vertical cut in either gives the same space).

==== Klein bottle ====

A similar nontrivial bundle is the Klein bottle, which can be viewed as a &quot;twisted&quot; circle bundle over another circle. The corresponding non-twisted (trivial) bundle is the 2-torus, formula_64.

=== Covering map ===

A covering space is a fiber bundle such that the bundle projection is a local homeomorphism. It follows that the fiber is a discrete space.

=== Vector and principal bundles ===

A special class of fiber bundles, called vector bundles, are those whose fibers are vector spaces (to qualify as a vector bundle the structure group of the bundle — see below — must be a linear group). Important examples of vector bundles include the tangent bundle and cotangent bundle of a smooth manifold. From any vector bundle, one can construct the frame bundle of bases, which is a principal bundle (see below).

Another special class of fiber bundles, called principal bundles, are bundles on whose fibers a free and transitive action by a group formula_65 is given, so that each fiber is a principal homogeneous space. The bundle is often specified along with the group by referring to it as a principal formula_65-bundle. The group formula_65 is also the structure group of the bundle. Given a representation formula_68 of formula_65 on a vector space formula_70, a vector bundle with formula_71 as a structure group may be constructed, known as the associated bundle.

=== Sphere bundles ===

A sphere bundle is a fiber bundle whose fiber is an &quot;n&quot;-sphere. Given a vector bundle formula_1 with a metric (such as the tangent bundle to a Riemannian manifold) one can construct the associated unit sphere bundle, for which the fiber over a point formula_28 is the set of all unit vectors in formula_74. When the vector bundle in question is the tangent bundle formula_75, the unit sphere bundle is known as the unit tangent bundle. 

A sphere bundle is partially characterized by its Euler class, which is a degree formula_76 cohomology class in the total space of the bundle. In the case formula_77 the sphere bundle is called a circle bundle and the Euler class is equal to the first Chern class, which characterizes the topology of the bundle completely. For any formula_78, given the Euler class of a bundle, one can calculate its cohomology using a long exact sequence called the Gysin sequence.

=== Mapping tori ===
If formula_79 is a topological space and formula_80 is a homeomorphism then the mapping torus formula_81 has a natural structure of a fiber bundle over the circle with fiber formula_82 Mapping tori of homeomorphisms of surfaces are of particular importance in 3-manifold topology.

=== Quotient spaces ===
If formula_65 is a topological group and formula_84 is a closed subgroup, then under some circumstances, the quotient space formula_85 together with the quotient map formula_86 is a fiber bundle, whose fiber is the topological space formula_84. A necessary and sufficient condition for (formula_88) to form a fiber bundle is that the mapping formula_13 admits local cross-sections .

The most general conditions under which the quotient map will admit local cross-sections are not known, although if formula_65 is a Lie group and formula_84 a closed subgroup (and thus a Lie subgroup by Cartan&#x27;s theorem), then the quotient map is a fiber bundle. One example of this is the Hopf fibration, formula_92, which is a fiber bundle over the sphere formula_93 whose total space is formula_94. From the perspective of Lie groups, formula_94 can be identified with the special unitary group formula_96. The abelian subgroup of diagonal matrices is isomorphic to the circle group formula_97, and the quotient formula_98 is diffeomorphic to the sphere.

More generally, if formula_65 is any topological group and formula_84 a closed subgroup that also happens to be a Lie group, then formula_101 is a fiber bundle.

== Sections ==
A (or cross section) of a fiber bundle formula_13 is a continuous map formula_103 such that formula_104 for all &quot;x&quot; in &quot;B&quot;. Since bundles do not in general have globally defined sections, one of the purposes of the theory is to account for their existence. The obstruction to the existence of a section can often be measured by a cohomology class, which leads to the theory of characteristic classes in algebraic topology.

The most well-known example is the hairy ball theorem, where the Euler class is the obstruction to the tangent bundle of the 2-sphere having a nowhere vanishing section.

Often one would like to define sections only locally (especially when global sections do not exist). A local section of a fiber bundle is a continuous map formula_105 where &quot;U&quot; is an open set in &quot;B&quot; and formula_104 for all &quot;x&quot; in &quot;U&quot;. If formula_107 is a local trivialization chart then local sections always exist over &quot;U&quot;. Such sections are in 1-1 correspondence with continuous maps formula_108. Sections form a sheaf.

== Structure groups and transition functions ==
Fiber bundles often come with a group of symmetries that describe the matching conditions between overlapping local trivialization charts. Specifically, let &quot;G&quot; be a topological group that acts continuously on the fiber space &quot;F&quot; on the left. We lose nothing if we require &quot;G&quot; to act faithfully on &quot;F&quot; so that it may be thought of as a group of homeomorphisms of &quot;F&quot;. A &quot;G&quot;-atlas for the bundle formula_109 is a set of local trivialization charts formula_110 such that for any formula_111 for the overlapping charts formula_112 and formula_113 the function
formula_114
is given by
formula_115
where formula_116 is a continuous map called a &#x27;. Two &quot;G&quot;-atlases are equivalent if their union is also a &quot;G&quot;-atlas. A G&quot;-bundle is a fiber bundle with an equivalence class of &quot;G&quot;-atlases. The group &quot;G&quot; is called the &quot;&#x27; of the bundle; the analogous term in physics is gauge group.

In the smooth category, a &quot;G&quot;-bundle is a smooth fiber bundle where &quot;G&quot; is a Lie group and the corresponding action on &quot;F&quot; is smooth and the transition functions are all smooth maps.

The transition functions formula_117 satisfy the following conditions
# formula_118
# formula_119
# formula_120

The third condition applies on triple overlaps &quot;Ui&quot; ∩ &quot;Uj&quot; ∩ &quot;Uk&quot; and is called the cocycle condition (see Čech cohomology). The importance of this is that the transition functions determine the fiber bundle (if one assumes the Čech cocycle condition).

A principal &quot;G&quot;-bundle is a &quot;G&quot;-bundle where the fiber &quot;F&quot; is a principal homogeneous space for the left action of &quot;G&quot; itself (equivalently, one can specify that the action of &quot;G&quot; on the fiber &quot;F&quot; is free and transitive, i.e. regular). In this case, it is often a matter of convenience to identify &quot;F&quot; with &quot;G&quot; and so obtain a (right) action of &quot;G&quot; on the principal bundle.

== Bundle maps ==

It is useful to have notions of a mapping between two fiber bundles. Suppose that &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; are base spaces, and formula_121 and formula_122 are fiber bundles over &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot;, respectively. A &#x27; or &#x27; consists of a pair of continuous functions
formula_123
such that formula_124 That is, the following diagram is commutative:
For fiber bundles with structure group &quot;G&quot; and whose total spaces are (right) &quot;G&quot;-spaces (such as a principal bundle), bundle morphisms are also required to be &quot;G&quot;-equivariant on the fibers. This means that formula_125 is also &quot;G&quot;-morphism from one &quot;G&quot;-space to another, that is, formula_126 for all formula_58 and formula_128

In case the base spaces &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; coincide, then a bundle morphism over &quot;M&quot; from the fiber bundle formula_121 to formula_130 is a map formula_125 such that formula_132 This means that the bundle map formula_125 covers the identity of &quot;M&quot;. That is, formula_134 and the following diagram commutes:
Assume that both formula_121 and formula_130 are defined over the same base space &quot;M&quot;. A bundle isomorphism is a bundle map formula_137 between formula_121 and formula_130 such that formula_140 and such that formula_61 is also a homeomorphism.

== Differentiable fiber bundles ==
In the category of differentiable manifolds, fiber bundles arise naturally as submersions of one manifold to another. Not every (differentiable) submersion formula_142 from a differentiable manifold &quot;M&quot; to another differentiable manifold &quot;N&quot; gives rise to a differentiable fiber bundle. For one thing, the map must be surjective, and formula_143 is called a fibered manifold. However, this necessary condition is not quite sufficient, and there are a variety of sufficient conditions in common use.

If &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; are compact and connected, then any submersion formula_142 gives rise to a fiber bundle in the sense that there is a fiber space &quot;F&quot; diffeomorphic to each of the fibers such that formula_145 is a fiber bundle. (Surjectivity of formula_146 follows by the assumptions already given in this case.) More generally, the assumption of compactness can be relaxed if the submersion formula_142 is assumed to be a surjective proper map, meaning that formula_148 is compact for every compact subset &quot;K&quot; of &quot;N&quot;. Another sufficient condition, due to , is that if formula_142 is a surjective submersion with &quot;M&quot; and &quot;N&quot; differentiable manifolds such that the preimage formula_150 is compact and connected for all formula_151 then formula_146 admits a compatible fiber bundle structure .

== Generalizations ==
* The notion of a bundle applies to many more categories in mathematics, at the expense of appropriately modifying the local triviality condition; cf. principal homogeneous space and torsor (algebraic geometry).
* In topology, a fibration is a mapping formula_20 that has certain homotopy-theoretic properties in common with fiber bundles. Specifically, under mild technical assumptions a fiber bundle always has the homotopy lifting property or homotopy covering property (see for details). This is the defining property of a fibration.
* A section of a fiber bundle is a &quot;function whose output range is continuously dependent on the input.&quot; This property is formally captured in the notion of dependent type.

== See also ==

* Affine bundle
* Algebra bundle
* Characteristic class
* Covering map
* Equivariant bundle
* Fibered manifold
* Fibration
* Gauge theory
* Hopf bundle
* I-bundle
* Natural bundle
* Principal bundle
* Projective bundle
* Pullback bundle
* Quasifibration
* Universal bundle
* Vector bundle
* Wu–Yang dictionary
== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Fiber Bundle, PlanetMath
* Making John Robinson&#x27;s Symbolic Sculpture `Eternity&#x27;
* Sardanashvily, Gennadi, Fibre bundles, jet manifolds and Lagrangian theory. Lectures for theoreticians, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="33" end="41" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="45" end="57" title="Fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="59" end="91" title="English in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="&amp;quot;Commonwealth English&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="93" end="105" title="Fiber bundle" label="fibre bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q472971" start="112" end="117" title="Space (mathematics)" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="128" end="141" title="product space" label="product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="168" end="189" title="topological structure" label="topological structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="295" end="305" title="Continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="306" end="316" title="Surjective function" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q370502" start="317" end="320" title="Map (mathematics)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="480" end="519" title="Fiber bundle" label="[[Projection (mathematics)|projection]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420023" start="523" end="550" title="Submersion (mathematics)" label="[[Fiber bundle|submersion]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="654" end="665" title="Fiber bundle" label="total space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="704" end="714" title="Fiber bundle" label="base space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="735" end="740" title="Fiber bundle" label="fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q945127" start="756" end="763" title="Triviality (mathematics)" label="trivial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="912" end="926" title="Fiber bundle" label="trivial bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="978" end="990" title="Möbius strip" label="Möbius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q23638" start="995" end="1007" title="Klein bottle" label="Klein bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="1031" end="1045" title="covering space" label="covering space"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="1075" end="1089" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="1095" end="1103" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="1127" end="1140" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="1169" end="1190" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224402" start="1195" end="1216" title="differential topology" label="differential topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="1224" end="1240" title="principal bundle" label="principal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997547" start="1354" end="1364" title="bundle map" label="bundle map"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="1375" end="1380" title="Class (set theory)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="1406" end="1414" title="Category theory" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="1496" end="1512" title="identity mapping" label="identity mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="1553" end="1560" title="Section (fiber bundle)" label="section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="1676" end="1691" title="Transition map" label="transition maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="1743" end="1760" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="1775" end="1790" title="Fiber bundle" label="structure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="1842" end="1850" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q75807" start="1984" end="1999" title="Herbert Seifert" label="Herbert Seifert"/>
<link wikidata="Q742072" start="2402" end="2417" title="Hassler Whitney" label="Hassler Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="2550" end="2563" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="2566" end="2582" title="principal bundle" label="principal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q493941" start="2597" end="2606" title="fibration" label="fibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446381" start="2612" end="2628" title="fibered manifold" label="fibered manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q75807" start="2667" end="2682" title="Herbert Seifert" label="Herbert Seifert"/>
<link wikidata="Q78448" start="2684" end="2694" title="Heinz Hopf" label="Heinz Hopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651160" start="2696" end="2711" title="Jacques Feldbau" label="Jacques Feldbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385051" start="2722" end="2737" title="Norman Steenrod" label="Norman Steenrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q304712" start="2739" end="2756" title="Charles Ehresmann" label="Charles Ehresmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q212063" start="2758" end="2775" title="Jean-Pierre Serre" label="Jean-Pierre Serre"/>
<link wikidata="Q51544038" start="3031" end="3044" title="sphere bundle" label="sphere bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="3106" end="3115" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="3220" end="3238" title="topological spaces" label="topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="3259" end="3269" title="Continuous (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="3270" end="3280" title="surjection" label="surjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="3566" end="3575" title="Connected space" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="3633" end="3645" title="Neighborhood (topology)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="3743" end="3756" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="3799" end="3816" title="subspace topology" label="subspace topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q621542" start="3973" end="3980" title="Commutative diagram" label="commute"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="4065" end="4068" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="4144" end="4152" title="preimage" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="4305" end="4313" title="open map" label="open map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="4392" end="4409" title="quotient topology" label="quotient topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326955" start="4512" end="4532" title="short exact sequence" label="short exact sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="4671" end="4679" title="Category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="4683" end="4698" title="smooth manifold" label="smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="4784" end="4793" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="4819" end="4829" title="smooth map" label="smooth map"/>
<link wikidata="Q230689" start="5148" end="5160" title="Contractible space" label="contractible"/>
<link wikidata="Q189061" start="5161" end="5171" title="CW-complex" label="CW-complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="5305" end="5317" title="Möbius strip" label="Möbius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="5330" end="5336" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="5414" end="5426" title="line segment" label="line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="5524" end="5536" title="neighbourhood (mathematics)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335820" start="5587" end="5590" title="circular arc" label="arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q36253" start="5620" end="5626" title="length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="5654" end="5662" title="image (mathematics)" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="6070" end="6078" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23638" start="6351" end="6363" title="Klein bottle" label="Klein bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="6501" end="6506" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="6545" end="6559" title="covering map" label="covering space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052761" start="6615" end="6634" title="local homeomorphism" label="local homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="6667" end="6681" title="discrete space" label="discrete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="6763" end="6776" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="6806" end="6818" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q524607" start="6909" end="6921" title="general linear group" label="linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="6973" end="6987" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="6992" end="7008" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477902" start="7077" end="7089" title="frame bundle" label="frame bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="7093" end="7098" title="basis (mathematics)" label="bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="7189" end="7205" title="principal bundle" label="principal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="7238" end="7242" title="free action" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="7247" end="7257" title="transitive action" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="7258" end="7264" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755543" start="7321" end="7348" title="principal homogeneous space" label="principal homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="7526" end="7540" title="group representation" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q427018" start="7682" end="7699" title="associated bundle" label="associated bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="7778" end="7798" title="hypersphere" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="7839" end="7845" title="metric tensor" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="7879" end="7898" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="8015" end="8027" title="Unit vector" label="unit vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071328" start="8151" end="8170" title="unit tangent bundle" label="unit tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193452" start="8224" end="8235" title="Euler class" label="Euler class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198376" start="8266" end="8276" title="cohomology" label="cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121446" start="8370" end="8383" title="circle bundle" label="circle bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069818" start="8426" end="8437" title="Chern class" label="Chern class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326955" start="8594" end="8613" title="long exact sequence" label="long exact sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558545" start="8625" end="8639" title="Gysin sequence" label="Gysin sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="8682" end="8699" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="8720" end="8733" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532262" start="8743" end="8756" title="mapping torus" label="mapping torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="8819" end="8825" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q484298" start="8882" end="8890" title="Surface (topology)" label="surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q526901" start="8923" end="8942" title="3-manifold" label="3-manifold topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="8988" end="9005" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="9026" end="9041" title="closed subgroup" label="closed subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="9078" end="9092" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="9216" end="9250" title="necessary and sufficient condition" label="necessary and sufficient condition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9329" end="9349" title="#Sections" label="local cross-sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="9397" end="9409" title="quotient map" label="quotient map"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="9485" end="9494" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="9540" end="9552" title="Lie subgroup" label="Lie subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206032" start="9556" end="9577" title="Closed subgroup theorem" label="Cartan&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627604" start="9648" end="9662" title="Hopf fibration" label="Hopf fibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="9834" end="9855" title="special unitary group" label="special unitary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="9872" end="9879" title="Abelian group" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332791" start="9892" end="9909" title="diagonal matrices" label="diagonal matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="9913" end="9923" title="Isomorphic group" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356493" start="9931" end="9943" title="circle group" label="circle group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058314" start="9987" end="10000" title="Diffeomorphism" label="diffeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126695" start="10298" end="10305" title="for all" label="for all"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017338" start="10475" end="10486" title="obstruction theory" label="obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062978" start="10591" end="10611" title="characteristic class" label="characteristic class"/>
<link wikidata="Q212803" start="10617" end="10635" title="algebraic topology" label="algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077741" start="10673" end="10691" title="hairy ball theorem" label="hairy ball theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193452" start="10703" end="10714" title="Euler class" label="Euler class"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="10741" end="10755" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="10763" end="10771" title="2-sphere" label="2-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="11002" end="11010" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="11125" end="11130" title="chart (mathematics)" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="11205" end="11223" title="1-1 Correspondence" label="1-1 correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="11274" end="11279" title="sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="11362" end="11367" title="Group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="11506" end="11523" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="11529" end="11533" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="11644" end="11654" title="Faithful action" label="faithfully"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="11715" end="11728" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="11764" end="11769" title="Atlas (topology)" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="12300" end="12307" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11301672" start="12311" end="12322" title="gauge group" label="gauge group"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="12422" end="12431" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12766" end="12773" title="Čech cohomology#Cocycle" label="cocycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095535" start="12789" end="12804" title="Čech cohomology" label="Čech cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="12938" end="12968" title="principal bundle" label="principal &amp;quot;G&amp;quot;-bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755543" start="13030" end="13057" title="principal homogeneous space" label="principal homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13222" end="13229" title="Group action (mathematics)#Regular" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q621542" start="13783" end="13794" title="Commutative diagram" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="13942" end="13951" title="Morphism" label="morphisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q256355" start="13990" end="14001" title="equivariant" label="equivariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="14417" end="14423" title="Cover (topology)" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="14618" end="14629" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="14821" end="14844" title="differentiable manifold" label="differentiable manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420023" start="14880" end="14891" title="submersion (mathematics)" label="submersions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446381" start="15180" end="15196" title="fibered manifold" label="fibered manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="15361" end="15368" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q31924" start="15373" end="15382" title="Connection (mathematics)" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090009" start="15783" end="15793" title="proper map" label="proper map"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="15849" end="15855" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420023" start="15966" end="15976" title="Submersion (mathematics)" label="submersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="16014" end="16037" title="differentiable manifold" label="differentiable manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349849" start="16145" end="16155" title="Compatible (algebra)" label="compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047307" start="16222" end="16228" title="bundle (mathematics)" label="bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755543" start="16355" end="16382" title="principal homogeneous space" label="principal homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104225" start="16387" end="16414" title="torsor (algebraic geometry)" label="torsor (algebraic geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q493941" start="16433" end="16442" title="fibration" label="fibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357062" start="16484" end="16502" title="homotopy theory" label="homotopy-theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983973" start="16621" end="16646" title="homotopy lifting property" label="homotopy lifting property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806121" start="16805" end="16810" title="Range of a function" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q997433" start="16909" end="16923" title="dependent type" label="dependent type"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001860" start="16944" end="16957" title="Affine bundle" label="Affine bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723973" start="16960" end="16974" title="Algebra bundle" label="Algebra bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062978" start="16977" end="16997" title="Characteristic class" label="Characteristic class"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="17000" end="17012" title="Covering map" label="Covering map"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909066" start="17015" end="17033" title="Equivariant bundle" label="Equivariant bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446381" start="17036" end="17052" title="Fibered manifold" label="Fibered manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q493941" start="17055" end="17064" title="Fibration" label="Fibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="17067" end="17079" title="Gauge theory" label="Gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627604" start="17082" end="17093" title="Hopf bundle" label="Hopf bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967726" start="17096" end="17104" title="I-bundle" label="I-bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36775500" start="17107" end="17121" title="Natural bundle" label="Natural bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="17124" end="17140" title="Principal bundle" label="Principal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249462" start="17143" end="17160" title="Projective bundle" label="Projective bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200951" start="17163" end="17178" title="Pullback bundle" label="Pullback bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930859" start="17181" end="17195" title="Quasifibration" label="Quasifibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894108" start="17198" end="17214" title="Universal bundle" label="Universal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="17217" end="17230" title="Vector bundle" label="Vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q117312693" start="17233" end="17251" title="Wu–Yang dictionary" label="Wu–Yang dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408552" start="17406" end="17428" title="Gennadi Sardanashvily" label="Sardanashvily, Gennadi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276527" wikidata="Q2662754" url="?curid=276527" title="The Battle of the Somme (film)">
<text>The Battle of the Somme (US title, &quot;Kitchener&#x27;s Great Army in the Battle of the Somme&quot;), is a 1916 British documentary and propaganda war film, shot by two official cinematographers, Geoffrey Malins and John McDowell. The film depicts the British Expeditionary Force during the preliminaries and early days of the Battle of the Somme (1 July – 18 November 1916). The film premièred in London on 10 August 1916 and was released generally on 21 August. The film shows trench warfare, marching infantry, artillery firing on German positions, British troops waiting to attack on 1 July, the treatment of wounded British and German soldiers, British and German dead and captured German equipment and positions. A scene during which British troops crouch in a ditch then &quot;go over the top&quot; was staged for the camera behind the lines.

The film was a great success, watched by about 20 million people in Britain in the first six weeks of exhibition and distributed in eighteen countries. A second film, covering a later phase of the battle, was released in 1917 as &quot;The Battle of the Ancre and the Advance of the Tanks&quot;. In 1920, the film was preserved in the film archive of the Imperial War Museum. In 2005, it was inscribed on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World Register, digitally restored and was released on DVD in 2008. &quot;The Battle of the Somme&quot; is significant as an early example of film propaganda, a historical record of the battle and as a popular source of footage illustrating the First World War.
==Film==

===Content===
&quot;The Battle of the Somme&quot; is a black-and-white silent film in five parts, with sequences divided by intertitles summarising the contents. The first part shows preparations for the battle; there are sequences of troops marching towards the front, French peasants at work in rear areas, the stockpiling of munitions, Major-General Beauvoir De Lisle addresses the 29th Division and some of the preparatory bombardment by 18-pounder, 60-pounder and 4.7-inch guns, 6-inch, 9.2-inch howitzers and 2-inch mortars is shown.

The second part depicts more preparations, troops moving into front line trenches, the intensification of the artillery barrage by 12-inch and 15-inch howitzers, a 9.45-inch heavy mortar and the detonation of the mine under the Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt. Part three begins with the attack on the First day on the Somme (1 July 1916), with some re-enactments and shows the recovery of British wounded and German prisoners. The fourth part shows more scenes of British and German wounded the clearing of the battlefield and some of the aftermath. The final part shows scenes of devastation, including the ruins of the village of Mametz, British troops at rest and preparations for the next stage of the advance.

==Production==

===Background===

On 2 November 1915, the British Topical Committee for War Films, representing British newsreel producers and supported by the War Office, despatched two cameramen to France. Geoffrey Malins of Gaumont British and Edward Tong of Jury&#x27;s Imperial Pictures, were to shoot footage for short newsreels. By early June Tong had fallen ill and been sent home but he and Malins had made five series of newsreels, which although well-received, had failed to impress the British cinema trade. John McDowell, of the British &amp; Colonial film company, volunteered to replace Tong and left for France on 23 June 1916. On 24 June, the British and French armies began the preparatory artillery bombardment of German positions for the Battle of the Somme.

===Photography===
Malins and McDowell shot the film between 26 June and from 7 to 9 July. Malins filmed in the vicinity of Beaumont Hamel, on attachment with the 29th Division (VIII Corps); McDowell worked further south near Fricourt and Mametz with the 7th Division (XV Corps). Before the battle, Malins worked at the north end of the British Somme sector, photographing troops on the march and heavy artillery west of Gommecourt. De Lisle suggested to Malins that he view the bombardment of Beaumont Hamel from Jacob&#x27;s Ladder, near White City, an abrupt drop down the side of a valley, with about cut into the ground, showing up white because of the chalk. Sappers had dug the large mine under Hawthorn Ridge in front of White City. German shells were falling as Malins made his way to Lanwick Street Trench; he had to rise above the parapet to remove sandbags and then set up his camera, which was camouflaged with sackcloth.

Malins returned to film the speech by de Lisle to the 2nd Royal Fusiliers, after which Malins heard of the postponement of the battle for . Malins returned to White City to film the bombardment of the Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt by trench mortars, during which there were three misfires which destroyed a trench-mortar position nearby. On 1 July, Malins filmed troops of the 1st Battalion Lancashire Fusiliers waiting to advance at Beaumont Hamel from a sunken lane in no man&#x27;s land, which had been occupied by digging a tunnel overnight. Malins then went back to Jacob&#x27;s Ladder to film the explosion of the Hawthorn Ridge mine. At Malins began filming and the mine detonation shook the ground as troops of Royal Engineers advanced on either side to occupy the crater.

Later in the day, a shell explosion damaged the camera tripod; Malins repaired it and in the evening filmed roll-calls. Next day Malins shot film at La Boisselle before leaving for London around 9 July. Malins returned to France and from filmed sequences of shellfire and of troops advancing from trenches, staged for the camera at a Third Army mortar school near St Pol. McDowell reached the Somme front after Malins and began filming British preparations on 28 or 29 June, to the east of Albert. He covered the opening day of the battle from the vicinity of Carnoy and from the dressing-station at Minden Post. The success of the 7th Division enabled McDowell to film captured German trenches near Fricourt and Mametz.

===Editing===

On 10 July, Brigadier-General John Charteris reported to the War Office that some of footage had been shot and recommended that sections of film should be released as soon as possible. Footage was first viewed as a negative on 12 July and Charles Urban is thought to have begun work on the film as editor, with the assistance of Malins. Urban later claimed to have proposed that the film be issued as a feature film rather than in short sections. The change in format was agreed with the British Topical Committee for War Films and a cut of the film was ready by 19 July. Much of the footage was censored from the public version as the War Office wanted the film to contain images that would support the war effort and raise morale. A version was ready by 31 July and a rough cut was screened at the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) General Headquarters (GHQ) at Montreuil, Pas-de-Calais and at the Fourth Army headquarters. The commander Lieutenant-General Henry Rawlinson said &quot;some of it is very good but it cut out many of the horrors in dead and wounded&quot;. The film was shown to the Secretary of State for War, David Lloyd George, on 2 August and members of the cinema trade late on 7 August, the day that the film received final approval for release.

===Release===

The film comprises five reels and is long. The first screening took place on 10 August 1916 at the Scala Theatre, to an audience of journalists, Foreign Office officials, cinema trade figures and officers of the Imperial General Staff. The screening was preceded by the reading of a letter from Lloyd George, exhorting the audience to &quot;see that this picture, which is in itself an epic of self-sacrifice and gallantry, reaches everyone. Herald the deeds of our brave men to the ends of the earth. This is your duty&quot;.

A musical medley with excerpts from classical, folk, contemporary and popular pieces, to be played in cinemas by accompanying musicians, was devised by J. Morton Hutcheson and published in The Bioscope on 17 August 1916. On 21 August, the film began showing simultaneously in thirty-four London cinemas and opened in provincial cities the following week, when the film was shown simultaneously at twenty cinemas in Birmingham, at least twelve cinemas in Glasgow and Edinburgh, six cinemas in Cardiff and three in Leeds. The Royal Family received a private screening at Windsor Castle on 2 September; the film was exhibited in more than eighteen countries.

==Reception==

===Britain===
The popularity of the film was unprecedented and cinemas played the film for longer runs than usual, often to packed houses, while some arranged additional screenings to meet demand. The film is thought to have achieved attendance figures of twenty million in its first six weeks of release. The film also attracted more middle-class audiences, some of whom had never been to a cinema before. William Jury, as the film&#x27;s booking director, initially charged exhibitors £40, with the fee decreasing by £5 a week; after two months, a reduced fee of £6 for three nights put the film within the price range of village halls wishing to show the film. By October 1916, the film had been booked by more than two thousand cinemas in Britain, earning over £30,000.
British authorities showed the film to the public as a morale-booster and in general it met with a favourable reception. &quot;The Times&quot; reported on 22 August that

Some members of the audience considered it immoral to portray scenes of violence; Hensley Henson, the Dean of Durham, protested &quot;against an entertainment which wounds the heart and violates the very sanctity of bereavement&quot;. Others complained that such a serious film shared the cinema programme with comedy films. On 28 August, the Yorkshire Evening Post printed the comment, attributed to Lloyd George, &quot;If the exhibition of this Picture all over the world does not end War, God help civilisation&quot;. The film was shown to British troops in France from 5 September; Lieutenant-Colonel Rowland Feilding, an officer who saw the film in a muddy field near Morlancourt, described it as &quot;a wonderful and most realistic production&quot; but criticised the film for failing to record the sound of rifles and machine-guns, although there was an artillery accompaniment from guns firing nearby. Feilding suggested that the film could reassure new recruits, by giving them some idea of what to expect in battle; the intertitles were forthright, describing images of injury and death.

===International===
The film was shown in New Zealand in October 1916. On 12 October, the Wellington &quot;Evening Post&quot; ran an advertisement for the film, describing it as &quot;the extraordinary films of &#x27;the big push&#x27; and &quot;an awe-inspiring, glorious presentation of what our heroes are accomplishing today&quot;. In a review published on 16 October, it was written that &quot;these pictures of the Battle of the Somme are a real and valuable contribution to the nation&#x27;s knowledge and a powerful spur to national effort&quot;. The film premièred in Australia on 13 October at Hoyt&#x27;s Picture Theatre in Melbourne. The Melbourne &quot;Argus&quot; considered that after the attack sequence, &quot;... you are not in a Melbourne picture theatre, but in the very forefront of the Somme battle&quot; and called the film &quot;this moving reality of battle&quot;.

The film and its reception attracted great interest in Germany, which was able to read a report from a neutral reporter in London, filed in the . British cinema was said to be taking a serious view of the war, helped by the government, which had arranged for the production of &quot;real war films&quot;, &quot;The Battle of the Somme&quot; was &quot;absorbing&quot; and had attracted huge audiences. German troops recovered a letter from a British civilian, who had seen the film on 26 August and written to a soldier in France, describing the issue of a leaflet to each filmgoer that stated that the film was not entertainment but an official film. Having viewed the film, the writer was sure that it would enlighten the audience in a way never before achieved.

===Other films===
During the second week of August, King George V, the Prime Minister H. H. Asquith and Lloyd George toured the Western Front and were filmed by Malins. The War Office released the film in October as &quot;The King Visits His Armies in the Great Advance&quot;. Malins made a third film &quot;The Battle of the Ancre and the Advance of the Tanks&quot; which opened in January 1917. In the same month a German film &quot;With our Heroes on the Somme&quot; was shown but &quot;lacked the immediacy&quot; of the British film, being re-enactments at training establishments behind the lines, which received a lukewarm reception. A booklet to accompany the film proclaimed that it depicted &quot;the German will in war&quot; and implied that the enemies of Germany were using colonial troops to undermine &quot;German honour&quot;. Malins&#x27; final feature film &quot;The German Retreat and the Battle of Arras&quot; was released in June 1917, showing the destruction of Péronne and the first British troops across the Somme, following-up the German withdrawal; the film failed to attract the audiences of 1916.

==Preservation==
In 1920, the original nitrate negative was passed to the Imperial War Museum for preservation. A nitrate protection archive master was made in 1921 and an acetate safety master in 1931. The nitrate masters were destroyed in the 1970s after the onset of irreversible nitrate decomposition. Excerpts have been taken for television documentaries, including &quot;The Great War&quot; (1964. BBC), &quot;The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th Century&quot; (1996, PBS) and &quot;The First World War&quot; (2003, Channel 4). The film was offered on VHS in 1987, the first title from the Imperial War Museum film archive to be released on video. In 2005, &quot;The Battle of the Somme&quot; was inscribed on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World Register for the preservation of global documentary heritage. The film was described by UNESCO as a &quot;compelling documentary record of one of the key battles of the First World War [and] the first feature-length documentary film record of combat produced anywhere in the world&quot; and had &quot;played a major part in establishing the methodology of documentary and propaganda film.&quot;

==Recent screenings==
On 22 October 2006, after a film restoration project, a refined version of the film was screened at the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London, accompanied by the Philharmonia Orchestra performing an original orchestral score by Laura Rossi. The restoration was later nominated for an Archive Restoration or Preservation Project award by the Federation of Commercial Audiovisual Libraries. In November 2008, the restored film was released on DVD, to mark the 90th anniversary of the Armistice with Germany in 1918. The DVD included the score by Laura Rossi, an accompanying 1916 musical medley, a commentary by Roger Smither, a film archivist at the Imperial War Museum and interviews with Smither, Rossi, Toby Haggith (film archivist) and Stephen Horne (silent film musician) on the reconstruction of the contemporary medley; film fragments and missing scenes were also included in the DVD.

In 2012, with the support of the Imperial War Museum, there were public screenings of the restored film accompanied by a live orchestra playing the soundtrack of Rossi&#x27;s music. Somme100 FILM has a target of a hundred performances of the film by amateur and professional orchestras in the centenary year, between July 2016 and July 2017.

==See also==
* &quot;The Somme&quot; (1927)
* &quot;The Somme – From Defeat to Victory&quot; (2006)
* War film
* History of the United Kingdom during the First World War#Media

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==

Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Journals
* 
* 
* 

Newspapers
* 
* 

Websites
* 


===Further reading===

Books

Journals
* 

websites


== External links ==

* BBC article
* Filmography, British Topical Committee for War Films
* Viewpoint: The WW1 film over 20 million people went to see, 7 November 2014, BBC
* Screenings of the film in 2012 with live soundtrack of Laura Rossi&#x27;s score
* FILM – &quot;The Battle of the Somme&quot; Centenary Tour 2016
* Somme100 FILM – List of Performances of &quot;The Battle of the Somme&quot; in 2016</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="122" end="133" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="138" end="148" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="149" end="157" title="war film" label="war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="180" end="195" title="cinematographer" label="cinematographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101075" start="198" end="213" title="Geoffrey Malins" label="Geoffrey Malins"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="254" end="281" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="329" end="348" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q204854" start="387" end="395" title="première" label="première"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="400" end="406" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="481" end="495" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q749808" start="1207" end="1226" title="Imperial War Museum" label="Imperial War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1257" end="1263" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="1271" end="1299" title="Memory of the World Programme" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="1628" end="1639" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="1681" end="1692" title="intertitles" label="intertitles"/>
<link wikidata="Q570152" start="1910" end="1927" title="Beauvoir De Lisle" label="Beauvoir De Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221553" start="1942" end="1955" title="29th Division (United Kingdom)" label="29th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q304860" start="1984" end="1995" title="Barrage (artillery)" label="bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029338" start="1999" end="2009" title="Ordnance QF 18 pounder" label="18-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517589" start="2011" end="2021" title="BL 60 pounder gun" label="60-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438238" start="2026" end="2034" title="QF 4.7 inch Gun Mk I–IV" label="4.7-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835901" start="2041" end="2047" title="BL 6 inch 30 cwt howitzer" label="6-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835910" start="2049" end="2057" title="BL 9.2-inch howitzer" label="9.2-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633420" start="2072" end="2086" title="2 inch Medium Mortar" label="2-inch mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645775" start="2229" end="2236" title="BL 12 inch railway howitzer" label="12-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835890" start="2241" end="2248" title="BL 15-inch howitzer" label="15-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645545" start="2262" end="2284" title="9.45 inch Heavy Mortar" label="9.45-inch heavy mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685506" start="2326" end="2348" title="Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt" label="Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454155" start="2391" end="2413" title="First day on the Somme" label="First day on the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q397026" start="2722" end="2728" title="Mametz, Somme" label="Mametz"/>
<link wikidata="Q735478" start="2926" end="2934" title="newsreel" label="newsreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="2966" end="2976" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756503" start="3033" end="3048" title="Gaumont British" label="Gaumont British"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402325" start="3348" end="3370" title="British and Colonial Films" label="British &amp;amp; Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="3564" end="3583" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q781662" start="3709" end="3723" title="Beaumont-Hamel" label="Beaumont Hamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316746" start="3763" end="3773" title="VIII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="VIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q141976" start="3811" end="3819" title="Fricourt" label="Fricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644073" start="3840" end="3852" title="7th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q991861" start="4006" end="4016" title="Gommecourt, Pas-de-Calais" label="Gommecourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="4250" end="4256" title="Sapper" label="Sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q20738331" start="4287" end="4301" title="Mines on the first day of the Somme" label="Hawthorn Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="4579" end="4594" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81925" start="4905" end="4925" title="Lancashire Fusiliers" label="Lancashire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q476352" start="4970" end="4981" title="sunken lane" label="sunken lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="5233" end="5248" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427589" start="5445" end="5457" title="Capture of La Boisselle" label="La Boisselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223130" start="5630" end="5640" title="Third Army (United Kingdom)" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q385527" start="5660" end="5666" title="Saint-Pol-sur-Ternoise" label="St Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q30940" start="5786" end="5792" title="Albert, Somme" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q520813" start="5856" end="5862" title="Carnoy" label="Carnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891414" start="5996" end="6004" title="Capture of Fricourt" label="Fricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205400" start="6009" end="6015" title="Capture of Mametz" label="Mametz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225822" start="6063" end="6077" title="John Charteris" label="John Charteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192650" start="6118" end="6125" title="footage" label="footage"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="6248" end="6256" title="Negative (photography)" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960355" start="6272" end="6285" title="Charles Urban" label="Charles Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q237893" start="6331" end="6337" title="Film editing" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="6436" end="6448" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="6629" end="6637" title="censored" label="censored"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="6833" end="6860" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q213344" start="6897" end="6921" title="Montreuil, Pas-de-Calais" label="Montreuil, Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q230071" start="6933" end="6944" title="Fourth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q958348" start="6992" end="7007" title="Henry Rawlinson, 1st Baron Rawlinson" label="Henry Rawlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="7131" end="7157" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="7159" end="7177" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429662" start="7415" end="7428" title="Scala Theatre" label="Scala Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="7461" end="7475" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="7528" end="7550" title="Imperial General Staff" label="Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915205" start="8033" end="8045" title="The Bioscope" label="The Bioscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="8139" end="8146" title="movie theater" label="cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="8259" end="8269" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="8298" end="8305" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="8310" end="8319" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="8336" end="8343" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="8357" end="8362" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="8368" end="8380" title="British Royal Family" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="8413" end="8427" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="9345" end="9351" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="9417" end="9426" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731386" start="9543" end="9557" title="Hensley Henson" label="Hensley Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958876" start="9563" end="9567" title="Dean (religion)" label="Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="9571" end="9577" title="Durham, England" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="9772" end="9783" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545362" start="9804" end="9826" title="Yorkshire Evening Post" label="Yorkshire Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q639056" start="10134" end="10145" title="Morlancourt" label="Morlancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="10492" end="10502" title="intertitle" label="intertitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594990" start="10603" end="10614" title="Dominion of New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="10651" end="10661" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732649" start="10662" end="10686" title="The Evening Post (New Zealand)" label="&amp;quot;Evening Post&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11138" end="11147" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922976" start="11165" end="11192" title="Hoyts" label="Hoyt&amp;#x27;s Picture Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="11196" end="11205" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714229" start="11227" end="11232" title="The Argus (Melbourne)" label="Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="11507" end="11514" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="12274" end="12282" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="12303" end="12316" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="12345" end="12358" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q217768" start="13200" end="13207" title="Péronne, Somme" label="Péronne"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="13381" end="13397" title="nitrate film" label="nitrate negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q749808" start="13416" end="13435" title="Imperial War Museum" label="Imperial War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048111" start="13475" end="13489" title="Master recording" label="archive master"/>
<link wikidata="Q481840" start="13514" end="13528" title="safety film" label="acetate safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603925" start="13677" end="13701" title="Television documentary" label="television documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521146" start="13713" end="13738" title="The Great War (documentary)" label="&amp;quot;The Great War&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="13746" end="13749" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737981" start="13758" end="13807" title="The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th Century" label="The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="13821" end="13824" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="13869" end="13878" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="13905" end="13908" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="14063" end="14069" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="14077" end="14105" title="Memory of the World" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="14543" end="14559" title="film restoration" label="film restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622428" start="14619" end="14639" title="Queen Elizabeth Hall" label="Queen Elizabeth Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="14670" end="14692" title="Philharmonia Orchestra" label="Philharmonia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499384" start="14736" end="14747" title="Laura Rossi" label="Laura Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="14949" end="14952" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253436" start="14990" end="15012" title="Armistice with Germany" label="Armistice with Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12127619" start="15758" end="15786" title="The Somme (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Somme&amp;quot; (1927)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765187" start="15789" end="15842" title="The Somme – From Defeat to Victory" label="&amp;quot;The Somme – From Defeat to Victory&amp;quot; (2006)"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="15845" end="15853" title="War film" label="War film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15856" end="15918" title="History of the United Kingdom during the First World War#Media" label="History of the United Kingdom during the First World War#Media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276528" wikidata="Q1515763" url="?curid=276528" title="St. Olaf College">
<text>St. Olaf College is a private liberal arts college in Northfield, Minnesota, United States. It was founded in 1874 by a group of Norwegian-American pastors and farmers led by Pastor Bernt Julius Muus. The college is named after the King and the Patron Saint Olaf II of Norway and is affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America.

As of 2024, the college had 3,074 undergraduate students and 313 faculty members. The campus, including its natural lands, is west of Northfield, Minnesota. Northfield is also the home of its neighbor and friendly rival, Carleton College. Between 1995 and 2020, 154 St. Olaf graduates were named Fulbright Scholars and 35 received Goldwater Scholarships.

==History==
===Seal and motto===
The seal of the St. Olaf College displays the Coat of arms of Norway, which includes the axe of St. Olaf.

The motto &quot;Fram! Fram! Kristmenn, Krossmenn&quot;, written in New Norwegian, is adapted from the Old Norse battle cry of King Olaf. It means &quot;Forward! Forward! Men of Christ, Men of the Cross&quot;.

===Founding===

Many Norwegian immigrants arrived in Rice County, Minnesota, and the surrounding area in the late 19th century. Nearly all were Lutheran Christians, and desired a non-secular post-secondary institution in the Lutheran tradition that offered classes in all subjects in both Norwegian and English. The catalyst for St. Olaf&#x27;s founding was the Reverend Bernt Julius Muus; he sought out the help of N. A. Quammen and H. Thorson. Together they petitioned their parishes and others to raise money to buy a plot of land on which to build the new institution. The three received around $10,000 in pledges, formed a corporation and bought land and four buildings (old Northfield schoolhouses) for the school. Muus came under scrutiny after a divorce case revealed extensive acts of domestic abuse. He fell out of favor with many of his predecessors, but the school did not officially denounce his abuses.

St. Olaf&#x27;s School opened on January 8, 1875, at its first site under the leadership of its first president, Thorbjorn N. Mohn, a graduate of Luther College. Herman Amberg Preus, president of the Norwegian Synod, laid the foundation stone of the St. Olaf School on July 4, 1877. In 1887 the &quot;Manitou Messenger&quot; was founded as a campus magazine and has since evolved into the college&#x27;s student newspaper, now called the &quot;Olaf Messenger&quot;. 1887 was also the year that the first female St. Olaf graduate, Agnes Mellby, joined the college. Mellby graduated in 1893. She was the first woman to graduate from a Norwegian Lutheran college in the United States. On June 20, 1889, the school&#x27;s board of trustees renamed the school St. Olaf College.

In 1932, Red Wing Lutheran Seminary was merged into St. Olaf and its Red Wing campus was closed. The Seminary was an independent academic institution from 1879 to 1932.

=== Financial crisis ===
In 1893, St. Olaf faced severe economic difficulties. A national economic depression caused enrollment to drop from a high of 147 in 1892 to 129 in 1893. Also in 1893 the Norwegian Synod voted to cut ties with the college, greatly reducing its income. By the August 1893 board meeting, the college was $10,000 in debt. On August 2 the Board of Trustees appointed professor H. T. Ytterboe to travel around the Midwest and collect funds for the college. During this time President Mohn took over Ytterboe&#x27;s responsibilities managing the college&#x27;s finances. Over the next six years faculty and staff saw their salaries reduced, and the number of teaching faculty was reduced from eleven to seven. Ytterboe spent six years traveling the Midwest and was highly effective at fundraising, averaging $6,500 per year, mostly in small donations of a dollar or more from farmers and private individuals. By 1897, the debt was reduced to less than $4,000, and in 1899 the synod reinstated the college. Historians of the college widely regard Ytterboe&#x27;s and Mohn&#x27;s efforts as having saved the college from extinction.

=== Scarlet fever epidemic ===
Following students&#x27; return from Christmas vacation in 1903, an epidemic of scarlet fever broke out on the campus and quickly spread. Twenty-eight out of St. Olaf&#x27;s approximately three hundred students came down with the highly infectious disease. With no local hospital, the north wing on the third floor of the Men&#x27;s Dormitory was used as a makeshift hospital and staffed with two nurses who worked tirelessly to contain the spread of the disease.

=== 1918 Spanish flu pandemic ===
At the beginning of the spread of the Spanish flu to the United States, St. Olaf went into voluntary quarantine in hopes of avoiding the epidemic, allowing students to leave campus only for emergencies once they had obtained a pass. The first cases on St. Olaf&#x27;s campus occurred on November 11, 1918, and shortly thereafter the college hospital was filled to capacity. Ytterboe Hall was converted into a hospital for the sick once the temporary beds in Hoyme Chapel had filled. St. Olaf officially closed for the year on December 7, due to a rapid rise of influenza cases. Four students died from flu complications.

=== St. Olaf during the Second World War ===
At the beginning of World War II, St. Olaf was not directly involved with the conflict, with the extent of wartime activities including Red Cross drives and a “Bundles for Britain” project. But by the fall of 1942, over 400 undergraduates and alumni were serving overseas. The campus was also ordered to house 600 U.S. Naval recruits for flight training, leading to the conversion of Mohn and Ytterboe Halls from women&#x27;s dormitories to housing for naval servicemen. Students living in Ytterboe and Mohn Halls were required to move to Agnes Mellby Hall to accommodate the naval personnel.

===Connections with Norway===
King Olav visited the college in 1987 and King Harald V and Queen Sonja of Norway visited in 2011. Queen Sonja visited the college&#x27;s campus again in 2022 as part of a tour to celebrate the connections between Norway and Minnesota&#x27;s Norwegian-American community. She participated in a ribbon-cutting ceremony for the Special Collections vault at Rølvaag Memorial Library.

===Presidents===
St. Olaf has had 12 presidents since its founding:
* Thorbjorn N. Mohn, 1874–99
* John N. Kildahl, 1899–1914
* Lauritz A. Vigness, 1914–18
* Lars W. Boe, 1918–42
* Clemens M. Granskou, 1943–63
* Sidney A. Rand, 1963–80
* Harlan F. Foss, Ph.D., 1980–85
* Melvin D. George, Ph.D., 1985–94
* Mark U. Edwards Jr., Ph.D., 1994–2000
* Christopher M. Thomforde, D.Min., 2001–06
* David R. Anderson, Ph.D., 2006-23
* Susan Rundell Singer, Ph.D., since 2023

===Church affiliations===

* 1874–87 Norwegian Synod
* 1887–90 Anti-Missourian Brotherhood
* 1890–1917 United Norwegian Lutheran Church of America
* 1917–60 Evangelical Lutheran Church
* 1960–87 The American Lutheran Church
* 1988–present Evangelical Lutheran Church in America

==Campus==
Known as &quot;The Hill&quot;, St. Olaf College&#x27;s campus is home to 17 academic and administrative buildings, 29 student residences and 10 athletic facilities. St. Olaf is a residential college; 96% of St. Olaf students reside in one of the 11 residence halls and 18 academic and special interest group houses. Adjacent to campus are of restored wetlands, woodlands, and native tall grass prairie owned and maintained by St. Olaf, and a utility-grade wind turbine that supplies up to one-third of the college&#x27;s electrical needs.

Two buildings on the campus are listed on the National Register of Historic Places: Old Main, designed by Long and Haglin; and Steensland Library, designed by Omeyer and Thori. In 2011, Travel+Leisure named St. Olaf one of the most beautiful college campuses in the United States.

Edward Sövik, a liturgical architect and St. Olaf professor of art until his death in 2014, designed or assisted in the design of 20 campus buildings.

=== Notable buildings ===
==== Center for Art and Dance ====
The Center for Art and Dance is a collaborative project with offerings from the art, art history, and dance departments. It houses the Flaten Art Museum and studio spaces dedicated to painting, drawing, printmaking, ceramics, wood sculpture, digital media, photography, and a metal foundry, all named after alumni and educators who contributed to the development of each discipline. The Flaten Art Museum was founded as the Steensland Art Gallery in 1976. In 2002, it was moved to the Center for Art and Dance and renamed to honor Arnold Flaten, a past professor of art, and his family. The museum has a collection of regional, national, and international works and exhibits these as well as faculty and student work.

The building underwent significant remodeling in the early 2000s and was initially dedicated as the Dittmann Complex, honoring Reidar Dittmann. Dittmann was born in Norway in 1922, and spent the better part of his youth working with the Norwegian resistance against the rising Nazi regime until his imprisonment in the Buchenwald concentration camp. After his immigration to the United States, Dittmann joined St. Olaf&#x27;s faculty as a professor of art and Norwegian in 1947. In 1952 He and Ansgar Sovik co-founded the International Studies program, now known as the Office of International and Off-Campus Studies. After his death in 2010, serious sexual assault allegations from St. Olaf alumni surfaced under the revisions of Title IX Policy concerning Dittmann and other faculty members. The decision to rename the building was made in 2017, following the pattern of campuses around the country questioning the names of buildings dedicated to notable alumni with contentious histories.

==== Agnes Mellby Hall ====
Mellby Hall was constructed in 1938 to meet the needs of the growing female student population overflowing from Ladies&#x27; Hall, the first female dormitory competed in 1879, and Mohn Hall, completed in 1912. The building is dedicated to 1893 alumna Agnes Theodora Mellby, the first woman to graduate from St. Olaf. Born in Christiania, Norway in 1870, Mellby immigrated with her family to the U.S. in 1871 and settled in New Richland, Minnesota. After finishing her Academy (1891) and College (1893) studies at St. Olaf, she returned as the Dean of Women and an educator that fall, affectionately known as the Preceptress by those she worked with. Mellby taught English, German, geography, U. S. History, civics, and math, firm in her resolve to see to the well-being of St. Olaf&#x27;s female population regarding education and housing. She held her position from 1893 until 1909, and continued to work with the college after retiring until her death in 1918.

==== Agnes Kittelsby Hall ====
In 1956, Agnes Kittelsby Hall was constructed with rooms for 164 women as an adjacent wing to the Gertrude Hilleboe Hall. It was an all-women&#x27;s dormitory until St. Olaf residence halls became co-ed. The building is named after Agnes Kittelsby, St. Olaf class of 1900. Like many St. Olaf alumnae, Kittelsby taught various subjects at the college after her graduation. In 1914, she moved to China and established American School Kikungshan, a school for the children of American missionaries.

==== Thorson Hall ====
Thorson Hall was constructed as a men&#x27;s dormitory in 1948. It was one of four dormitories constructed in the 1940s and 1950s to address an increase in enrollment after World War II. The building is named after Harald Thorson (1841–1920), an early benefactor of the college. A businessman, Thorson owned farms, sold horses and mules, and established banks. He was instrumental in establishing St. Olaf&#x27;s School (as it was first named), choosing the initial plot of land and authorizing the first payment for it. He later served as a member of the original Board of Trustees. Thorson&#x27;s will bequeathed most of his estate to St. Olaf under the stipulation that the money be used for the construction of a new building, Thorson Hall.

==Academics==

===Curriculum===
Before graduating, St. Olaf students complete 15-18 required courses in general education credits, including courses in writing, a foreign language, society, religion, ethics, mathematical reasoning, race, social science, and natural science. Many of the courses are interdisciplinary. St. Olaf offers 41 different majors for the bachelor of arts degree, five for the bachelor of music degree, and 20 areas of concentration, which are pursued independently of majors. Its most popular majors, based on 2021 graduates, were:
*Biology/Biological Sciences (83)
*Economics (64)
*Research and Experimental Psychology (57)
*Mathematics (34)
*English Language and Literature (33)
*Political Science and Government (33)

As of the 2020–21 academic year, the student-to-faculty ratio is 12.2 to 1.

The Paracollege lasted for 31 years, from 1969 to 2000, and was an individualized, interdisciplinary option for obtaining the Bachelor of Arts degree. The Paracollege program emphasized student-centered education through workshops, colloquia, tutorials, seminars, and senior concentrations. It was replaced by the Center for Integrative Studies, which allows students to design individual majors.

===Admissions===
According to the St. Olaf College Common Dataset for the class of 2024, St. Olaf received 5,229 applications, accepted 2,656 (50.8%), and enrolled 727. The middle 50% range of SAT Composite scores for the class of 2024 was 1160–1370, while the ACT Composite range was 25–32. Of the 37% of enrolled first-year students who submitted high school class rank, 39% were in the top tenth of their high school classes and 69% ranked in the top quarter. The average high school GPA was 3.68.

===Rankings===
The 2025 annual ranking by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; rates St. Olaf tied for 50th among 211 &quot;National Liberal Arts Colleges&quot;, 11th &quot;Best Value Schools&quot;, and tied at 23rd for &quot;Best Undergraduate Teaching&quot;.

&quot;Forbes&quot; in 2019 rated St. Olaf 116th overall in its America&#x27;s Top Colleges ranking of 650 military academies, national universities, and liberal arts colleges, and 50th among liberal arts colleges.

&quot;Washington Monthly&quot; ranked St. Olaf 28th in 2022 among 203 liberal arts colleges in the U.S. based on its contribution to the public good, as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service.

St. Olaf was ranked 47th for liberal arts colleges on Payscale.com&#x27;s 2016-17 list of highest-paid graduates.


==Student life==

===Student organizations===
More than 250 student organizations are registered at St. Olaf, including academic, athletic, awareness, multicultural, political, religious, service (Alpha Phi Omega) and other special interest groups. Club sports include rowing, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s Ultimate Frisbee, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s rugby, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s lacrosse, badminton, cycling, judo, and fencing. KSTO 93.1 FM is the student-operated radio station and the &quot;Olaf Messenger&quot; (formerly known as the &quot;Manitou Messenger)&quot; is the student newspaper. The paper changed its name in 2020 in response to concerns of the appropriation of the word &quot;Manitou&quot; from the language of the original inhabitants of the land the college is built on. Other groups include an on-campus organic farm (STOGROW), an improv comedy troupe (Scared Scriptless), and an EMT (emergency medical technician) organization that is the first responder for campus emergencies. St. Olaf students edit and publish several journals each year, including &quot;The Reed&quot;, the world&#x27;s only international undergraduate journal for existential philosophy.

===Student government===
St. Olaf&#x27;s Student Government Association (SGA) finances many student activities and organizations on campus. It operates through 10 branches, each managed by an elected executive: Diversity Celebrations Committee, Volunteer Network, Music Entertainment Committee, Student Activities Committee, Student Organizations Committee, Board of Regents Student Committee, The Pause, After Dark Committee, and Political Awareness Committee. Besides these committees, students can serve in the Student Senate to vote on issues such as constitutional bylaws changes and dorm capital improvement funds and communicate with college administrators about campus issues. SGA also maintains Oleville.com, a website containing information about student activities.

===Student protests===
====Ytterboe the Dog====
Ytterboe, named after former professor H. T. Ytterboe, was a black dog who became a facet of campus life at St. Olaf in 1942. Fed and cared for by students, the dog became an unofficial mascot. In 1957, Ytterboe the Dog &quot;allegedly&quot; bit the son of a local police officer Peter Morris. In response, Morris sent two officers to St. Olaf&#x27;s campus to capture the dog. After he evaded capture, police shot Ytterboe on the library hill, in front of students who were studying for finals. In response, St. Olaf and Carleton students protested, gaining local and national coverage. At the protests, an effigy of the officer who shot Ytterboe was hung from a streetlight and burned. The Minnesota highway patrol was called in to control the protest as students continued demonstrating in Northfield. In response to the protests, the chief of police said, &quot;Nobody loves a dog more than I do. We didn&#x27;t mean to kill him&quot;. St. Olaf President Clemens M. Granskou commented, &quot;As far as I could see, this is one of these tempests in a teacup that usually take place once in a while in the springtime on a college campus&quot;.

Initially, the Northfield Police sent Ytterboe&#x27;s body to a local landfill, but students retrieved it. Afterward, Ytterboe&#x27;s head was sent to Minneapolis to be tested for rabies; it tested negative. His body was buried on a slope of Manitou Heights the day after he was shot as a crowd of 2,000 students and members of the community gathered to pay their respects.

====ROTC====
Between 50 and 75 students from St. Olaf, accompanied by some Carleton students, occupied the St. Olaf administration building on April 16, 1970, demanding that the school cut ties with the ROTC. Students occupied the building until Friday afternoon, ending their occupation when President Sidney Rand came to an agreement with the leaders of the protest. The school moved forward on votes within the administration and the board of regents in return for the cessation of &quot;obstructive demonstration&quot;. The St. Olaf protests coincided with a similar occupation at Macalester College.

==== Sexual misconduct ====
In 2016, students protested the school&#x27;s policies on sexual harassment through a T-shirt campaign. Students donned grey shirts reading &quot;Ask me how my college is protecting my rapist&quot; to draw attention to the school&#x27;s sexual misconduct policies. Information about the campaign circulated through social media and was soon picked up by local news sources. In response, the Office of Civil Rights of the U.S. Education Department launched an investigation into the college&#x27;s policies. Soon after, the school officially announced an overhaul of its Title IX policies.

==== Racism ====
In 2017, a series of notes containing threats and racial slurs appeared. In response, students protested for systemic changes within the school on issues like diversity and inclusion, cultural sensitivity, and hate crimes. As of May 1, 2017, there had been 9 reported acts of hate speech during the school year. By occupying campus buildings, blocking entrances to the cafeteria, and boycotting classes, demonstrators pushed the administration to act on a number of demands. While the protests prompted the administration to reevaluate its policies, an investigation revealed that one of the notes was forged. While the forgery undermined the movement for some, others saw it as a rogue action that did not detract from the progress made.

==== Climate ====
In 2019, St. Olaf students joined over four million people worldwide who participated in the September 2019 climate strikes, a continuation of the school strike for climate movement inspired by Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg. On September 20, hundreds of St. Olaf students walked out of class and marched into downtown Northfield, where they joined other Northfield citizens to raise awareness of the growing threat of global climate change. The St. Olaf strike was organized by the college&#x27;s Climate Justice Collective (CJC), a group dedicated to increasing campus awareness of climate issues and pushing St. Olaf to divest its endowment from fossil fuel companies.

==Music program==

St. Olaf&#x27;s music program was founded by F. Melius Christiansen in 1903. Its band, choir and orchestra tour the continental United States annually and have made many international tours, typically occurring triennially. The St. Olaf Band was the first American college musical organization to conduct a concert tour abroad when it traveled to Norway in 1906. It was awarded The American Prize in Band/Wind Ensemble Performance, 2021, in the college/university (smaller program) division.

The St. Olaf Choir was founded in 1907 as the St. John&#x27;s Lutheran Church Choir in Northfield, a collegiate ensemble. It has toured Europe several times, as well as China, Korea, and Australia, performing before heads of state and producing more than a dozen recordings. The choir performs in the nationally broadcast annual St. Olaf Christmas Festival, along with the St. Olaf Orchestra and four of the college&#x27;s other choirs.

Other student musical ensembles include The St. Olaf Handbell Choir, Chapel Choir, Cantorei, Manitou Singers, Viking Chorus, Collegiate Chorale, Philharmonia, Norseman Band, and many smaller vocal and instrumental ensembles. There are also student-run music ensembles at St. Olaf: Valhalla Band, Naknefeler Orchestra, and the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s a cappella groups: &quot;The Limestones&quot;, &quot;Agnes,&quot; and &quot;Krossmen&quot;. In addition, the Gospel Choir of St. Olaf is one of few Midwest college gospel choirs. These groups are not a part of the college&#x27;s music program and operate independently.

Ensembles founded at St. Olaf include the Minnesota Symphonic Winds, the Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra, the Copper Street Brass and the a cappella choral groups Cantus, Inpulse, and Magnum Chorum. St. Olaf is also the location of the sacred choral music radio show &quot;Sing for Joy&quot;.

== Athletics ==
St. Olaf&#x27;s athletic teams are called the Oles. Their colors are black and gold. The college is a member of the NCAA Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (MIAC) in most sports since the 1974–75 academic year (of which it was also a member from 1920–21 to 1949–50), while its Alpine and Nordic skiing teams compete as Independents. The Oles competed in the Midwest Collegiate Athletic Conference (MCAC, known as the Midwest Conference since 1994–95) from 1952–53 to 1973–74.

St. Olaf competes in 26 intercollegiate varsity sports (13 for men and 13 for women). Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, hockey, skiing (Nordic and Alpine), soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, and track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor); women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, golf, ice hockey, skiing (Nordic and Alpine), soccer, softball, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor), and volleyball. Former sports included men&#x27;s wrestling.

St. Olaf also has many student-coached club and intramural teams that compete within the student body and also inter-college. Notable are the St. Olaf Ultimate teams, The Berzerkers and Durga (team name changed to Vortex in 2015), which make an annual trip to a national collegiate tournament (Spring Ultimax) in North Carolina. The women&#x27;s Ultimate teams have been successful at the national level for many years. In 2011, Durga played at the Division III Nationals tournament in Buffalo, New York, finishing in seventh place. The team also played in the DIII Nationals tournament in 2014. In 2017, Vortex again qualified for the national tournament in Kentucky and placed seventh. In 2018, Vortex won the DIII national championship in Rockford, Illinois. After that success, Vortex placed third at the DIII National tournament in College Station, Texas. The St. Olaf Dance Team supports St. Olaf athletic teams (football, men&#x27;s/women&#x27;s soccer and basketball) with halftime performances and competes in intercollegiate events every year. It has performed in the Minnesota Swarm lacrosse team&#x27;s halftime show and placed third in its division at the 2011 St. Thomas Invitational.

===Rivalry with Carleton College===
==== Football ====
St. Olaf is a traditional athletic rival of its crosstown neighbor Carleton College. The annual American football game between the Knights and the Oles was recently dubbed the &quot;Cereal Bowl&quot; in honor of the Malt-O-Meal production facility in Northfield. The annual winner receives the &quot;Goat Trophy&quot;, which was created by Minneapolis dentist Ranthus B. Fouch in 1931.

The rivalry between St. Olaf and Carleton began with a Carleton victory over St. Olaf in 1919. A statue of an eagle in Northfield&#x27;s Civil War Veterans&#x27; Memorial (in Bridge Square) is turned to face the college that wins the annual match between the schools.

These football teams are also significant for having played the only NCAA-sanctioned &quot;Liter Bowl&quot; metric football game in history, which St. Olaf won in 1977.

==== Cross country ====
The Great Karhu Shoe Race is an annual rivalry between the cross country teams of Carleton and St. Olaf College. The race was founded in 1972 when Carleton Coach Bill Huyck was in search of a new championship course for the Midwest Conference Meet. St. Olaf coach Bill Thornton agreed to a competition between the runners on each team who were not on the varsity top 7. The varsity athletes were still racing later in the season. The trophy for the 1972 race was a pair of Karhu Shoes worth $10. These shoes have remained the trophy to this day.

Several traditions exist between the St. Olaf and Carleton runners at the race. As the race typically falls near Halloween, many of the runners will often don costumes. The runners for the St. Olaf men use safety pins to attach gummy bears to their shorts, which the Carleton runners attempt to rip off.

==Kierkegaard Library==
The Howard V. and Edna H. Hong Kierkegaard Library is a research collection dedicated to the work of the 19th-century Danish philosopher and theologian Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855), housed at St. Olaf College, Northfield, Minnesota. Along with the Søren Kierkegaard Research Center at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark, it is one of two internationally significant research facilities devoted to the study of Kierkegaard. The collection began as the private library of Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong, assembled during their complete translation of Kierkegaard&#x27;s writings into English, the first volume of which received the National Book Award. Subsequent curators of the library were philosophers C. Stephen Evans and, from 1995 to 2022, Gordon D. Marino.

The Hongs donated the collection to St. Olaf College in 1976 with the understanding that it be made available as a center for research and publication. The library&#x27;s current holdings include over 11,000 volumes, 3,500 periodical articles and a partial replication of Kierkegaard&#x27;s personal library as well as titles Kierkegaard might have had access to during his lifetime. It hosts visiting researchers throughout the year (including an active summer fellows program) and periodic conferences and research seminars. Activities in the summer include Danish courses and an International Conference every fourth year. Yearlong Kierkegaard Fellowships see scholars living in St. Olaf&#x27;s Kierkegaard House. The library&#x27;s director is St. Olaf College philosophy faculty member Anna Louise Strelis Söderquist.

St. Olaf students edit and publish &quot;The Reed&quot;, an undergraduate journal of existential philosophy, from the library. &quot;The Reed&quot; began in 1998, and since then has published articles from undergraduates across the globe every year.

== Flaten Art Museum ==
St. Olaf is home to the Flaten Art Museum, in the Center for Art and Dance. The museum holds over 4,000 works on rotating display to the public. The vast majority of the works were received through donations, but a few were purchased. The museum also displays senior studio majors&#x27; work at the end of the year to give them experience in having artwork displayed in a professional setting.

===Poster collection===
In 2015 St. Olaf accepted a collection of 147 rare World War II-era propaganda posters as part of a donation from the estate of Richard N. Tetlie. The posters were created by the Nazi regime and the Vichy French government for display across occupied Europe and were collected by Major Duncan Emrich, historian for General Dwight D. Eisenhower, during the liberation of Europe. The collection provides insight into how the Nazis and their allies attempted to foster racial ideology, encourage distrust of the Allies, and rally support for their cause by manipulating the fear, anxiety, traditions, and political circumstances of the people in the occupied territories. The museum contacted the Midwest Art Conservation Center for a full assessment of the collection in hopes that the posters can be restored. They could then be used in exhibits and as resources to teach about the dangers of propaganda and extremism.

==Notable alumni==

Notable St. Olaf alumni include civil rights activist James Reeb &#x27;50, AIA Gold Award-winning architect Edward Sövik &#x27;39, Minnesota Governor Al Quie &#x27;50, Oscar-winning screenwriter Barry Morrow &#x27;70, Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Gretchen Morgenson &#x27;76, and writers Ole Rolvaag 1905, Siri Hustvedt &#x27;77 (winner of the Princess of Asturias Award in Letters), and ornithologist Margaret Sordahl. Game designer Jonathan Tweet studied at the college, as did the first female major league baseball coach, Justine Siegal. Raffi Freedman-Gurspan graduated in 2009 with a Bachelor of Arts in political science and Norwegian. Andrew Volstead 1881 introduced the National Prohibition Act to Congress in 1919. Cheryl Willman is an American cancer researcher and the executive director of Mayo Clinic Cancer Programs.

Ernest Lawrence, recipient of the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics, studied for a year at St. Olaf.

==In popular culture==
St. Olaf is mentioned in the works of Minnesota author F. Scott Fitzgerald, whose character Jay Gatsby of &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; attended the college briefly and worked as a janitor. The college is also frequently mentioned in Garrison Keillor&#x27;s radio program &quot;A Prairie Home Companion,&quot; which broadcast its show from St. Olaf on November 17, 2001, and November 19, 2011.

The fictional Minnesota city of St. Olaf was the hometown of Rose Nylund in the TV show &quot;The Golden Girls.&quot; In the TV show the fictional city&#x27;s sister city was St. Gustav, Minnesota, a nod to Gustavus Adolphus College, in nearby St. Peter, Minnesota. Betty White, the actress who played Rose, visited St. Olaf and was given an honorary membership in St. Olaf&#x27;s chapter of the theater honorary society.

The St. Olaf Choir can be heard performing Mozart&#x27;s &quot;Requiem&quot; with the St. Paul Chamber Orchestra in Nike&#x27;s &quot;Jordan XXII-Takeover&quot; commercial. The choir is also on the soundtrack of the 1972 film &quot;The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid&quot;.

In October 2008 the Coen Brothers shot scenes at St. Olaf for their film &quot;A Serious Man&quot;. After a long search of many campuses, they chose St. Olaf&#x27;s old Science Center because it had the late 1960s look of the movie. St. Olaf has since built a new science center and remodeled the old facility into Tomson Hall.

==See also==
* List of St. Olaf College people
* List of colleges and universities in Minnesota
* Higher education in Minnesota
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1515763" start="0" end="16" title="St. Olaf College" label="St. Olaf College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="22" end="29" title="Private college" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="30" end="50" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q996544" start="54" end="75" title="Northfield, Minnesota" label="Northfield, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894596" start="182" end="199" title="Bernt Julius Muus" label="Bernt Julius Muus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="258" end="275" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="Olaf II of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="303" end="341" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q996544" start="478" end="499" title="Northfield, Minnesota" label="Northfield, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041671" start="565" end="581" title="Carleton College" label="Carleton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="640" end="658" title="Fulbright Program" label="Fulbright Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864452" start="675" end="697" title="Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship" label="Goldwater Scholarships"/>
<link wikidata="Q86881" start="779" end="801" title="Coat of arms of Norway" label="Coat of arms of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="829" end="837" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="St. Olaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="907" end="920" title="Nynorsk" label="New Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="1071" end="1080" title="Norwegian people" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q490423" start="1103" end="1125" title="Rice County, Minnesota" label="Rice County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1194" end="1202" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="1203" end="1213" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1241" end="1255" title="post-secondary" label="post-secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="1339" end="1348" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894596" start="1421" end="1438" title="Bernt Julius Muus" label="Bernt Julius Muus"/>
<link wikidata="Q996544" start="1730" end="1740" title="Northfield, Minnesota" label="Northfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007813" start="1844" end="1858" title="Muus v. Muus" label="domestic abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705538" start="2114" end="2128" title="Luther College (Iowa)" label="Luther College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739480" start="2130" end="2149" title="Herman Amberg Preus" label="Herman Amberg Preus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022542" start="2168" end="2183" title="Norwegian Synod" label="Norwegian Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305242" start="2751" end="2777" title="Red Wing Seminary" label="Red Wing Lutheran Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q862727" start="2811" end="2819" title="Red Wing, Minnesota" label="Red Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="2993" end="3021" title="Panic of 1893" label="national economic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q180266" start="4174" end="4187" title="scarlet fever" label="scarlet fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="4631" end="4642" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="4880" end="4897" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="November 11, 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5280" end="5292" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="5396" end="5405" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="5574" end="5584" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q154912" start="5884" end="5893" title="King Olav" label="King Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="5926" end="5939" title="King Harald V" label="King Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q131045" start="5944" end="5965" title="Queen Sonja of Norway" label="Queen Sonja of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796162" start="6336" end="6353" title="Thorbjorn N. Mohn" label="Thorbjorn N. Mohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250090" start="6365" end="6380" title="John N. Kildahl" label="John N. Kildahl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6424" end="6435" title="Lars W. Boe" label="Lars W. Boe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022542" start="6770" end="6785" title="Synod of the Norwegian Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Norwegian Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774229" start="6796" end="6823" title="Anti-Missourian Brotherhood" label="Anti-Missourian Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889000" start="6836" end="6879" title="United Norwegian Lutheran Church of America" label="United Norwegian Lutheran Church of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656611" start="6890" end="6917" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church (United States)" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744379" start="6928" end="6956" title="American Lutheran Church" label="The American Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="6972" end="7010" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="7479" end="7491" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="7609" end="7645" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="7749" end="7763" title="Travel+Leisure" label="Travel+Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658535" start="7845" end="7857" title="Edward Sövik" label="Edward Sövik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="9014" end="9034" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="Norwegian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="9054" end="9065" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="9096" end="9125" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="9508" end="9516" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="13472" end="13475" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="13540" end="13543" title="ACT (examination)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="13829" end="13857" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="14053" end="14059" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="14268" end="14286" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156560" start="14539" end="14551" title="Payscale.com" label="Payscale.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735100" start="14798" end="14813" title="Alpha Phi Omega" label="Alpha Phi Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="18340" end="18344" title="ROTC" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="18722" end="18740" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079156" start="19162" end="19184" title="Office of Civil Rights" label="Office of Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="19341" end="19349" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q67205392" start="20229" end="20259" title="September 2019 climate strikes" label="September 2019 climate strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60674974" start="20283" end="20308" title="school strike for climate" label="school strike for climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56434717" start="20355" end="20369" title="Greta Thunberg" label="Greta Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q996544" start="20464" end="20474" title="Northfield, Minnesota" label="Northfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q30606503" start="20523" end="20586" title="Climate education" label="raise awareness of the growing threat of global climate change."/>
<link wikidata="Q4567030" start="20882" end="20904" title="F. Melius Christiansen" label="F. Melius Christiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590870" start="20918" end="20922" title="St. Olaf Band" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590871" start="20924" end="20929" title="St. Olaf Choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590873" start="20934" end="20943" title="St. Olaf Orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590870" start="21065" end="21078" title="St. Olaf Band" label="St. Olaf Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590871" start="21334" end="21348" title="St. Olaf Choir" label="St. Olaf Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="21506" end="21511" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034074" start="22556" end="22562" title="Cantus (vocal ensemble)" label="Cantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866681" start="22577" end="22590" title="Magnum Chorum" label="Magnum Chorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="22819" end="22836" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="22850" end="22890" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969866" start="22926" end="22971" title="Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843362" start="23174" end="23212" title="Midwest Conference" label="Midwest Collegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="23877" end="23887" title="intramural" label="intramural"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="23980" end="23988" title="Ultimate (sport)" label="Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="24142" end="24156" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="24315" end="24332" title="Buffalo, NY" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041671" start="25151" end="25167" title="Carleton College" label="Carleton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="25180" end="25197" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q28444589" start="25215" end="25222" title="Carleton Knights football" label="Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717053" start="25300" end="25311" title="Malt-O-Meal" label="Malt-O-Meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="25608" end="25617" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="25809" end="25813" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="25993" end="26006" title="Cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26289" end="26302" title="Cross country running#Scoring" label="varsity top 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="26935" end="26946" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="26951" end="26961" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="26962" end="26979" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q996544" start="27021" end="27042" title="Northfield, Minnesota" label="Northfield, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666560" start="27059" end="27092" title="Søren Kierkegaard Research Center" label="Søren Kierkegaard Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="27100" end="27124" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27126" end="27133" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27303" end="27315" title="Edna Hong (translator)" label="Edna H. Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="27445" end="27464" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006872" start="27519" end="27535" title="C. Stephen Evans" label="C. Stephen Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29148" end="29160" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="29420" end="29440" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141913" start="30090" end="30100" title="James Reeb" label="James Reeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="30111" end="30114" title="American Institute of Architects" label="AIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658535" start="30144" end="30156" title="Edward Sövik" label="Edward Sövik"/>
<link wikidata="Q888927" start="30186" end="30193" title="Al Quie" label="Al Quie"/>
<link wikidata="Q507252" start="30231" end="30243" title="Barry Morrow" label="Barry Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040618" start="30288" end="30306" title="Gretchen Morgenson" label="Gretchen Morgenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q523105" start="30329" end="30340" title="Ole Rolvaag" label="Ole Rolvaag"/>
<link wikidata="Q259543" start="30347" end="30360" title="Siri Hustvedt" label="Siri Hustvedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="30385" end="30411" title="Princess of Asturias Awards" label="Princess of Asturias Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q110242315" start="30443" end="30459" title="Margaret Sordahl" label="Margaret Sordahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q706412" start="30475" end="30489" title="Jonathan Tweet" label="Jonathan Tweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="30538" end="30559" title="major league baseball" label="major league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073891" start="30567" end="30581" title="Justine Siegal" label="Justine Siegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20985226" start="30583" end="30605" title="Raffi Freedman-Gurspan" label="Raffi Freedman-Gurspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860735" start="30684" end="30699" title="Andrew Volstead" label="Andrew Volstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613068" start="30720" end="30744" title="National Prohibition Act" label="National Prohibition Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q110811050" start="30766" end="30780" title="Cheryl Willman" label="Cheryl Willman"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="30874" end="30889" title="Ernest Lawrence" label="Ernest Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="30913" end="30935" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="31048" end="31067" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048121" start="31085" end="31095" title="Jay Gatsby" label="Jay Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="31105" end="31121" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q183031" start="31226" end="31242" title="Garrison Keillor" label="Garrison Keillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890517" start="31270" end="31294" title="A Prairie Home Companion" label="A Prairie Home Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367877" start="31448" end="31459" title="Rose Nylund" label="Rose Nylund"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="31467" end="31469" title="TV" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q912467" start="31481" end="31497" title="The Golden Girls" label="The Golden Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621541" start="31594" end="31619" title="Gustavus Adolphus College" label="Gustavus Adolphus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931467" start="31631" end="31651" title="St. Peter, Minnesota" label="St. Peter, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q373895" start="31653" end="31664" title="Betty White" label="Betty White"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="31853" end="31859" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737869" start="32042" end="32077" title="The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid" label="The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="32106" end="32119" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q300555" start="32165" end="32178" title="A Serious Man" label="A Serious Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158395" start="32430" end="32461" title="List of St. Olaf College people" label="List of St. Olaf College people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853336" start="32464" end="32510" title="List of colleges and universities in Minnesota" label="List of colleges and universities in Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853336" start="32513" end="32542" title="Higher education in Minnesota" label="Higher education in Minnesota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276532" wikidata="Q5652742" url="?curid=276532" title="Happy Fun Ball">
<text>&quot;Happy Fun Ball&quot; is a parody advertisement that first aired on February 16, 1991, on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Described as a &quot;classic that can sit right up there with Dan Aykroyd&#x27;s Bass-o-Matic&quot;, The topic of the sketch is a toy rubber ball, the advertisement for which is accompanied by a long series of bizarre disclaimers and increasingly ominous warnings, including &quot;Do not taunt Happy Fun Ball.&quot; It was brought back for several &quot;Best of Saturday Night Live&quot; specials.

== Concept ==
Written by Jack Handey and voiced by Phil Hartman, the ad featured three &quot;kids&quot; portrayed by Dana Carvey, Jan Hooks, and Mike Myers. The brief commercial declares Happy Fun Ball (produced by Wacky Products Incorporated, and its parent company, Global Chemical Unlimited), just $14.95, was &quot;the toy sensation sweeping the nation!&quot; However, this positive message about the innocuous-seeming toy was undercut by a lengthier number of bizarre disclaimers and warnings, including &quot;may suddenly accelerate to dangerous speeds&quot; and &quot;If Happy Fun Ball begins to smoke, seek shelter and cover head.&quot; Ingredients include &quot;an unknown glowing substance which fell to Earth, presumably from outer space&quot;; said ingredients are not to be &quot;touched, inhaled, or looked at&quot; if exposed due to rupture. Viewers were also warned, &quot;Do not taunt Happy Fun Ball.&quot; The sketch ends with a slogan for Happy Fun Ball: &quot;Accept no substitutes!&quot;

The parody lampooned advertisers, pharmaceutical companies, toy manufacturers, chemical companies, absurdly long legal disclaimers, alien conspiracies, and mentions the 1991 Gulf War (stating Happy Fun Ball was dropped by U.S. warplanes on Iraq).

Happy Fun Ball was presented as one of the sponsors of the first &quot;Unfrozen Caveman Lawyer&quot; sketch (aired November 23, 1991), with the claim Happy Fun Ball was &quot;Still legal in 16 states. It&#x27;s happy. It&#x27;s fun. It&#x27;s Happy Fun Ball.&quot;

== See also ==
*Recurring &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; characters and sketches
*SuperHappyDevHouse
*Super Ball
*Engrish

== References ==
== External links ==
*Happy Fun Ball sketch on YouTube
*Fan site containing .WAV samples of the sketch
*Transcript of the SNL sketch</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5652742" start="6" end="20" title="Happy Fun Ball" label="Happy Fun Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596428" start="32" end="52" title="List of Saturday Night Live commercial parodies" label="parody advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="101" end="120" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q105221" start="190" end="201" title="Dan Aykroyd" label="Dan Aykroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5787637" start="552" end="563" title="Jack Handey" label="Jack Handey"/>
<link wikidata="Q366834" start="578" end="590" title="Phil Hartman" label="Phil Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q545924" start="644" end="655" title="Dana Carvey" label="Dana Carvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372210" start="657" end="666" title="Jan Hooks" label="Jan Hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="672" end="682" title="Mike Myers (actor)" label="Mike Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q906118" start="1000" end="1010" title="disclaimer" label="disclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q91723" start="1142" end="1149" title="Blast shelter" label="shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="1264" end="1275" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="1597" end="1600" title="toy" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="1650" end="1655" title="legal" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="1669" end="1674" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="1675" end="1687" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1711" end="1719" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1777" end="1781" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656615" start="1856" end="1879" title="Unfrozen Caveman Lawyer" label="Unfrozen Caveman Lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319575" start="2067" end="2132" title="Recurring Saturday Night Live characters and sketches" label="Recurring &amp;quot;Saturday Night Live&amp;quot; characters and sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642022" start="2134" end="2152" title="SuperHappyDevHouse" label="SuperHappyDevHouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156983" start="2154" end="2164" title="Super Ball" label="Super Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q368901" start="2166" end="2173" title="Engrish" label="Engrish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276533" wikidata="Q298612" url="?curid=276533" title="Stefan Nemanja">
<text>Stefan Nemanja (Serbian Cyrillic: , ; – 13 February 1199) was the Grand Prince (Veliki Župan) of the Serbian Grand Principality (also known as Raška, lat. ) from 1166 to 1196. A member of the Vukanović dynasty, Nemanja founded the Nemanjić dynasty, and is remembered for his contributions to Serbian culture and history, founding what would evolve into the Serbian Empire, as well as the national church. According to the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Nemanja is also among the most remarkable Serbs for his literary contributions and altruistic attributes.

In 1196, after three decades of warfare and negotiations, including the Third Norman invasion of the Balkans (1185–1186) which consolidated Serbia while distinguishing it from both Western and Byzantine spheres of influence, Nemanja abdicated in favour of his middle son Stefan Nemanjić, who later became the first King of Serbia. Nemanja ultimately went to Mount Athos, where he became a monk and took the name of Simeon, joining his youngest son (later known as Saint Sava), who had already become the first archbishop of the Serbian Orthodox Church.

Together with his son Saint Sava, Nemanja restored the Hilandar Monastery at Mount Athos from 1198 to 1199, and issued the &quot;Charter of Hilandar&quot;. The monastery thus became the center of Serbian Orthodox monasticism at Athos. Shortly after his death, Serbian Orthodox Church canonized Stefan Nemanja, under the name Saint Simeon the [[Myroblyte saint|Myroblyte]] ().

==Early life==
Nemanja was born around the year 1113 or 1114 AD in Ribnica, Zeta (in the vicinity of present-day Podgorica, the capital of Montenegro). He was the youngest son of Zavida, a Prince of Zahumlje, who after a conflict with his brothers was sent to Ribnica where he had the title of Lord. Zavida (Beli Uroš) was most probably a son of Uroš I or Vukan. Since western Zeta was under Roman Catholic jurisdiction, Nemanja received a Latin baptism, although much of his later life was spent balancing Western and Eastern forms of Christianity.

==Byzantine-Hungarian War==

In 1163, Emperor Manuel I Comnenus came to Niš with the army via Serdica (Sofia), where, according to John Kinnamos, he decided &quot;to deal with things concerning Serbia&quot;. At that time, Serbia was ruled by the Grand Župan Desa, an ally of Stephen III in the Hungarian dynastic conflicts, and thus an opponent of Manuel. When in 1165 Desa was finally forced to come to Niš before the emperor, his connections with the Hungarian king Stephen III were revealed, Desa called him his master, Manuel I decided to take him to court and punish him. Desa was first detained and kept under guard, and then sent to the court prison in Constantinople.

The land was given by the emperor to the administration of Zavida&#x27;s sons, who were in the pro-Byzantine party: Tihomir, Stracimir, Miroslav and the youngest Nemanja. Tihomir was the oldest and became the Grand Župan of Serbia. In January 1166, Tihomir was recognized by the brothers who were given to rule other certain parts of Serbia and the Serbian-Byzantine frontier. Stracimir held the areas around West Morava, Miroslav Zahumlje, while Stefan Nemanja was given the areas around Ibar, and Dubočica (around Leskovac), which probably was historical region of &quot;Dendra&quot; west of Niš.

The Byzantine emperor Manuel I Comnenus launched a large army against Hungary because he was informed of their dissatisfaction and internal conflicts. The Hungarian prince Béla III had to live in Constantinople, where he was married, and Béla&#x27;s lands, Dalmatia with southern Hungary (below Velebit), had to come under Constantinople&#x27;s rule. There is resistance in Hungary, which is why Emperor Manuel embarks on a campaign. The Byzantine army conquered Zemun and Srem in 1165. The Byzantines were accompanied by the obligatory detachments of Serbs. The second Byzantine army under command of John Doukas Komnenos moved west, across Serbia and Bosnia towards the Adriatic coast. Without significant resistance, they took all the cities from Split to Bar, forcing them to recognize Byzantine rule.

The Byzantines also had success in a campaign in Italy where they captured an important seaport on the west coast of the Adriatic, Ancona. Venice, which had previously turned to Byzantium for help during the conquest of Friedrich Barbarossa in northern Italy, changed its attitude towards the Byzantines for fear of losing the Adriatic. It approached Hungary as a natural ally against the Byzantines. At the same time, they began to work among the Serbs, especially in Serbia, in order to rebel against Byzantium.

In 1166, the Hungarians counterattacked to push Byzantium out of the newly conquered areas. However, in response, Emperor Manuel launched three armies against Hungary, one from the Danube, and the other two across the Carpathians, towards the center of Pannonia. While the main Hungarian army was operating towards the Danube, Belgrade and Braničevo, two Byzantine armies went deep into their territory, causing general panic. The Hungarians were forced to seek peace through intermediaries to their detriment in 1167.

As the ideal candidate of Venice and Hungary among the Serbs appeared Nemanja, when his brothers and, above all, Tihomir imprisoned him in a cave near Fortress Ras. Nemanja probably hoped that he would take the place of Desa, as the former representative of the pro-Greek party, while Emperor Manuel brought his eldest brother Tihomir to the throne. Angry because of that, Nemanja changes his policy in favor of Hungary and its allies. Nemanja escaped from the dungeon, it is not known with whose help. Nemanja&#x27;s son and biographer, Stefan Nemanjić, describing his father&#x27;s life, says how he escaped with the help of &quot;heavenly forces&quot;: &quot;And this again, because of meekness and justice, and wonderful humility, and because of all good customs, with a high arm he brought him out of the rocky cave, and brought him to the throne of his fatherland, and raised him up as the great lord of all the world.&quot;

==Rise to the throne (1168–1172)==
In 1166 or 1167, Nemanja first expanded his territories and conquered Kotor, and then gathered his supporters in Ras and started a conflict against Tihomir, who was looking for support from the Byzantines. Nemanja overthrew Tihomir, provoking Byzantines action in autumn 1168:

At that time, William of Tyre, an emissary of Amalric, a Latin King of Jerusalem, arrived at the diplomatic mission in Constantinople. His goal was for Byzantium to join the crusade against Egypt. During his stay in Constantinople, probably under the influence of the Byzantines, William of Tyre left negative classifications about Serbs in his reports.
The following year, Nemanja attacked the Byzantine vassal, Prince of Zeta Radoslav, and on that occasion annexed to his country a part of the then Zeta and the Neretva region. Soon, Manuel I Komnenos came into conflict with the Venetian Republic, and on his order, on 12 March 1171, all Venetian property in Byzantium was confiscated. In response to this, from Venecia was launched Venetian navy with about 120 ships to Byzantine possessions. The Venetian fleet headed east in September of that year, conquering, by the way, Byzantine Trogir and Dubrovnik. Then Nemanja entered into closer ties with the Venetians and began attacks on Byzantine Kotor, simultaneously carrying out raids through the Moravian valley through which the main public road passes between Byzantine Belgrade and Niš. According to Arnold of Lübeck on that road, near fortress Ravno, in March 1172, the Serbs carried out a night attack on the camp of Western knights and pilgrims led by Henry the Lion accompanied by the Byzantines. Arnold of Lubeck also left a very negative opinion in his chronicle about Serbs. Probably under the impression of the night attack, he even called them the &quot;sons of Belial.&quot; Meanwhile, in 1171, Saladin was appointed sultan of Egypt, who would become one of the greatest defenders of Islam in history.

The Kingdom of Hungary also wanted to join the fight against Byzantium, and the Holy Roman Empire of Frederick Barbarossa (1152–1190), also supported this alliance. Nemanja expected Hungarian help, but in the meantime, king Stephen III of Hungary died on 4 March 1172. The Hungarian emissaries went to Serdica (Sofia), where Emperor Manuel encamped with the army, preparing for the campaign. The Hungarian throne was won by Manuel&#x27;s candidate Bela III (1173–1196). In the meantime, during the winter of 1171/72 on the island of Chios, the Venetian army was decimated by an epidemic, so that the Serbs were left alone in the fight against Byzantium. Manuel immediately took advantage of the favorable moment and after receiving the Hungarian emissaries, he headed for the Serbs at the head of the army. Before the oncoming Byzantine army, the grand zoupan Nemanja retreated to the mountains. According to the Byzantine historian John Kinnamos, the Venetians incited Nemanja to revolt.

==Byzantine vassal (1172–1182)==

This conflict ended with Nemanja&#x27;s surrender to Emperor Manuel. One day, Nemanja ritually obeyed Manuel I Komnenus in Niš. Barefoot, with his clothes torn to the elbows, a rope around his neck and a sword in his hands, he entered the Byzantine camp and went out to the emperor. Arriving in front of Manuel, he fell on his knees in front of him, handing him his sword, to do with him what he wanted. The Byzantine emperor accepted his humility, agreeing to the renewal of vassal obligations and leaving Nemanja in the position of grand zoupan. The final part of this episode took place in Constantinople, where Nemanja was taken as a slave in Manoel&#x27;s triumphal procession, while the gathered people ridiculed him. He was even shown a &quot;series of wall paintings that the emperor had commissioned to commemorate his victories over the Serbs; his alleged reaction is recorded in an oration by Eustathius of Thessalonica: &#x27;Seeing these paintings, he agrees with everything and approves of the visual feast. In one respect only does he chide the painter, namely that the latter has not called him a slave (doulos) in all the scenes of the triumph&#x27;.&quot;

The Byzantine emperor Manuel Comnenus returned Nemanja to the position of Grand Župan, and he confirmed to his brothers their areas – Stracimir around the West Moravia and Miroslav Zachlumia. Upon his return to Serbia, Nemanja turned to consolidating the central government, and forced Tihomir&#x27;s son and successor Prvoslav to renounce the ruler&#x27;s claims in his favor.

In accordance with his vassal duties, Nemanja regularly sent auxiliary detachments to Byzantine military campaigns. Serbian detachments were also part of the Byzantine army that was defeated by the troops of the Sultanate of Rum in the battle of Myriokephalon on 17 September 1176 in the gorges of Asia Minor.
Bogumilism reached its peak in the Byzantine Empire during the 11th and in the first half of the 12th century. At the end of the 12th century, among Serbs and other Balkan Slavs, there was a very widespread &#x27;Slavic&#x27; Gnosticism or dualistic teaching called Bogumilism. The main political tendency of Bogomilism was resistance to the Byzantine state and church authorities.

Bogumilism itself was very widespread among the people in Serbia and Bosnia, and its spread among the nobles led to Nemanja&#x27;s actions against them. He convened a state-church assembly at which a decision was to be made on further measures against them. 
The Assembly gathered the entire state leadership, composed of nobles and Bishop Euthymius of Ras, as well as a large number of abbots and monks. The assembly was held around 1176, during the time of Nemanja&#x27;s vassalship and before the death of Emperor Manoel in 1180. The grand zoupan Nemanja gave a speech at the assembly about the harmfulness of the Bogumil heresy. A woman who was married to a heretic spoke as the main witness at the assembly. Her testimony was crucial to end the quarrel at the council and to give the majority the impression that it was a harmful religious teaching. After consultations, especially with the Bishop Euthymius, the grand zopuan brought measures against them. The leader of the Bogumil community in Serbia was caught and brought before the court. The grand zoupan spared the life of their leader, and he was sentenced to corporal punishment, cutting off his tongue so that he would no longer blaspheme and spread harmful teachings. The army was sent to those parts of Serbia where their actions were most pronounced. The primary goal of this action was conversion.

The measures taken against those who refused were the confiscation of property, the punishment of milder punishments, the burning of books, as well as expulsion from the country. For the Bogumil community in Serbia, this was certainly persecution and ruthless action. Their confiscated property was distributed to the lepers and the poor.

==War with Byzantium (1183–1191)==
After the death of Emperor Manoel on 24 September 1180, the Hungarian king Bela III considered that he had no more obligations to Byzantium. The following 1181, he launched an offensive against Byzantium and conquered Srem (Sirmium) the northeastern part of the Adriatic coast (Including Zara) and Zemun. Byzantium was then occupied by internal conflicts, so that there was no military response to the Hungarian conquests. In 1182, Bela III ordered an attack on Byzantine Belgrade and Braničevo. The attack itself was quite clumsily carried out, and both fortresses were defended by experienced military leaders from the time of Emperor Manoel, Alexius Branas and Andronikos Lapardas.

Following the death of Manuel I in 1180, his widow, the Latin princess Maria of Antioch, acted as regent to her infant son Alexios II Komnenos. Her regency was notorious for the favoritism shown to Latin merchants and was overthrown in April 1182 by Andronikos I Komnenos, who entered the city in a wave of popular support. Almost immediately, the celebrations spilled over into massacre of Latins.

The usurpation of Andronikos I freed Nemanja from subordination to the Byzantine emperor. Stefan Nemanja, in alliance with the Hungarian king Bela III, launched a great offensive on Byzantium in 1183. Also, the commander of the Byzantine army, Andronicus Lampardis in Niš and Braničevo, renounced obedience to the new central authorities. At the same time, the Hungarian king Bela III conquered Byzantine Belgrade, Niš and Serdica (Sofia). According to the Byzantine historian Niketas Choniates, the Serbs, led by Nemanja, joined this campaign. The following year, Nemanja launched an offensive on the southeastern Adriatic coast and conquered Byzantine Skadar and besieged Dubrovnik (Ragusa).

In 1185, Andronicus I was killed in Constantinople and the new Byzantine emperor Isaac II Angelos began peace negotiations with the Hungarian king. The peace treaty provided for Emperor Isaac II to marry Bela&#x27;s daughter Margaret. The Hungarian army withdrew from the Byzantine central part of the Balkans, leaving Nemanja without support. Fortunately for Nemanja, at the same time, the Normans and the Bulgarians joined the anti-Byzantine alliance.

Nemanja forced Dubrovnik (Ragusa) to replace Byzantium with Norman rule. The Normans of king William II of Sicily, also in 1185, conquered Dyrrachium and Thessalonica, and embarked on an expedition to Constantinople, but they lost discipline due to large-scale looting, so the Byzantines easily defeated them in the battle of Demetritzes near Lower Struma. In October 1185, in the Lower Danube, in northern Bulgaria, an uprising began, led by the brothers Peter and Ivan I Asen, one of the reasons for which was an extraordinary tribute that Emperor Isaac II ordered to be collected for his wedding. Nemanja then coordinated actions with the Asen brothers against Byzantium. In September 1186, Nemanja and his brothers &quot;made peace with the city of Dubrovnik&quot;, ruled by William II.

===Between two emperors===

Meanwhile, Ayyubid sultan Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn captured Jerusalem in 1187. Due to the fall of Jerusalem in the Latin West, there was a great commotion that started the Third Crusade. A large crusader army led by Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa marched in 1189 from Buda through Belgrade and Niš to Adrianople and Constantinople.
 In Niš, in the new capital of Stefan Nemanja, the German emperor and the grand zoupan met at the end of July 1189. At the meeting, Nemanja asked Barbarossa for the Crusaders to promise him lands the Serbians recently conquered in exchange of aiding the Crusaders in war against Byzantium. However, Barbarossa rejected this proposal in a diplomatic manner, wanting to ensure only a safe passage for his army through Byzantium. His main goal, however, remained the liberation of Jerusalem.
A month later, negotiations began between the Crusaders and the Byzantines over the passage with great tension. At that time, according to Christian doctrine, there could be only one emperor in the Christian world. Hence the great rivalry and tension between the Eastern Roman Empire (historiographically known as Byzantium) and the Holy Roman Empire. The Crusaders captured Philippopolis and Adrianople and prepared for an attack on Constantinople. Nemanja takes advantage of this situation and launches an offensive towards Byzantine Skopje. Meanwhile, in February 1190, an agreement was reached between the two emperors at Adrianople to allow the Crusader army to cross the Dardanelles. During the uncertain negotiations, Emperor Isaac II replied that the new friendship between the Crusaders and the Serbs was very difficult for him.

In June 1190, Frederick Barbarossa drowned in the river Saleph. At the same time, Byzantine Emperor Isaac II Angelos launched a punitive expedition against the Serbs, and Nemanja was defeated in the battle at South Morava (1191). In fact, Constantinople did not want to subdue the Serbs, but to regain Niš and the main road to Belgrade, as well as to make allies of the rebellious Serbs. The peace treaty in 1193 provided for Stefan Nemanjić, the middle son of the Grand Župan Stefan Nemanja, to marry a Byzantine princess Eudokia Angelina, i.e. niece of the Byzantine emperor.

==Return to Byzantium==

The concluded peace envisaged that Nemanja would be succeeded by his middle son Stefan, who received the Byzantine title of sebastokrator and the Byzantine princess Eudokia for a wife, and not the firstborn Vukan.

In November 1192, on the way to Venice, from Acre via Byzantine Corfu to the southeastern Adriatic coast on the small island of Lokrum near Dubrovnik (Ragusa), Richard I arrived incognito as an ordinary knight or pilgrim, where he revealed that he is the King of England. Hungarian king Béla invaded Serbia at the beginning of 1193. Emperor Isaac II demanded the withdrawal of his troops, and threatened Béla with war. At the same time, Doge Enrico Dandolo attempted to occupy Hungarian Zara, but failed. In April 1195, the father-in-law of Stefan Nemanjić, Alexius III Angelus (1195–1203), overthrew his brother Emperor Isaac II and took power.

In 1196, at the state assembly near Church of Saints Peter and Paul in Ras, Stefan Nemanja abdicated the throne in favor of his middle son Stefan, who became the grand prince of Serbia. He left his eldest son Vukan in charge of Zeta, Travunija, Hvosno and Toplica. Nemanja became a monk in his old age and was given the name Simeon. Shortly afterwards, he went to Byzantium, to Mount Athos, where his youngest son Sava had been a monk for some time. They received permission from the new Byzantine emperor to rebuild the abandoned monastery of Hilandar.

==Death and legacy==

Knowing his death was near in his 86th year, Simeon asked to be placed on a mat in front of the icon of the Virgin Hodegetria with a stone for his pillow. He died in front of his son Sava and other monks, on 13 February 1199. He was buried in the grounds of Hilandar monastery. His last words requested that Sava take his remains to Serbia, &quot;when God permits it, after a certain period of time&quot;. Sava later wrote the &quot;Liturgy of Saint Simeon&quot; in Nemanja&#x27;s honour.

In 1206, Sava decided to bring his father&#x27;s remains to Serbia, where his brothers Stefan and Vukan were fighting among themselves, thus tearing apart the Serbian lands their father had reunited. Upon arrival of Sava, his brothers made peace and Simeon was re-buried in 1207 in his personal foundation, the Studenica Monastery, where holy oil (myrrh) started to seeped, from his new grave, thus giving Simeon the epithet &quot;the Myrrh-streaming&quot;. Because of miracles that occurred at his grave, the Serbian Orthodox Church canonised him, and declared his feast-day on . The cult of St. Simeon helped consolidate Serbian national identity. Centers of his cult are in monasteries of Studenica and Hilandar.

==Name and title==
Various names have been used to refer to Stefan Nemanja, including Stefan I and the Latin &quot;Stephanus Nemania&quot;. Sometimes the spelling of his name is anglicised, to become Stephen Nemanya. In the latter part of his life, he became a monk and hence was referred to as Monk Simeon, or Monk Symeon. After his death, he was canonised by the Orthodox Church, and became St. Symeon the Myrrh-streaming. His son and successor, Stefan the First-Crowned, called him &quot;The Gatherer of the Lost Pieces of the Land of his Grandfathers, and also their Rebuilder&quot;. His other son Sava, called him &quot;Our Lord and Autocrat, and ruler of the whole Serbian land&quot;. In a way, both sons introduced the cult of their father, thus creating the ideal picture of a ruler-saint, without parallel in Byzantium.

==Family==
Nemanja was married to a Serb noblewoman by the name of Ana. They had three sons and three daughters:

* Vukan Nemanjić – Prince of Doclea and briefly Grand Prince of Serbia (1202–1204)
* Stefan Nemanjić – Nemanja&#x27;s successor, first &quot;King of All Serbian lands&quot;, 1196–1228
* Rastko Nemanjić (Saint Sava) (1171–1236) – The first archbishop and saint of the Serbian Orthodox Church
* Jefimija Nemanjić – married Manuel Komnenos Doukas Regent of Thessaloniki (+1241)
* A daughter married Bulgarian nobleman Tihomir Asen, mother of Bulgarian emperor Konstantin Tih (r. 1257–1277)
* Elena-Evgenia, wife of Ivan Asen I

==Foundations==
Stefan Nemanja founded, restored and reconstructed several monasteries. He also established the Raška architectural school, that spanned from 1170 to 1300.

* Monastery of Saint Nicholas, in Kuršumlija
* Monastery of Saint Mother of Christ, between Kosanica and Toplica
* Monastery Temple of George&#x27;s Tracts (Đurđevi Stupovi), in 1171 in Ras
* Monastery Temple of the Immaculate Holy Virgin the Benefactor (Studenica), in 1190 in Ibar
* Church of Saint Mother of Christ, at the confluence of the Bistrica and the Lim
* Monastery of Saint Nicholas, in Kaznovići/Končulj on the Ibar
* Nunnery of Mother of Christ, in Ras

===Reconstructions===
* Hilandar monastery on Mount Athos, in 1199
* Monastery of Saint Archangel Michael, in Skopje
* Monastery of Saint Pantheleimon, in Niš

===Donations===
* Church of Lord, Holy Grave and Christ&#x27;s Arrisal, in Jerusalem
* Church of Saint John the Forerunner, in Jerusalem
* Church of Saint Theodosios, in the Desert of Bethlehem
* Church Saint Apostole Peter and Paul, in Rome
* Church of Saint Nicholas, in Bari
* Monastery/Church of the Virgin of Evergethide, in Constantinople
* Monastery/Church of Saint Demetrios, in Thessalonika

==See also==
* Battle of Pantina
* History of Serbia; List of Serbian monarchs
* History of Montenegro; List of rulers of Montenegro
* History of Herzegovina

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

*In the Beginning was the Word – History of the Miroslav Gospel
* Serbian Unity Congress – Rulers of the Land
* CD Chilandar by Studio A, Aetos, Library of Serb Patriarchate and Chilandar monastery, Belgrade, 1998.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298612" start="0" end="14" title="Stefan Nemanja" label="Stefan Nemanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="16" end="32" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Serbian Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549319" start="66" end="78" title="Grand Prince" label="Grand Prince"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80" end="92" title="Grand Župan#Serbia" label="Veliki Župan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311990" start="101" end="127" title="Grand Principality of Serbia" label="Serbian Grand Principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q599110" start="143" end="148" title="Raška (region)" label="Raška"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622713" start="192" end="209" title="Vukanović dynasty" label="Vukanović dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q746782" start="231" end="247" title="Nemanjić dynasty" label="Nemanjić dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599752" start="292" end="307" title="Serbian culture" label="Serbian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223195" start="312" end="319" title="History of Serbia" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="357" end="371" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="388" end="403" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="national church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132636" start="422" end="458" title="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="502" end="507" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="516" end="524" title="literary" label="literary"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="543" end="553" title="altruistic" label="altruistic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="639" end="687" title="Byzantine-Norman wars#Third Norman invasion of the Balkans (1185–1186)" label="Third Norman invasion of the Balkans (1185–1186)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="838" end="853" title="Stefan Nemanjić" label="Stefan Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q615450" start="882" end="896" title="King of Serbia" label="King of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="925" end="936" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="1031" end="1041" title="Saint Sava" label="Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="1077" end="1087" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="1095" end="1118" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="1143" end="1153" title="Saint Sava" label="Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q849914" start="1176" end="1194" title="Hilandar Monastery" label="Hilandar Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="1198" end="1209" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086775" start="1250" end="1269" title="Charter of Hilandar" label="Charter of Hilandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="1405" end="1414" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q298612" start="1446" end="1492" title="Stefan Nemanja" label="Saint Simeon the [[Myroblyte saint|Myroblyte]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q11750130" start="1574" end="1578" title="Zeta (crown land)" label="Zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="1611" end="1620" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="1637" end="1647" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273231" start="1677" end="1683" title="Zavida" label="Zavida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="1697" end="1705" title="Zahumlje" label="Zahumlje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142592" start="1844" end="1850" title="Uroš I, Grand Prince of Serbia" label="Uroš I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359954" start="1854" end="1859" title="Vukan, Grand Prince of Serbia" label="Vukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1890" end="1904" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="2095" end="2112" title="Manuel I Comnenus" label="Manuel I Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="2121" end="2124" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="2143" end="2158" title="Sofia" label="Serdica (Sofia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q470689" start="2180" end="2193" title="John Kinnamos" label="John Kinnamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570380" start="2295" end="2306" title="Grand Župan" label="Grand Župan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901299" start="2307" end="2311" title="Desa, Grand Prince of Serbia" label="Desa"/>
<link wikidata="Q87051" start="2324" end="2335" title="Stephen III of Hungary" label="Stephen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2709" end="2723" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359011" start="2842" end="2849" title="Tihomir of Serbia" label="Tihomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301359" start="2851" end="2860" title="Stracimir Zavidović" label="Stracimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285178" start="2862" end="2870" title="Miroslav of Hum" label="Miroslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q378985" start="3135" end="3146" title="Zapadna Morava" label="West Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="3157" end="3165" title="Zahumlje" label="Zahumlje"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3215" end="3219" title="Ibar District" label="Ibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192606" start="3242" end="3250" title="Leskovac" label="Leskovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="3348" end="3365" title="Manuel I Comnenus" label="Manuel I Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q86978" start="3498" end="3506" title="Béla III of Hungary" label="Béla III"/>
<link wikidata="Q223275" start="3621" end="3628" title="Velebit" label="Velebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="3789" end="3794" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="3799" end="3803" title="Srem" label="Srem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229938" start="3928" end="3948" title="John Doukas Komnenos" label="John Doukas Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="3998" end="4006" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="4076" end="4081" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q115276" start="4085" end="4088" title="Bar, Montenegro" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="4264" end="4270" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4272" end="4278" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="4353" end="4373" title="Friedrich Barbarossa" label="Friedrich Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="4460" end="4468" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="4829" end="4835" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="4866" end="4877" title="Carpathians" label="Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="4901" end="4909" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396259" start="4988" end="4997" title="Braničevo Fortress" label="Braničevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="5309" end="5313" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q917814" start="5319" end="5331" title="Stari Ras" label="Fortress Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="5706" end="5721" title="Stefan Nemanjić" label="Stefan Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q171080" start="6205" end="6210" title="Kotor" label="Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q311822" start="6427" end="6442" title="William of Tyre" label="William of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="6459" end="6466" title="Amalric of Jerusalem" label="Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="6476" end="6493" title="King of Jerusalem" label="King of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q248565" start="6587" end="6608" title="Crusader invasion of Egypt" label="crusade against Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14394" start="6836" end="6840" title="Zeta" label="Zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="6927" end="6941" title="Neretva" label="Neretva region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778737" start="6977" end="7012" title="Byzantine–Venetian war of 1171" label="conflict with the Venetian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189161" start="7302" end="7308" title="Trogir" label="Trogir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="7313" end="7322" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q171080" start="7412" end="7417" title="Kotor" label="Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211328" start="7465" end="7480" title="Velika Morava" label="Moravian valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="7541" end="7549" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="7554" end="7557" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q316835" start="7572" end="7588" title="Arnold of Lübeck" label="Arnold of Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="7727" end="7741" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q815594" start="7943" end="7949" title="Belial" label="Belial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="7977" end="7984" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8066" end="8071" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q87051" start="8309" end="8331" title="Stephen III of Hungary" label="Stephen III of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="8387" end="8402" title="Sofia" label="Serdica (Sofia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q86978" start="8533" end="8541" title="Béla III of Hungary" label="Bela III"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="8618" end="8623" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="8663" end="8671" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470689" start="9018" end="9031" title="John Kinnamos" label="John Kinnamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907852" start="9232" end="9235" title="Niš Fortress" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q453465" start="10013" end="10039" title="Eustathius of Thessalonica" label="Eustathius of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q378985" start="10439" end="10451" title="Zapadna Morava" label="West Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="10465" end="10474" title="Zachlumia" label="Zachlumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180511" start="10603" end="10611" title="Stefan Prvoslav" label="Prvoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="10875" end="10891" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q730553" start="10899" end="10922" title="battle of Myriokephalon" label="battle of Myriokephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="10961" end="10971" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204095" start="10973" end="10983" title="Bogumilism" label="Bogumilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="11199" end="11209" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21658608" start="13263" end="13284" title="Byzantine–Hungarian War (1180–1185)" label="launched an offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="13317" end="13321" title="Srem" label="Srem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="13387" end="13391" title="Zadar" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="13397" end="13402" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396259" start="13584" end="13593" title="Braničevo Fortress" label="Braničevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q195854" start="13744" end="13758" title="Alexius Branas" label="Alexius Branas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707839" start="13763" end="13782" title="Andronikos Lapardas" label="Andronikos Lapardas"/>
<link wikidata="Q240604" start="13856" end="13872" title="Maria of Antioch" label="Maria of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41849" start="13908" end="13927" title="Alexios II Komnenos" label="Alexios II Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41830" start="14035" end="14056" title="Andronikos I Komnenos" label="Andronikos I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246569" start="14164" end="14182" title="Massacre of the Latins" label="massacre of Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="14590" end="14598" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="14600" end="14603" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="14608" end="14623" title="Sofia" label="Serdica (Sofia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q297340" start="14662" end="14679" title="Niketas Choniates" label="Niketas Choniates"/>
<link wikidata="Q131638" start="14839" end="14845" title="Skadar" label="Skadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="14859" end="14877" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik (Ragusa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37135" start="14961" end="14977" title="Isaac II Angelos" label="Isaac II Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q774723" start="15105" end="15113" title="Margaret of Hungary" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="15182" end="15188" title="Balkan" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="15271" end="15278" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="15287" end="15297" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="15350" end="15368" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik (Ragusa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q367387" start="15428" end="15448" title="William II of Sicily" label="William II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="15474" end="15484" title="Durrës" label="Dyrrachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="15489" end="15501" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528017" start="15651" end="15672" title="battle of Demetritzes" label="battle of Demetritzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204127" start="15678" end="15690" title="Struma (river)" label="Lower Struma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="15716" end="15728" title="Lower Danube" label="Lower Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q905368" start="15791" end="15796" title="Peter II of Bulgaria" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q748091" start="15801" end="15812" title="Ivan Asen I of Bulgaria" label="Ivan I Asen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="16166" end="16173" title="Ayyubid" label="Ayyubid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="16181" end="16193" title="Saladin" label="Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="16203" end="16212" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q815161" start="16233" end="16250" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1187)" label="fall of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="16315" end="16328" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="16378" end="16398" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="16420" end="16424" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="16433" end="16441" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="16446" end="16449" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="16453" end="16463" title="Edirne" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="16468" end="16482" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q459" start="17348" end="17361" title="Plovdiv" label="Philippopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="17366" end="17376" title="Edirne" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="17407" end="17421" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="17509" end="17515" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="17599" end="17609" title="Adrianople" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="17650" end="17661" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q732201" start="17868" end="17874" title="Göksu" label="Saleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q37135" start="17912" end="17928" title="Isaac II Angelos" label="Isaac II Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="18114" end="18117" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="18139" end="18147" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="18238" end="18253" title="Stefan Nemanjić" label="Stefan Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234282" start="18335" end="18351" title="Eudokia Angelina" label="Eudokia Angelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q392519" start="18540" end="18553" title="sebastokrator" label="sebastokrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234282" start="18581" end="18588" title="Eudokia Angelina" label="Eudokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q648277" start="18623" end="18628" title="Vukan Nemanjić" label="Vukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="18676" end="18680" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="18695" end="18700" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q277389" start="18759" end="18765" title="Lokrum" label="Lokrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="18771" end="18789" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik (Ragusa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="18791" end="18800" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="18886" end="18901" title="List of English monarchs" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q205688" start="19073" end="19087" title="Enrico Dandolo" label="Enrico Dandolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="19118" end="19122" title="Zadar" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q37065" start="19189" end="19208" title="Alexius III Angelus" label="Alexius III Angelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559411" start="19314" end="19345" title="Church of Saint Apostles Peter and Paul (Novi Pazar)" label="Church of Saints Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q917814" start="19349" end="19352" title="Stari Ras" label="Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="19656" end="19667" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="19692" end="19696" title="Rastko Nemanjić" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q849914" start="19822" end="19830" title="Hilandar" label="Hilandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132413" start="19970" end="19980" title="Hodegetria" label="Hodegetria"/>
<link wikidata="Q143042" start="20656" end="20675" title="Studenica Monastery" label="Studenica Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q829540" start="20683" end="20691" title="Chrism" label="holy oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="20879" end="20888" title="canonised" label="canonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="21165" end="21170" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="21240" end="21250" title="anglicised" label="anglicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="21427" end="21442" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642184" start="21470" end="21485" title="List of Eastern Orthodox saint titles" label="Myrrh-streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="21510" end="21534" title="Stephen II of Serbia" label="Stefan the First-Crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="21880" end="21889" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q447785" start="21959" end="21962" title="Saint Anastasija" label="Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q648277" start="22008" end="22022" title="Vukan Nemanjić" label="Vukan Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252942" start="22035" end="22041" title="Duklja" label="Doclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q24445" start="22091" end="22106" title="Stefan Nemanjić" label="Stefan Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="22192" end="22207" title="Rastko Nemanjić" label="Rastko Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="22245" end="22255" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225297" start="22327" end="22349" title="Manuel Komnenos Doukas" label="Manuel Komnenos Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401314" start="22429" end="22433" title="Asen dynasty" label="Asen"/>
<link wikidata="Q462917" start="22463" end="22477" title="Konstantin Tih" label="Konstantin Tih"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657881" start="22495" end="22529" title="Elena-Evgenia, wife of Ivan Asen I" label="Elena-Evgenia, wife of Ivan Asen I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756718" start="22643" end="22669" title="Raška architectural school" label="Raška architectural school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320221" start="22706" end="22733" title="Monastery of St. Nicholas, Kuršumlija" label="Monastery of Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q995031" start="22738" end="22748" title="Kuršumlija" label="Kuršumlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113606" start="22770" end="22786" title="Mother of Christ" label="Mother of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031510" start="22796" end="22804" title="Kosanica" label="Kosanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665686" start="22809" end="22816" title="Toplica (river)" label="Toplica"/>
<link wikidata="Q592512" start="22829" end="22859" title="Đurđevi Stupovi" label="Temple of George&amp;#x27;s Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q917814" start="22890" end="22893" title="Stari Ras" label="Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q143042" start="22906" end="22957" title="Studenica Monastery" label="Temple of the Immaculate Holy Virgin the Benefactor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22982" end="22986" title="Ibar District" label="Ibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113606" start="23005" end="23021" title="Mother of Christ" label="Mother of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23048" end="23056" title="Bistrica (Lim)" label="Bistrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q167916" start="23065" end="23068" title="Lim (river)" label="Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="23084" end="23098" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640720" start="23103" end="23112" title="Kaznoviće" label="Kaznovići"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177753" start="23113" end="23120" title="Končulj" label="Končulj"/>
<link wikidata="Q917814" start="23167" end="23170" title="Stari Ras" label="Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q849914" start="23196" end="23214" title="Hilandar" label="Hilandar monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="23218" end="23229" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="23282" end="23288" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="23327" end="23330" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="23407" end="23416" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="23459" end="23468" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="23516" end="23525" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="23569" end="23573" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="23586" end="23600" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="23605" end="23609" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="23662" end="23676" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="23719" end="23731" title="Thessalonika" label="Thessalonika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871982" start="23748" end="23765" title="Battle of Pantina" label="Battle of Pantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q223195" start="23768" end="23785" title="History of Serbia" label="History of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q615450" start="23787" end="23811" title="List of Serbian monarchs" label="List of Serbian monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q628024" start="23814" end="23835" title="History of Montenegro" label="History of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q257873" start="23837" end="23865" title="List of rulers of Montenegro" label="List of rulers of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="23868" end="23890" title="History of Herzegovina" label="History of Herzegovina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276540" wikidata="Q2072045" url="?curid=276540" title="The Devil's Disciple (play)">
<text>The Devil&#x27;s Disciple is an 1897 play written by Irish dramatist George Bernard Shaw. The play is Shaw&#x27;s eighth, and after Richard Mansfield&#x27;s original 1897 American production it was his first financial success, which helped to affirm his career as a playwright. It was published in Shaw&#x27;s 1901 collection &quot;Three Plays for Puritans&quot; together with &quot;Captain Brassbound&#x27;s Conversion&quot; and &quot;Caesar and Cleopatra&quot;. Set in Colonial America during the Revolutionary era, the play tells the story of Richard Dudgeon, a local outcast and self-proclaimed &quot;Devil&#x27;s disciple&quot;. In a twist characteristic of Shaw&#x27;s love of paradox, Dudgeon sacrifices himself in a Christ-like gesture despite his professed infernal allegiance.

==Plot summary==
The setting is in the Fall of 1777, during the Saratoga Campaign.

===Act I===
Richard (Dick) Dudgeon is an outcast from his family in colonial Websterbridge, New Hampshire. He returns their hatred with scorn. After the death of his father, Dick returns to his childhood home to hear the reading of his father&#x27;s will, much to his family&#x27;s dismay. Anthony Anderson, the local minister, treats him with courtesy despite Dick&#x27;s self-proclaimed apostasy, but Dick&#x27;s &quot;wickedness&quot; appalls Anderson&#x27;s wife Judith. To everyone&#x27;s surprise, it is revealed that Dick&#x27;s father secretly changed his will just before he died, leaving the bulk of his estate to Dick. Dick promptly evicts his mother from her home, but also invites his cousin Essie (the illegitimate daughter of Dick&#x27;s never-do-well uncle Peter), orphaned by the hanging of her father as a rebel by the British, to stay as long as she wants. At the end of the Act, Dick proclaims himself also a rebel against the British and scorns his family as cowards when they flee his home. He warns Anderson that the approaching army hanged his uncle in error, believing him to be a man of highest respect, unaware of his ill repute, and that Anderson will be the example set in Websterbridge.

===Act II===
While visiting Anderson&#x27;s home at the Reverend&#x27;s invitation, Dick is left alone with Judith while Anderson is called out to Mrs. Dudgeon&#x27;s deathbed. Perceiving Judith&#x27;s distaste for him, Dick attempts to leave, but Judith insists he stay until Anderson returns. While they are waiting, British soldiers enter Anderson&#x27;s home and arrest Dick, mistaking him for Anderson. Dick allows them to take him away without revealing his actual identity. He swears Judith to secrecy lest her husband give the secret away and expose himself to arrest. Anderson returns and finds his wife in a state of great agitation. He demands to know if Dick has harmed her. Breaking her promise to Dick, Judith reveals that soldiers came to arrest Anderson but Dick went in his place. Anderson is stunned. He grabs all his money and a gun and quickly rides away, ignoring Judith&#x27;s appeals. Judith believes her husband to be a coward, while Dick, whom she despised, is a hero.

===Act III===
Dick is being held for court martial at the local British Army headquarters. Judith visits Dick and asks to be present at his trial. He allows it as long as she promises not to speak up. The proceedings are run by the charming British General Burgoyne. After some back and forth, where, among other things, Dick makes treasonous statements, it is decided the prisoner will be hanged at noon. Judith can no longer hold her tongue and tells the court Dick is not her husband, but this makes no difference—the sentence will still be carried out. The action moves to the gallows at the Websterbridge market place, where Dick is soon to be hanged. He is saved at the last second, however, by Anderson, now the commander of a militia that has won the day.

==Original New York cast==
Fifth Avenue Theatre October 4, 1897
* Anthony Anderson .. Benjamin Johnson
* Judith Anderson .. Beatrice Cameron
* Anne Dudgeon .. Minna Monk
* Richard &quot;Dick&quot; Dudgeon .. Richard Mansfield
* Christopher Dudgeon .. A. G. Andrews
* Uncle William Dudgeon .. W. H. Griffith
* Uncle Titus Dudgeon .. Le Fevre
* Essie .. Lottie Briscoe
* Lawyer Hawkins .. Hunter
* General Burgoyne .. Arthur Forrest
* Major Swindon .. Joseph Wearer
* Rev. Mr. Brudenell .. William Courtenay
* A Sergeant .. Francis Kingdon

== Adaptations==
A 1955 television broadcast featured Ralph Bellamy as Anthony Anderson, Maurice Evans (who also co-wrote the screenplay) as Dick Dudgeon, Teresa Wright as Judith Anderson, Dennis King as General Burgoyne, and Margaret Hamilton as Mrs. Dudgeon.

A 1959 film adaptation featured Burt Lancaster as Reverend Anthony Anderson, Kirk Douglas as Dick Dudgeon, Janette Scott as Judith Anderson, and Laurence Olivier as General Burgoyne.

A 1976 BBC Radio 3 broadcast featured Tony Church as General Burgoyne, James Laurenson as Dick Dudgeon, Tenniel Evans as Anthony Anderson and Lucy Fleming as Judith Anderson. The programme was subsequently re-broadcast on BBC Radio 7, later BBC Radio 4 Extra, in 2009, 2010, and 2011.

The BBC broadcast a 1987 television film on &quot;Theatre Night&quot; on 17 May with Patrick Stewart as Anthony Anderson, Mike Gwilym as Dick Dudgeon, Susan Wooldridge as Judith Anderson, and Ian Richardson as General Burgoyne.

At Southwark Playhouse in 2025 The Devil May Care was an adaptation by Mark Giesser that moved the story to The Philippines in 1899. 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Online Text

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="69" end="88" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150168" start="132" end="149" title="Richard Mansfield" label="Richard Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797696" start="332" end="356" title="Three Plays for Puritans" label="Three Plays for Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036574" start="383" end="419" title="Captain Brassbound&amp;#x27;s Conversion" label="Captain Brassbound&amp;#x27;s Conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501409" start="436" end="456" title="Caesar and Cleopatra (play)" label="Caesar and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="499" end="516" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary era"/>
<link wikidata="Q126876" start="852" end="869" title="Saratoga Campaign" label="Saratoga Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447480" start="3877" end="3897" title="Fifth Avenue Theatre" label="Fifth Avenue Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668295" start="3974" end="3990" title="Beatrice Cameron" label="Beatrice Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150168" start="4058" end="4075" title="Richard Mansfield" label="Richard Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15770620" start="4202" end="4216" title="Lottie Briscoe" label="Lottie Briscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="4246" end="4262" title="General Burgoyne" label="General Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007170" start="4338" end="4355" title="William Courtenay (actor)" label="William Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q364135" start="4443" end="4456" title="Ralph Bellamy" label="Ralph Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233590" start="4478" end="4491" title="Maurice Evans (actor)" label="Maurice Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q230136" start="4544" end="4557" title="Teresa Wright" label="Teresa Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079861" start="4578" end="4589" title="Dennis King (actor)" label="Dennis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q257756" start="4615" end="4632" title="Margaret Hamilton (actress)" label="Margaret Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571462" start="4653" end="4673" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Disciple (1959 film)" label="1959 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160528" start="4683" end="4697" title="Burt Lancaster" label="Burt Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q104027" start="4728" end="4740" title="Kirk Douglas" label="Kirk Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q462335" start="4758" end="4771" title="Janette Scott" label="Janette Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="4796" end="4812" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="4842" end="4853" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277117" start="4873" end="4884" title="Tony Church (actor)" label="Tony Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137826" start="4906" end="4921" title="James Laurenson" label="James Laurenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790705" start="4939" end="4952" title="Tenniel Evans" label="Tenniel Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q734202" start="4977" end="4989" title="Lucy Fleming" label="Lucy Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="5057" end="5068" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5125" end="5128" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729912" start="5141" end="5161" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Disciple (1987 film)" label="1987 television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="5206" end="5221" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847105" start="5243" end="5254" title="Mike Gwilym" label="Mike Gwilym"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116094" start="5272" end="5288" title="Susan Wooldridge" label="Susan Wooldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q363691" start="5313" end="5327" title="Ian Richardson" label="Ian Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571159" start="5353" end="5372" title="Southwark Playhouse" label="Southwark Playhouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276541" wikidata="Q1124275" url="?curid=276541" title="Sea Scout">
<text>Sea Scouts are a part of the Scout movement, with a particular emphasis on boating and other water-based activities on the sea, rivers or lakes (canoeing, rafting, scuba, sailboarding). Sea Scouts can provide a chance to sail, cruise on boats, learn navigation, learn how to work on engines and compete in regattas. Sea Scouts often have distinctive uniforms. In some countries or Scout organisations, Sea Scouting is a programme just for older Scouts. Sea scouts is also the 2nd oldest scout branch.

==History==


One of the earliest records of &quot;Sea Scouts&quot; is in &quot;Chums&quot; magazine which refers to &quot;Sea Scouts&quot; as early as July 1909. These Sea Scouts were part of the Chums Scouts and British Boy Scouts. 

Also in the &quot;Chums&quot; magazine, the British Boys Naval Brigade, later National Naval Cadets, were subtitled &#x27;Scouts of the Sea&#x27; from the 14 July 1909 edition and, from the 28 July 1909 edition, &#x27;Sea Scouts of the Empire&#x27;. The British Boy Scouts and an original company of The National Naval Cadets were both headquartered in Battersea, London and the &#x27;boys&#x27; weekly newspaper &quot;Chums&quot; was the official journal of both. The National Naval Cadets affiliated with the British Boy Scouts as part of its Sea Scouts.

Later, Sea Scouts were introduced within the Baden-Powell Boy Scouts organization. In the first edition of &quot;Scouting for Boys&quot;, Baden-Powell mentioned that &quot;A Scout should be able to manage a boat, to bring it properly alongside a ship or pier...&quot;. In December 1908, the first Seamanship badge was issued as one of the first &#x27;Efficiency&#x27; badges. A camp for Scouts was held at Bucklers Hard, Hampshire in August 1909 at which boating activities were a focus. In 1911, Baden-Powell wrote the booklet &quot;Sea Scouting for Boys&quot;. Warington Baden-Powell wrote &quot;Sea Scouting and Seamanship for Boys&quot; in 1912, with a foreword by Robert Baden-Powell. A special uniform for Sea Scouts was approved in 1910 and, in 1912, the name &quot;Sea Scouts&quot; was officially adopted within Baden-Powell&#x27;s Boy Scouts Association.

Sea Scouting found its way to the rest of the world. In many organisations a Sea Scout troop or group has a special name, in the Boy Scouts of America it is called a ship.

==Around the world==

==Eurosea seminars==
Eurosea is the seminar for Sea Scouting/Guiding in the European Scout Region which take place every two or three years. The aims and objectives are to enable national associations to share ideas and experiences on how to develop Sea Scouting/Guiding or water-based programmes in general. Participants are members of national or regional teams responsible for Sea Scouting/Guiding or developing water-based programmes and representatives from associations interested in introducing Sea Scouting/Guiding.
*Eurosea 1, 1985: Thessaloniki, Greece
*Eurosea 2, 1988: Harderhaven, Netherlands
*Eurosea 3, 1992: Vässarö, Sweden
*Eurosea 4, 1994: London, United Kingdom
*Eurosea 5, 1997: Oslo, Norway
*Eurosea 6, 2000: Olsztynek, Poland
*Eurosea 7, 2003: São Jacinto, Aveiro, Portugal
*Eurosea 8, 2006: Korpo, Finland
*Eurosea 9, 2008: Larch Hill, Ireland
*Eurosea 10, 2010: Plzeň, Czech Republic
*Eurosea 11, 2012: Copenhagen, Denmark
*Eurosea 12, 2014: Bruges, Belgium
*Eurosea 13, 2016: Puck, Poland
*Eurosea 14, 2018: Barcelona, Spain
*Eurosea 15, 2022: Athens, Greece

==Loss of vessels==
*4 August 1912 – eight Boy Scouts from the 2nd Walworth (Dulwich Mission) group and another boy drowned in capsize of a cutter off Leysdown-on-Sea, Kent, England. The boat was carrying twenty-three Scouts from Erith to a camp at Leysdown.
*27 October 1913 – three Scouts and an assistant leader drowned and eleven Scouts were saved when the ketch &quot;Mirror&quot; was hit by the steamer &quot;Hogarth&quot; (1231 tons) while tacking across the river. &quot;Mirror&quot; had been a gift of the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; newspaper to the Scouts.
*In August 1950 – all ten Scouts on board were killed when the &quot;Wangle III&quot;, owned by 1st Mortlake Sea Scouts was lost on a return voyage from France.

==See also==
*S.S.S. Lotus

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1124275" start="0" end="10" title="Sea Scout" label="Sea Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="29" end="34" title="Scouting" label="Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="306" end="313" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116185" start="576" end="593" title="Chums (paper)" label="&amp;quot;Chums&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969580" start="716" end="734" title="British Boy Scouts and British Girl Scouts Association" label="British Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q849740" start="1341" end="1364" title="The Scout Association" label="Baden-Powell Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q840584" start="1409" end="1426" title="Scouting for Boys" label="Scouting for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="1434" end="1446" title="Baden-Powell" label="Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983328" start="1702" end="1715" title="Bucklers Hard" label="Bucklers Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="1717" end="1726" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360618" start="1859" end="1881" title="Warington Baden-Powell" label="Warington Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="1965" end="1984" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Robert Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235887" start="2432" end="2453" title="European Scout Region (World Organization of the Scout Movement)" label="European Scout Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="2898" end="2910" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2912" end="2918" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q184454" start="2937" end="2948" title="Zeewolde" label="Harderhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2950" end="2961" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142916" start="2980" end="2987" title="Vässarö" label="Vässarö"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2989" end="2995" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3014" end="3020" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3022" end="3036" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="3055" end="3059" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3061" end="3067" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q999614" start="3086" end="3095" title="Olsztynek" label="Olsztynek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3097" end="3103" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q384682" start="3122" end="3133" title="São Jacinto (parish)" label="São Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q485581" start="3135" end="3141" title="Aveiro, Portugal" label="Aveiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="3143" end="3151" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q305440" start="3170" end="3175" title="Korpo" label="Korpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="3177" end="3184" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488757" start="3203" end="3213" title="Larch Hill" label="Larch Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="3215" end="3222" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="3242" end="3247" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="3249" end="3263" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3283" end="3293" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="3295" end="3302" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="3322" end="3328" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3330" end="3337" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q628962" start="3357" end="3369" title="Puck, Poland" label="Puck, Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q248782" start="3389" end="3398" title="Barcelona S.C." label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3400" end="3405" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3425" end="3431" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3433" end="3439" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538114" start="3592" end="3613" title="Leysdown-on-Sea" label="Leysdown-on-Sea, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q146671" start="3671" end="3676" title="Erith" label="Erith"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4159" end="4165" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387286" start="4182" end="4194" title="S.S.S. Lotus" label="S.S.S. Lotus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276544" wikidata="Q933583" url="?curid=276544" title="Ground sloth">
<text>Ground sloths are a diverse group of extinct sloths in the mammalian superorder Xenarthra. They varied widely in size with the largest, belonging to genera &quot;Lestodon&quot;, &quot;Eremotherium&quot; and &quot;Megatherium&quot;, being around the size of elephants. Ground sloths represent a paraphyletic group, as living tree sloths are thought to have evolved from ground sloth ancestors.

The early evolution of ground sloths took place during the late Paleogene and Neogene of South America, while the continent was isolated. At their earliest appearance in the fossil record, they were already distinct at the family level. Sloths dispersed into the Greater Antilles during the Oligocene, and the presence of intervening islands between the American continents in the Miocene allowed a dispersal of some species into North America. They were hardy as evidenced by their high species diversity and their presence in a wide variety of environments, extending from the far south of Patagonia (Cueva del Milodón Natural Monument) to Alaska. Sloths, and xenarthrans as a whole, represent one of the more successful South American groups during the Great American Interchange after the connection of North and South America during the late Pliocene with a number of ground sloth genera migrating northwards. One genus, &quot;Thalassocnus,&quot; even adapted for marine life along the Pacific coast of South America during the late Miocene and Pliocene epochs.

Ground sloths, which were represented by over 30 living species during the Late Pleistocene, abruptly became extinct on the American mainland as part of the end-Pleistocene extinction event around 12,000 years ago, simultaneously with the majority of other large animals in the Americas. Their extinction has been posited to be the result of hunting by recently arrived humans and/or climate change. A number of kill sites are known where humans butchered ground sloths dating just prior to their extinction.

The Caribbean ground sloths, the most recent survivors, lived on Cuba and Hispaniola, possibly until 1550 BCE. However, radiocarbon dating suggests an age of between 2819 and 2660 BCE for the last occurrence of &quot;Megalocnus&quot; in Cuba. They survived 5,000–6,000 years longer in the Caribbean than on the American mainland, which correlates with the later colonization of this area by humans.

== Description ==

Ground sloths varied widely in size from under in the Caribbean ground sloths, to in the largest ground sloth genera &quot;Megatherium&quot;, &quot;Lestodon&quot; and &quot;Eremotherium.&quot; The bodies of ground sloths were generally barrel-shaped, with a broad pelvis. The skull shapes of ground sloths are highly variable. Like other xenarthrans, the adult teeth of ground sloths lacked enamel, with the tooth surface being composed of relatively soft orthodentine. The number of teeth in the jaws is considerably reduced in comparison to other mammals, with most ground sloths only having 5 and 4 teeth in each half of the upper and lower jaws respectively, with some ground sloths exhibiting further tooth number reduction. These teeth were rootless and were continuously growing (hypselodont), and typically have a relatively simple morphology. There are generally no teeth at the front of the jaws. In order to be able to grasp food, those whose skulls exhibit narrow muzzles are likely to have had prehensile, black rhinoceros-like upper lips, while those with wider muzzles are likely to have had a square, white rhinoceros like upper-lip, used in combination with mobile tongues. Some ground sloths have canine-like teeth at the front of the jaws separated from the other teeth by a gap (diastema). The hands of ground sloths have ungual phalanges that indicate that they had well developed claws. In many ground sloth families (Megatheriidae, Mylodontidae, Scelidotheriidae and Nothrotheriidae), the hindfoot is inwardly rotated, meaning sole faces inwards and that the body weight was primarily borne on the fifth metatarsus and the calcaneum.

== Ecology ==
Ground sloths are generally regarded as herbivores, with some being browsers, others grazers, and some intermediate between the two as mixed feeders (both browsing and grazing), though a number of authors have argued that some ground sloths may have been omnivores. Sloths that had longer snouts are presumed to have had greater olfactory acuity, but appear to have also had less binocular vision and poorer ability to localize sounds. A number of extinct sloth species are thought to have had hearing abilities optimized for low frequencies, perhaps related to use of infrasound for communication. Some ground sloths are suggested to have dug burrows. Their skeletal anatomy suggests that they were incapable of running, and relied on other strategies to defend against predators, though they were likely significantly more active and agile than living tree sloths. Ground sloths were likely able to adopt a bipedal stance while stationary, allowing the forelimbs to be used to grasp vegetation as well as to use their claws for defence, though whether they were capable of moving in this posture is uncertain. Some ground sloths have been suggested to be able to climb. Some authors have suggested ground sloths were largely solitary animals, like living sloths, though other authors have argued that at least some ground sloths are likely to have engaged in gregarious behaviour. Whether or not ground sloths had a slow metabolism like living xenarthrans (including living sloths) is debated.

Like living sloths, ground sloths likely only gave birth to a single offspring at a time, with likely several years between the birth of offspring. At least some ground sloths engaged in long-term parental care, with one adult (presumably female) &quot;Megalonyx&quot; found with two juveniles of different ages, with the oldest juvenile suggested to be 3–4 years old. Juvenile ground sloths may have clung to the body of their mother for some time following birth, as occurs in living tree sloths.

== Evolution ==
The earliest unambiguous fossil evidence of ground sloths comes from the early Oligocene. Ground sloths had dispersed into the Caribbean already by 31 million years ago, as evidenced by a femur found in Puerto Rico. During the Miocene, sloths diversified, with the major families of sloths appearing during this period, with diversity waxing and waning over the course of the Miocene. Megalonychid and mylodontid sloths had migrated into North America by the Late Miocene, around 10 million years ago. At the end of the Miocene, ground sloth diversity declined, though their diversity would remain largely stable throughout the Pliocene and Pleistocene periods, up until their extinction. During the Pliocene and Pleistocene, as part of the Great American Interchange, additional lineages of sloths migrated into Central and North America. Prior to their extinction, there were over 30 living species of ground sloths across the Americas during the Late Pleistocene.

== Families ==
Paleontologists assign more than 80 genera of ground sloths to multiple families.

=== Megalonychidae ===

The megalonychid ground sloths first appeared in the Late Eocene, about 35 million years ago, in Patagonia. Megalonychids first reached North America by island-hopping, prior to the formation of the Isthmus of Panama. Some lineages of megalonychids increased in size as time progressed. The first species of these were small and may have been partly tree-dwelling, whereas the Pliocene (about 5 to 2 million years ago) species were already approximately half the size of the huge Late Pleistocene &quot;Megalonyx jeffersonii&quot; from the last ice age. Some West Indian island species were as small as a large cat; their dwarf condition typified both tropical adaptation and their restricted island environment. This small size also enabled them a degree of arboreality.

&quot;Megalonyx&quot;, which means &quot;giant claw&quot;, was a widespread North American genus that lived past the close of the last (Wisconsin) glaciation, when so many large mammals died out. Remains have been found as far north as Alaska and the Yukon. Ongoing excavations at Tarkio Valley in southwestern Iowa may reveal something of the familial life of &quot;Megalonyx&quot;. An adult was found in direct association with two juveniles of different ages, suggesting that adults cared for young of different generations.

The earliest known North American megalonychid, &quot;Pliometanastes protistus&quot;, lived in the southern U.S. about 9 million years ago and is believed to have been the predecessor of &quot;Megalonyx&quot;. Several species of &quot;Megalonyx&quot; have been named; in fact it has been stated that &quot;nearly every good specimen has been described as a different species&quot;. A broader perspective on the group, accounting for age, sex, individual and geographic differences, indicates that only three species are valid (&quot;M. leptostomus&quot;, &quot;M. wheatleyi&quot;, and &quot;M. jeffersonii&quot;) in the late Pliocene and Pleistocene of North America, although work by McDonald lists five species.
Jefferson&#x27;s ground sloth has a special place in modern paleontology, for Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s letter on &quot;Megalonyx&quot;, read before the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia in August 1796, marked the beginning of vertebrate paleontology in North America. When Lewis and Clark set out, Jefferson instructed Meriwether Lewis to keep an eye out for ground sloths. He was hoping they would find some living in the Western range. &quot;Megalonyx jeffersonii&quot; was appropriately named after Thomas Jefferson.

=== Megatheriidae ===
The megatheriid ground sloths are relatives of the megalonychids; these two families, along with the family Nothrotheriidae, form the infraorder Megatheria. Megatheriids appeared later in the Oligocene, some 30 million years ago, also in South America. The group includes the heavily built &quot;Megatherium&quot; (given its name &#x27;great beast&#x27; by Georges Cuvier) and &quot;Eremotherium,&quot; which are the largest known ground sloths, thought to have had body masses of 3.5-4 tons. The skeletal structure of these ground sloths indicates that the animals were massive. Their thick bones and even thicker joints (especially those on the hind legs) gave their appendages tremendous power that, combined with their size and fearsome claws, provided a formidable defense against predators.

The earliest megatheriid in North America was &quot;Eremotherium eomigrans&quot; which arrived 2.2 million years ago, after crossing the recently formed Panamanian land bridge. With more than five tons in weight, 6 meters in length, and able to reach as high as , it was larger than an African bush elephant bull. Unlike relatives, this species retained a plesiomorphic extra claw. While other species of &quot;Eremotherium&quot; had four fingers with only two or three claws, &quot;E. eomigrans&quot; had five fingers, four of them with claws up to nearly a foot long.

===Nothrotheriidae===

Recently recognized, ground sloths of Nothrotheriidae are often associated with those of the Megatheriidae, and together the two form the superfamily Megatherioidea. The most prominent members of the group are the South American genus &quot;Thalassocnus&quot;, known for being aquatic, and &quot;Nothrotheriops&quot; from North America.

The last ground sloths in North America belonging to &quot;Nothrotheriops&quot; died so recently that their subfossil dung has remained undisturbed in some caves. One of the skeletons, found in a lava tube (cave) at Aden Crater, adjacent to Kilbourne Hole, New Mexico, still had skin and hair preserved, and is now at the Yale Peabody Museum. The largest samples of &quot;Nothrotheriops&quot; dung can be found in the collections of the Smithsonian Museum. Another &quot;Nothrotheriops&quot; was excavated at Shelter Cave, also in Doña Ana County, New Mexico.

=== Mylodontidae ===
The mylodontid ground sloths together with their relatives the scelidotheriids form the Mylodontoidea, the second radiation of ground sloths. The discovery of their fossils in caverns associated with human occupation led some early researchers to theorize that the early humans built corrals when they could procure a young ground sloth, to raise the animal to butchering size. However, radiocarbon dates do not support simultaneous occupation of the site by humans and sloths. Subfossil remains like coproliths, fur and skin have been discovered in some quantities. The American Museum of Natural History has exhibited a sample of &quot;Mylodon&quot; dung from Argentina with a note that reads &quot;deposited by Theodore Roosevelt&quot;. Mylodontids are the only ground sloths confirmed to have had osteoderms embedded within their skin, though osteoderms were only present in a handful of genera and absent in many others.

The largest mylodontid is &quot;Lestodon&quot;, with an estimated mass of .

=== Scelidotheriidae ===

The ground sloth family Scelidotheriidae was demoted in 1995 to the subfamily Scelidotheriinae within Mylodontidae. Based on collagen sequence data showing that its members are more distant from other mylodontids than Choloepodidae, it was elevated back to full family status in 2019. Together with Mylodontidae, the enigmatic &quot;Pseudoprepotherium&quot; and two-toed sloths, the scelidotheriids form the superfamily Mylodontoidea. &quot;Chubutherium&quot; is an ancestral and very plesiomorphic member of this subfamily and does not belong to the main group of closely related genera, which include &quot;Scelidotherium&quot; and &quot;Catonyx&quot;.

===Phylogeny===
The following sloth family phylogenetic tree is based on collagen and mitochondrial DNA sequence data (see Fig. 4 of Presslee &quot;et al&quot;., 2019).

== Extinction ==


Radiocarbon dating places the disappearance of ground sloths in what is now the United States at around 11,000 years ago. The Shasta ground sloth (&quot;Nothrotheriops shastensis&quot;) visited Rampart Cave (located on the Arizona side of the Lake Mead National Recreation Area) seasonally, leaving behind a massive stratified subfossilized dung deposit, and seemed to be flourishing from 13,000 until 11,000 BP, when the deposition suddenly stopped. Steadman &quot;et al.&quot; argue that it is no coincidence that studies have shown that ground sloths disappeared from an area a few years after the arrival of humans. Trackways preserved in New Mexico (probably dating from 10 to 15.6 thousand years ago) that appear to show a group of humans chasing or harassing three &quot;Nothrotheriops&quot; or &quot;Paramylodon&quot; ground sloths may record the scene of a hunt. The tracks are interpreted as showing seven instances of a sloth turning and rearing up on its hind legs to confront its pursuers, while the humans approach from multiple directions, possibly in an attempt to distract it.

Those who argue in favor of humans being the direct cause of the ground sloths&#x27; extinction point out that the few sloths that remain are small sloths that spend most of their time in trees, making it difficult for them to be spotted. Although these sloths were well hidden, they still would have been affected by the climate changes that others claim wiped out the ground sloths. Additionally, after the continental ground sloths disappeared, insular sloths of the Caribbean survived for approximately 6,000 years longer, which correlates with the fact that these islands were not colonized by humans until about 5500 yr BP.

It is difficult to find evidence that supports either claim on whether humans hunted the ground sloths to extinction. Removing large amounts of meat from large mammals such as the ground sloth requires no contact with the bones; tool-inflicted damage to bones is a key sign of human interaction with the animal.

=== Hunting of ground sloths ===

==== Kill sites ====
A number of kill sites are known for ground sloths in the Americas, these include Campo Laborde in the Pampas of Argentina, where an individual of &quot;Megatherium americanum&quot; was butchered at the edge of a swamp, dating to approximately 12,600 years Before Present (BP), with another potential &quot;Megatherium&quot; kill site being Arroyo Seco 2 in the same region, dating to approximately 14,782–11,142 cal yr BP. In northern Ohio, a &quot;Megalonyx jeffersoni&quot; skeleton dubbed the &quot;Firelands Ground Sloth&quot; has cut marks indicative of butchery, dating to 13,738 to 13,435 years BP. At the Santa Elina rockshelter in Mato Grosso Brazil, a specimen of &quot;Glossotherium&quot; is associated with hearths and stone tools, dating to 11,833–11,804 years BP. At Fell&#x27;s Cave in southern Chilean Patagonia, a specimen of &quot;Mylodon&quot; with fractured and burned bones associated with human activity has been dated to approximately 12,766–12,354 years BP.

==== Hunting weapons ====
Humans are believed to have entered the New World via Beringia, a land bridge which connected Asia and North America during the last glacial maximum. Mosimann and Martin (1975) suggested the first of these nomads descended from hunting families who had acquired the skills to track down and kill large mammals. By this time, humans had developed proficient hunting weapons, including the Clovis points, which were narrow, carved stone projectiles used specifically for big game. A couple of hundred years later, the atlatl became widely used, which allowed them to throw spears with greater velocity. These inventions would have allowed hunters to put distance between them and their prey, potentially making it less dangerous to approach ground sloths.

==== Advantages ====
Certain characteristics and behavioral traits of the ground sloths made them easy targets for human hunting and provided hunter-gatherers with strong incentives to hunt these large mammals.

Ground sloths often fed in open fields. Recent studies have attempted to discover the diet of ground sloths through fossils of their dung. Analysis of these coproliths have found that ground sloths often ate the foliage of trees, hard grasses, shrubs, and yucca; these plants were located in areas that would have exposed them, making them susceptible to human predation. Ground sloths were not only easy to spot, but had never interacted with humans before, so would not have known how to react to them. Additionally, these large mammals waddled on their hind legs and front knuckles, keeping their claws turned in. Their movement and massive build (some weighed up to ) imply they were relatively slow mammals.

These reasonable after-the-fact inferences from the evidence might explain why ground sloths would have been easy prey for hunters, but are not certain.

==== Difficulties ====
While ground sloths would have been relatively easy to spot and approach, big game hunters&#x27; weapons would have been useless from farther than away. It would have been difficult to take down a ground sloth with a spear-thrower and would have required extensive knowledge of the species. Additionally, the ground sloths&#x27; already thick hide was fortified by osteoderms, making it difficult to penetrate.

Since ground sloths thrived in an environment filled with large predators, they evidently would have been able to also defend themselves against human predation, so there is no reason to expect that they would have been &quot;easy pickings&quot;. When feeding, they had enough strength to use their long, sharp claws to tear apart tree branches; presumably their strength and formidable claws would be dangerous for hunters that attempted to attack them at close quarters. But fossilized evidence of humans hunting on ground sloth in White Sands National Park suggests that the slow-moving giant sloths were likely easy prey for early humans possibly hurling spears.

==References==
==Sources==
*; (2): 227–228.

* Harrington, C.R. (1993): Yukon Beringia Interpretive Center – Jefferson&#x27;s Ground Sloth. Retrieved 2008-JAN-24.
* Hogan, C.M. (2008): &quot;Cueva del Milodon&quot;, Megalithic Portal. Retrieved 2008-APR-13
* Kurtén, Björn and Anderson, Elaine (1980): &quot;Pleistocene Mammals of North America.&quot; Columbia University Press, New York. 
* McKenna, Malcolm C. &amp; Bell, Susan K. (1997): &quot;Classification of Mammals Above the Species Level.&quot; Columbia University Press, New York. 
* Nowak, R.M. (1999): &quot;Walker&#x27;s Mammals of the World&quot; (Vol. 2). Johns Hopkins University Press, London.



== External links ==

*Picture and information about a ground sloth skeleton on display at the University of Georgia&#x27;s Science Library.
*Academy of Natural Sciences ground sloth page.
*Illinois State Museum ground sloth page.
*Ground sloths at La Brea.
*&quot;Eremotherium&quot; in Florida.
*Have some ground sloths survived in Argentina?
*Ground sloths in general.
*Western Center for Archaeology and Paleontology Hemet, CA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q933583" start="0" end="13" title="Ground sloth" label="Ground sloths"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="37" end="44" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="45" end="50" title="sloth" label="sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="59" end="65" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="69" end="79" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q173612" start="80" end="89" title="Xenarthra" label="Xenarthra"/>
<link wikidata="Q604501" start="162" end="170" title="Lestodon" label="Lestodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q907433" start="184" end="196" title="Eremotherium" label="Eremotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="213" end="224" title="Megatherium" label="Megatherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="257" end="266" title="elephants" label="elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="294" end="312" title="paraphyletic group" label="paraphyletic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="458" end="467" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="472" end="479" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="657" end="673" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="685" end="694" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="775" end="782" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="986" end="995" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483271" start="997" end="1031" title="Cueva del Milodón Natural Monument" label="Cueva del Milodón Natural Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1036" end="1042" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q278170" start="1150" end="1176" title="Great American Interchange" label="Great American Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="1241" end="1249" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q137429" start="1326" end="1338" title="Thalassocnus" label="Thalassocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="1537" end="1553" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="1619" end="1651" title="Late Pleistocene extinctions" label="end-Pleistocene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109175" start="1874" end="1883" title="kill site" label="kill site"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392529" start="1976" end="1999" title="Megalocnidae" label="Caribbean ground sloths"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2037" end="2041" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="2046" end="2056" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="2092" end="2110" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q141383" start="2189" end="2199" title="Megalocnus" label="Megalocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2209" end="2213" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="2261" end="2270" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="2514" end="2525" title="Megatherium" label="Megatherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q604501" start="2539" end="2547" title="Lestodon" label="Lestodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q907433" start="2564" end="2576" title="Eremotherium" label="Eremotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q143942" start="2782" end="2788" title="Tooth enamel" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189637" start="2847" end="2859" title="Dentin" label="orthodentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="3410" end="3426" title="black rhinoceros" label="black rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q159918" start="3508" end="3524" title="white rhinoceros" label="white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884529" start="3733" end="3739" title="ungual" label="ungual"/>
<link wikidata="Q320524" start="4018" end="4028" title="Metatarsal bones" label="metatarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13075" start="4037" end="4046" title="calcaneum" label="calcaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353883" start="4131" end="4139" title="Browsing (herbivory)" label="browsers"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764397" start="4148" end="4155" title="Grazing (behaviour)" label="grazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212082" start="4632" end="4642" title="infrasound" label="infrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="4707" end="4713" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="5486" end="5496" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q994735" start="5757" end="5770" title="parental care" label="parental care"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="6155" end="6164" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="6303" end="6310" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="6704" end="6712" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="6717" end="6728" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q278170" start="6817" end="6843" title="Great American Interchange" label="Great American Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="7025" end="7041" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="7059" end="7073" title="Paleontologist" label="Paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="7095" end="7101" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="7131" end="7139" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259942" start="7170" end="7182" title="Megalonychidae" label="megalonychid"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="7219" end="7230" title="Eocene" label="Late Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="7365" end="7382" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="7543" end="7551" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="7646" end="7662" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q134380" start="7669" end="7690" title="Megalonyx jeffersonii" label="Megalonyx jeffersonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="7706" end="7718" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q134380" start="7945" end="7954" title="Megalonyx" label="Megalonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="8069" end="8096" title="Last glacial period" label="last (Wisconsin) glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="8190" end="8195" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="8250" end="8254" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906721" start="8522" end="8546" title="Pliometanastes" label="Pliometanastes protistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="9242" end="9254" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="9260" end="9276" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="9333" end="9363" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="9367" end="9379" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="9420" end="9430" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="9467" end="9482" title="Lewis and Clark" label="Lewis and Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q784732" start="9741" end="9752" title="Megatheriidae" label="megatheriid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="9871" end="9881" title="infraorder" label="infraorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="9882" end="9892" title="Megatheria" label="Megatheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="10033" end="10044" title="Megatherium" label="Megatherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="10094" end="10108" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q907433" start="10120" end="10132" title="Eremotherium" label="Eremotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="10688" end="10694" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36557" start="10821" end="10842" title="African bush elephant" label="African bush elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q932223" start="10891" end="10904" title="plesiomorphic" label="plesiomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879160" start="11167" end="11182" title="Nothrotheriidae" label="Nothrotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q784732" start="11222" end="11235" title="Megatheriidae" label="Megatheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q137429" start="11370" end="11382" title="Thalassocnus" label="Thalassocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088778" start="11425" end="11439" title="Nothrotheriops" label="Nothrotheriops"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="11575" end="11584" title="subfossil" label="subfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919" start="11663" end="11672" title="lava tube" label="lava tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682162" start="11683" end="11694" title="Aden Crater" label="Aden Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406574" start="11708" end="11722" title="Kilbourne Hole" label="Kilbourne Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="11724" end="11734" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="11794" end="11808" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493949" start="11976" end="11988" title="Shelter Cave" label="Shelter Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q112953" start="11998" end="12013" title="Doña Ana County" label="Doña Ana County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="12015" end="12025" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749282" start="12053" end="12063" title="Mylodontidae" label="mylodontid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="12137" end="12150" title="Mylodontoidea" label="Mylodontoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q858177" start="12333" end="12339" title="corral" label="corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="12527" end="12536" title="Subfossil" label="Subfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="12620" end="12654" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q310869" start="12687" end="12694" title="Mylodon" label="Mylodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="12763" end="12781" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="12850" end="12860" title="osteoderms" label="osteoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q604501" start="13008" end="13016" title="Lestodon" label="Lestodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430688" start="13103" end="13119" title="Scelidotheriidae" label="Scelidotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q511079" start="13297" end="13310" title="Choloepodidae" label="Choloepodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090179" start="13412" end="13430" title="Pseudoprepotherium" label="Pseudoprepotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q511079" start="13441" end="13455" title="two-toed sloth" label="two-toed sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115294" start="13520" end="13532" title="Chubutherium" label="Chubutherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q936352" start="13688" end="13702" title="Scelidotherium" label="Scelidotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942980" start="13719" end="13726" title="Catonyx" label="Catonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088778" start="14077" end="14091" title="Nothrotheriops" label="Nothrotheriops"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="14147" end="14154" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476864" start="14167" end="14201" title="Lake Mead National Recreation Area" label="Lake Mead National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="14251" end="14260" title="subfossil" label="subfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114983" start="14544" end="14553" title="Fossil track" label="Trackways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088778" start="14702" end="14716" title="Nothrotheriops shastensis" label="Nothrotheriops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057386" start="14732" end="14743" title="Paramylodon harlani" label="Paramylodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194316" start="15467" end="15498" title="Pilosans of the Caribbean" label="insular sloths of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q310387" start="16171" end="16193" title="Megatherium americanum" label="Megatherium americanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="16275" end="16289" title="Before Present" label="Before Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q134380" start="16468" end="16488" title="Megalonyx jeffersoni" label="Megalonyx jeffersoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q135575" start="16699" end="16712" title="Glossotherium" label="Glossotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404113" start="16800" end="16816" title="Cueva Fell" label="Fell&amp;#x27;s Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q310869" start="16868" end="16875" title="Mylodon" label="Mylodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="17082" end="17090" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="17094" end="17105" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="17156" end="17176" title="last glacial maximum" label="last glacial maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q140654" start="17416" end="17428" title="Clovis point" label="Clovis point"/>
<link wikidata="Q492883" start="17544" end="17550" title="atlatl" label="atlatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q544041" start="18152" end="18162" title="coprolite" label="coproliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="19251" end="19260" title="osteoderm" label="osteoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200164" start="19832" end="19857" title="White Sands National Park" label="White Sands National Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276546" wikidata="Q1225439" url="?curid=276546" title="Oriented strand board">
<text>Oriented strand board (OSB) is a type of engineered wood, formed by adding adhesives and then compressing layers of wood strands (flakes) in specific orientations. It was invented by Armin Elmendorf in California in 1963. OSB may have a rough and variegated surface with the individual strips of around , lying unevenly across each other, and is produced in a variety of types and thicknesses.

Oriented strand board is sometimes confused with &quot;chipboard&quot;, a synonym for particle board, whose &quot;chips&quot; are of a size that a lay person would likely describe as &quot;particles&quot;.

==Uses==
OSB is a material with favorable mechanical properties that make it particularly suitable for load-bearing applications in construction. It is now more popular than plywood, commanding 66% of the North American structural panel market. The most common uses are as sheathing in walls, flooring, and roof decking. For exterior wall applications, panels are available with a radiant-barrier layer laminated to one side; this eases installation and increases energy performance of the building envelope. OSB is also used in furniture production.

==Manufacturing==
Oriented strand board is manufactured in wide mats from cross-oriented layers of thin, rectangular wooden strips compressed and bonded together with wax and synthetic resin adhesives.

The adhesive resins types used include: urea-formaldehyde (OSB type 1, nonstructural, nonwaterproof); isocyanate-based glue (or PMDI poly-methylene diphenyl diisocyanate based) in inner regions with melamine-urea-formaldehyde or phenol formaldehyde resin glues at surface (OSB type 2, structural, water resistant on face); phenol formaldehyde resin throughout (OSB types 3 and 4, structural, for use in damp and outside environments).

The layers are created by shredding the wood into strips, which are sifted and then oriented on a belt or wire-mesh caul (a heated, ventilated support) and coated with the resin. The layers thus built up are transferred to a forming line and cross-oriented so that strips on the external layers are aligned to the panel&#x27;s strength axis, while the internal layers are perpendicular. The number of layers placed is determined partly by the thickness of the panel, but is limited by the equipment installed at the manufacturing site. Individual layers can also vary in thickness to give different finished panel thicknesses; typically, a layer will produce a panel thickness. The mat is placed in a thermal press to compress the flakes and bond them by heat activation and curing of the resin that has been coated on the flakes. Individual panels are then cut from the mats into finished sizes. Most of the world&#x27;s OSB is made in the United States and Canada in large production facilities. 

==Related products==
Materials other than wood have been used to produce products similar to OSB. Oriented structural straw board is an engineered board made by splitting straw and formed by adding P-MDI adhesives and then hot compressing layers of straw in specific orientations. Strand board can also be made from bagasse.

==Production==
In 2005, Canadian production was ( basis) of which ( inch) were exported, almost entirely to the United States. In 2014, Romania became the largest OSB exporting country in Europe, with 28% of the exports going to Russia and 16% to Ukraine.

==Properties==
Adjustments to the manufacturing process can affect thickness, panel size, strength, and rigidity. OSB panels have no internal gaps or voids, and can be water-resistant, although they do require additional membranes to achieve impermeability to water and are not recommended for exterior use. The finished product has properties similar to plywood, but is uniform and cheaper. When tested to failure, OSB has a greater load-bearing capacity than milled wood panels. It has replaced plywood in many environments, especially the North American structural panel market. 

While OSB does not have a continuous grain like a natural wood, it does have greater strength on its long axis because more of the component grains are oriented in this direction. This can be seen by observing the alignment of the surface wood chips. 

All wood-based structural use panels can be cut and installed with the same types of equipment as for solid wood.

=== Health and safety ===
The resins used to create OSB have raised questions regarding the potential for OSB to emit volatile organic compounds such as formaldehyde. Urea-formaldehyde is more toxic and should be avoided in home use. Phenol-formaldehyde products are considered to be relatively hazard free. Some newer types of OSB, so-called &quot;new-generation&quot; OSB panels, use isocyanate resins that do not contain formaldehyde and are considered nonvolatile when cured. Industry trade groups assert that formaldehyde emissions from North American OSB are &quot;negligible or nonexistent&quot;.

Some manufacturers treat the wood chips with various borate compounds that are toxic to termites, wood-boring beetles, molds, and fungi, but not mammals in applied doses.

===Types===
Five grades of OSB are defined in EN 300 in terms of their mechanical performance and relative resistance to moisture:
* OSB/0 – No added formaldehyde
* OSB/1 – General-purpose boards and boards for interior fitments (including furniture) for use in dry conditions
* OSB/2 – Load-bearing boards for use in dry conditions
* OSB/3 – Load-bearing boards for use in humid conditions
* OSB/4 – Heavy-duty load-bearing boards for use in humid conditions

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1225439" start="0" end="21" title="Oriented strand board" label="Oriented strand board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225439" start="23" end="26" title="Oriented strand board" label="OSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="41" end="56" title="engineered wood" label="engineered wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="75" end="83" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="116" end="120" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779564" start="247" end="257" title="variegation" label="variegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="481" end="495" title="particle board" label="particle board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="734" end="746" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="776" end="783" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625476" start="875" end="884" title="Siding (construction)" label="sheathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280316" start="983" end="998" title="Radiant barrier" label="radiant-barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986592" start="1092" end="1109" title="building envelope" label="building envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="1131" end="1140" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="1285" end="1295" title="compression (physical)" label="compressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="1321" end="1324" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="1339" end="1344" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="1345" end="1353" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146537" start="1397" end="1414" title="urea-formaldehyde" label="urea-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q408365" start="1459" end="1469" title="isocyanate" label="isocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370465" start="1485" end="1489" title="PMDI" label="PMDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370465" start="1495" end="1526" title="methylene diphenyl diisocyanate" label="methylene diphenyl diisocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212553" start="1556" end="1564" title="melamine" label="melamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146537" start="1565" end="1582" title="urea-formaldehyde" label="urea-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="1586" end="1611" title="phenol formaldehyde resin" label="phenol formaldehyde resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="1680" end="1705" title="phenol formaldehyde resin" label="phenol formaldehyde resin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1899" end="1913" title="wire-mesh caul" label="wire-mesh caul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2734" end="2747" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2752" end="2758" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25045332" start="2891" end="2922" title="Oriented structural straw board" label="Oriented structural straw board"/>
<link wikidata="Q799856" start="3109" end="3116" title="bagasse" label="bagasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="3255" end="3262" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3348" end="3354" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3366" end="3373" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="3466" end="3474" title="Strength of materials" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q569057" start="3480" end="3488" title="Stiffness" label="rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059955" start="3597" end="3605" title="Artificial membrane" label="membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="3731" end="3738" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="3997" end="4002" title="wood grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="4446" end="4472" title="volatile organic compounds" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="4481" end="4493" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q146537" start="4495" end="4512" title="Urea-formaldehyde resin" label="Urea-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="4562" end="4581" title="Phenol formaldehyde resin" label="Phenol-formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="4714" end="4731" title="Isocyanate resin" label="isocyanate resins"/>
<link wikidata="Q421726" start="4986" end="4992" title="borate" label="borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="5021" end="5028" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="5043" end="5049" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="5052" end="5056" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="5063" end="5068" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="5078" end="5084" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276548" wikidata="Q1384674" url="?curid=276548" title="Exponential map (Riemannian geometry)">
<text>In Riemannian geometry, an exponential map is a map from a subset of a tangent space T&quot;p&quot;&quot;M&quot; of a Riemannian manifold (or pseudo-Riemannian manifold) &quot;M&quot; to &quot;M&quot; itself. The (pseudo) Riemannian metric determines a canonical affine connection, and the exponential map of the (pseudo) Riemannian manifold is given by the exponential map of this connection.

== Definition ==
Let be a differentiable manifold and a point of . An affine connection on allows one to define the notion of a straight line through the point .

Let be a tangent vector to the manifold at . Then there is a unique geodesic :[0,1] → satisfying with initial tangent vector . The corresponding exponential map is defined by . In general, the exponential map is only &quot;locally defined&quot;, that is, it only takes a small neighborhood of the origin at , to a neighborhood of in the manifold. This is because it relies on the theorem of existence and uniqueness for ordinary differential equations which is local in nature. An affine connection is called complete if the exponential map is well-defined at every point of the tangent bundle.

== Properties ==
Intuitively speaking, the exponential map takes a given tangent vector to the manifold, runs along the geodesic starting at that point and goes in that direction, for one unit of time. Since &quot;v&quot; corresponds to the velocity vector of the geodesic, the actual (Riemannian) distance traveled will be dependent on that. We can also reparametrize geodesics to be unit speed, so equivalently we can define exp&quot;p&quot;(&quot;v&quot;) = β(|&quot;v&quot;|) where β is the unit-speed geodesic (geodesic parameterized by arc length) going in the direction of &quot;v&quot;. As we vary the tangent vector &quot;v&quot; we will get, when applying exp&quot;p&quot;, different points on &quot;M&quot; which are within some distance from the base point &quot;p&quot;—this is perhaps one of the most concrete ways of demonstrating that the tangent space to a manifold is a kind of &quot;linearization&quot; of the manifold.

The Hopf–Rinow theorem asserts that it is possible to define the exponential map on the whole tangent space if and only if the manifold is complete as a metric space (which justifies the usual term geodesically complete for a manifold having an exponential map with this property). In particular, compact manifolds are geodesically complete. However even if exp&quot;p&quot; is defined on the whole tangent space, it will in general not be a global diffeomorphism. However, its differential at the origin of the tangent space is the identity map and so, by the inverse function theorem we can find a neighborhood of the origin of T&quot;p&quot;&quot;M&quot; on which the exponential map is an embedding (i.e., the exponential map is a local diffeomorphism). The radius of the largest ball about the origin in T&quot;p&quot;&quot;M&quot; that can be mapped diffeomorphically via exp&quot;p&quot; is called the injectivity radius of &quot;M&quot; at &quot;p&quot;. The cut locus of the exponential map is, roughly speaking, the set of all points where the exponential map fails to have a unique minimum.

An important property of the exponential map is the following lemma of Gauss (yet another Gauss&#x27;s lemma): given any tangent vector &quot;v&quot; in the domain of definition of exp&quot;p&quot;, and another vector &quot;w&quot; based at the tip of &quot;v&quot; (hence &quot;w&quot; is actually in the double-tangent space T&quot;v&quot;(T&quot;p&quot;&quot;M&quot;)) and orthogonal to &quot;v&quot;, &quot;w&quot; remains orthogonal to &quot;v&quot; when pushed forward via the exponential map. This means, in particular, that the boundary sphere of a small ball about the origin in T&quot;p&quot;&quot;M&quot; is orthogonal to the geodesics in &quot;M&quot; determined by those vectors (i.e., the geodesics are &quot;radial&quot;). This motivates the definition of geodesic normal coordinates on a Riemannian manifold.

The exponential map is also useful in relating the abstract definition of curvature to the more concrete realization of it originally conceived by Riemann himself—the sectional curvature is intuitively defined as the Gaussian curvature of some surface (i.e., a slicing of the manifold by a 2-dimensional submanifold) through the point &quot;p&quot; in consideration. Via the exponential map, it now can be precisely defined as the Gaussian curvature of a surface through &quot;p&quot; determined by the image under exp&quot;p&quot; of a 2-dimensional subspace of T&quot;p&quot;&quot;M&quot;.

== Relationships to exponential maps in Lie theory ==
In the case of Lie groups with a bi-invariant metric—a pseudo-Riemannian metric invariant under both left and right translation—the exponential maps of the pseudo-Riemannian structure are the same as the exponential maps of the Lie group. In general, Lie groups do not have a bi-invariant metric, though all connected semi-simple (or reductive) Lie groups do. The existence of a bi-invariant &quot;Riemannian&quot; metric is stronger than that of a pseudo-Riemannian metric, and implies that the Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of a compact Lie group; conversely, any compact (or abelian) Lie group has such a Riemannian metric.

Take the example that gives the &quot;honest&quot; exponential map. Consider the positive real numbers R+, a Lie group under the usual multiplication. Then each tangent space is just R. On each copy of R at the point &quot;y&quot;, we introduce the modified inner product
formula_1
multiplying them as usual real numbers but scaling by &quot;y&quot;2 (this is what makes the metric left-invariant, for left multiplication by a factor will just pull out of the inner product, twice — canceling the square in the denominator).

Consider the point 1 ∈ R+, and &quot;x&quot; ∈ R an element of the tangent space at 1. The usual straight line emanating from 1, namely &quot;y&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) = 1 + &quot;xt&quot; covers the same path as a geodesic, of course, except we have to reparametrize so as to get a curve with constant speed (&quot;constant speed&quot;, remember, is not going to be the ordinary constant speed, because we&#x27;re using this funny metric). To do this we reparametrize by arc length (the integral of the length of the tangent vector in the norm formula_2 induced by the modified metric):
formula_3

and after inverting the function to obtain as a function of , we substitute and get
formula_4

Now using the unit speed definition, we have
formula_5
giving the expected &quot;e&quot;&quot;x&quot;.

The Riemannian distance defined by this is simply
formula_6

== See also ==
*List of exponential topics

== Notes ==
==References==

* . See Chapter 1, Sections 2 and 3.
* . See Chapter 3.
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="3" end="22" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384674" start="27" end="42" title="Exponential map (Riemannian geometry)" label="exponential map"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="71" end="84" title="tangent space" label="tangent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="118" end="137" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="142" end="168" title="pseudo-Riemannian manifold" label="pseudo-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="421" end="444" title="differentiable manifold" label="differentiable manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371213" start="465" end="482" title="affine connection" label="affine connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="523" end="536" title="straight line" label="straight line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179296" start="567" end="581" title="tangent vector" label="tangent vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="626" end="634" title="geodesic" label="geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q530152" start="949" end="973" title="Picard–Lindelöf theorem" label="existence and uniqueness"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="978" end="1008" title="ordinary differential equation" label="ordinary differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="1137" end="1151" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094241" start="2098" end="2116" title="Hopf–Rinow theorem" label="Hopf–Rinow theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="2247" end="2259" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="2391" end="2398" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058314" start="2543" end="2557" title="diffeomorphism" label="diffeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="2627" end="2639" title="identity function" label="identity map"/>
<link wikidata="Q931001" start="2655" end="2679" title="inverse function theorem" label="inverse function theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237377" start="3003" end="3021" title="injectivity radius" label="injectivity radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q55951116" start="3061" end="3070" title="Cut locus (Riemannian manifold)" label="cut locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229339" start="3259" end="3273" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma (Riemannian geometry)" label="lemma of Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178762" start="3287" end="3305" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma (disambiguation)" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300098" start="3503" end="3523" title="Double tangent bundle" label="double-tangent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152232" start="3968" end="3995" title="geodesic normal coordinates" label="geodesic normal coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q40139" start="4074" end="4106" title="Curvature of Riemannian manifolds" label="abstract definition of curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q855622" start="4190" end="4209" title="sectional curvature" label="sectional curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q945953" start="4240" end="4258" title="Gaussian curvature" label="Gaussian curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810382" start="4874" end="4907" title="exponential map (Lie theory)" label="exponential maps of the Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176558" start="5380" end="5401" title="positive real numbers" label="positive real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619128" start="6697" end="6723" title="List of exponential topics" label="List of exponential topics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276549" wikidata="Q2946927" url="?curid=276549" title="Certified Management Accountant">
<text>Certified Management Accountant (CMA) is a professional certification credential in the management accounting and financial management fields. The certification signifies that the person possesses knowledge in the areas of financial planning, analysis, control, decision support, and professional ethics. There are many professional bodies globally that have management accounting professional qualifications. The main bodies that offer the CMA certification are:
# Institute of Management Accountants USA;
# Institute of Certified Management Accountants (Australia);
# Certified Management Accountants of Canada.

Since the Canadian body merged with the CPA Canada in September 2015, there are only 2 global bodies that offer the CMA certification, IMA (USA) and ICMA (Australia). However, the certification pathways for the two bodies – in terms of entry requirements, study syllabi and experience requirements are very different.

The United States–based Institute of Management Accountants USA is one of the two global bodies that offers the CMA Certification. Only authorized partners of IMA can provide coaching to students for CMA USA. CMA (USA)-certified professionals work inside organizations of all sizes, industries, and types, including manufacturing and services, public and private enterprises, not-for-profit organizations, academic institutions, Government entities (USA), and multinational corporations worldwide. To obtain certification, candidates must pass a rigorous exam, meet an educational requirement, experience requirement, and demonstrate a commitment to continuous learning through continuing professional education (CPE).

==The Certified Management Accountant (USA) Exam==
Prior to 2010, the CMA exam was organized into four parts: Business Analysis, Management Accounting and Reporting, Strategic Management and Decision Analysis. Since 2010, the exam has been condensed into two four-hour parts, covering largely the same material as the former four part exam with added emphasis on financial planning, analysis, control, and decision support.

Each exam consists of descriptive questions and two 30-minute essay questions. Candidates are given 3 hours to complete the multiple choice section and one hour to complete the essays. Candidates must show their work for the essay questions in order to receive credit. Parts 1 and 2 of the CMA exam are scored on a scale of 0–500 with a candidate&#x27;s raw score converted to a uniform scaled score against all exam candidates. On this scale, a score of 360 represents the minimum passing scaled score.

===Exam Content===
&quot;Part 1 – Financial Planning, Performance, and Analytics.&quot;
* External financial reporting decisions (15%)
* Planning, budgeting and forecasting (20%)
* Performance management (20%)
* Cost management (15%)
* Internal controls (15%)
* Technology and Analytics (15%)

&quot;Part 2 – Strategic Financial Management&quot;
* Financial statement analysis (20%)
* Corporate finance (20%)
* Decision analysis (25%)
* Risk management (10%)
* Investment decisions (10%)
* Professional ethics (15%)


===Additional Certification Requirements===
In addition to successfully passing the exams, CMA candidates must fulfill education and experience requirements in order to be certified:

1. Bachelor&#x27;s degree from an accredited college or university

2. Two continuous years of professional experience employing the principles of management accounting and financial management including:
* Preparation of financial statements
* Financial planning &amp; analysis
* Monthly, quarterly, and year end close
* Auditing (external or internal)
* Budget preparation &amp; reporting
* Manage general ledger and balance sheets
* Forecasting
* Company investment decision making
* Costing analysis
* Risk evaluation

3. For certified CMAs, 30 hours of CPE credits, including two hours of ethics, and annual IMA Membership are required to maintain active status.
In September 2021, IMA announced the historic milestone of awarding 100,000 CMA certifications. IMA awards 100,000th CMA certification to Qatar&#x27;s Parkar

== The Certified Management Accountant (Australia) Exam ==
The Institute of Certified Management Accountants (ICMA) is an Australian organisation operating globally, focused on management accounting. A management accountant applies his or her professional knowledge and skill in the preparation and presentation of financial and other decision-oriented information in such a way as to assist management in the formulation of policies and in the planning and control of the operation of the undertaking.

Management Accountants therefore are seen as the &quot;value-creators&quot; amongst the accountants. They are much more interested in forward looking and taking decisions that will affect the future of the organization, than in the historical recording and compliance (scorekeeping) aspects of the profession. Management accounting knowledge and experience can therefore be obtained from varied fields and functions within an organization, such as information management, treasury, efficiency auditing, marketing, valuation, pricing, logistics, etc.

=== Education Program ===
ICMA (Australia) is committed to scholarship and quality education at the lowest possible cost to its students. The educational objectives of the Institute of Certified Management Accountants (ICMA) are therefore to further the development of management accounting education in the universities and business schools of Australia and Internationally, to encourage research into the application of management accounting theory and practice, and to provide continuing professional development for its members.

In order to achieve the above objectives, the following educational programmes have been implemented by the institute.

==== Technician Level Programmes ====
These programmes cover the three technician-level qualifications of ICMA:

* Certified Accounting Technician (CAT)
* Registered Cost Accountant (RCA)
* Registered Business Accountant (RBA)

There are 4-Stages in the Technician-Level Programs, consisting of 4-Subjects each as follows:

===== Stage 1 =====

* Organizational Management
* Accounting Principles &amp; Practice
* Accounting Control Systems
* Financial Information Systems

===== Stage 2 =====

* Financial Economics
* International Business Law &amp; Governance
* Business Analysis &amp; Audit
* International Business Taxation

===== Stage 3 =====

* Financial Accounting
* Marketing Management
* Information Management
* Strategic Management

===== Stage 4 =====

* Financial Management
* Financial Statement Analysis
* Financial Modelling
* Managerial Accounting

==== Professional Level Programmes ====
These programmes cover the professional-level qualifications of ICMA

* Graduate Management Accountant (GMA)
* Associate Management Accountant (AMA)
* Certified Management Accountant (CMA)

These certifications are only open to degree holders. Those holding an accounting/finance degree (or equivalent professional qualification) are exempt from all four stages of the Technician-level program and can advance directly to the CMA program. Those holding a non-accounting/finance degree or professional qualification need to undertake a Graduate Conversion program (Stage 4) prior to undertaking the CMA program

=== Graduate Conversion Program (for Non-Accounting Graduates/ Non-Accounting Professionals). ===
Students who have obtained a non-accounting degree, or are full members of recognized professional non-accounting bodies (e.g., Chartered Institute of Marketing) would have satisfied the broad educational objectives to enrol in the Graduate Conversion programme -which is to complete Stage 4 of the GMA programme prior to undertaking the CMA program. A student completing the Graduate Conversion programme is eligible to join as a Graduate Management Accountant (GMA).

A student completing the Graduate Management Accountant (GMA) program and having 3 years or more of business experience is eligible to join as an Associate Management Accountant (AMA). Such students can enrol for the post-graduate level CMA program at any time; but must successfully complete this program and also accumulate 5-years of business experience to be eligible to join as a Certified Management Accountant (CMA).

=== CMA Program (for Accounting Graduates/Professional Accountants) ===
The flagship CMA Preparatory Program consists of two subjects:

# Strategic Cost Management
# Strategic Business Analysis

The CMA program from Australia is designed as the first post-graduate level management accounting qualification in the world. There are other unique aspects to ICMA&#x27;s Education program. It was the first professional body in the world to embed its CMA subjects within master&#x27;s degree programs in accredited universities; and allow those universities to examine students internally.

== Entry Criteria for CMA (Australia) Program ==
The CMA Preparatory Program is only open to those with a university degree in accounting or finance; or an MBA, or a recognised professional qualification in accounting/finance. Those not meeting these entry criteria need to complete the Graduate Management Accountant (GMA) or GMA Conversion program first.

=== Assessments ===
Those undertaking course at an ICMA Recognised Provider Institution are all examined by the ICMA: 

[A student must obtain a 50% pass grade, in the final assessment to pass the subject. Students obtaining less than 50% in the final assessment would Fail the subject.]

=== Additional Certification Requirements ===
In addition to passing the two subjects, one needs to have 5-years of business experience to qualify as a Certified Management Accountant (CMA).

==See also==
* Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA UK, Designation is ACMA or FCMA) - UK, Europe, International
* Institute of Cost Accountants of India (ICMAI, Designation is ACMA or FCMA) - India
* Certified Management Accountants of Canada (Designation as CMA, FCMA)
* Certified Public Accountant - USA
* Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination - USA
* Chartered Financial Analyst - USA
* Certified International Investment Analyst - Europe, International
* Certified European Financial Analyst - Europe
* Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan (ICMAP - Designation as ACMA, FCMA)
* Institute of Certified Management Accountants (ICMA Australia) - Australia, Asia-Pacific, International
* Institute of Management Accountants (IMA USA) - USA, China, International
*Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Bangladesh (Designation is ACMA or FCMA)ICMAB Bangladesh
* Institute of Certified Management Accountants (CMA SL Sri Lanka) - Sri Lanka &lt;Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka |&gt;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2946927" start="0" end="31" title="Certified Management Accountant" label="Certified Management Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946927" start="33" end="36" title="Certified Management Accountant" label="CMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023913" start="43" end="69" title="professional certification" label="professional certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990807" start="88" end="109" title="management accounting" label="management accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738155" start="114" end="134" title="financial management" label="financial management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416547" start="223" end="241" title="financial planning" label="financial planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152803" start="466" end="505" title="Institute of Management Accountants" label="Institute of Management Accountants USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040008" start="509" end="566" title="Institute of Certified Management Accountants" label="Institute of Certified Management Accountants (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065197" start="570" end="612" title="Certified Management Accountants of Canada" label="Certified Management Accountants of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="938" end="951" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152803" start="958" end="997" title="Institute of Management Accountants" label="Institute of Management Accountants USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q828812" start="1612" end="1651" title="Continuing professional development" label="continuing professional education (CPE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="3289" end="3311" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384936" start="9775" end="9820" title="Chartered Institute of Management Accountants" label="Chartered Institute of Management Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040174" start="9890" end="9928" title="Institute of Cost Accountants of India" label="Institute of Cost Accountants of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065197" start="9976" end="10018" title="Certified Management Accountants of Canada" label="Certified Management Accountants of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="10048" end="10075" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="Certified Public Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885018" start="10084" end="10131" title="Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination" label="Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067869" start="10140" end="10167" title="Chartered Financial Analyst" label="Chartered Financial Analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q856313" start="10176" end="10218" title="Certified International Investment Analyst" label="Certified International Investment Analyst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10245" end="10281" title="Certified European Financial Analyst" label="Certified European Financial Analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377792" start="10293" end="10349" title="Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan" label="Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040008" start="10388" end="10433" title="Institute of Certified Management Accountants" label="Institute of Certified Management Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152803" start="10494" end="10529" title="Institute of Management Accountants" label="Institute of Management Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040179" start="10569" end="10627" title="Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Bangladesh" label="Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324556" start="10676" end="10721" title="Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka" label="Institute of Certified Management Accountants"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276551" wikidata="Q2855841" url="?curid=276551" title="Robert Siegel">
<text>Robert Charles Siegel (born June 26, 1947) is an American retired radio journalist. He was one of the co-hosts of the National Public Radio afternoon news broadcast &quot;All Things Considered&quot; from 1987 until his retirement in January 2018.

== Early life, family and education ==
Siegel was born June 26, 1947, in New York City, to parents Joseph and Edith Siegel (&quot;née&quot; Joffe). His father was a commercial education teacher, and his mother a secretary at Stuyvesant High School. He grew up at Stuyvesant Town—Peter Cooper Village. His maternal grandfather claimed to descend from rabbinical scholar Mordechai Yoffe, and Siegel has identified on-air as Jewish. After graduating in 1964 from Stuyvesant, Siegel studied at Columbia University, graduating from Columbia College in 1968. During this time, he was an anchor for the reporting of the 1968 Columbia demonstrations at the college radio station, WKCR-FM.
He attended Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism for a year.

== Career ==
Siegel&#x27;s first professional broadcasting job was at WGLI in Babylon, New York, where he &quot;did morning newscasts and a show that was part phone-ins, part Top Forty, all under the pseudonym Bob Charles.&quot; After graduate school, he worked for WRVR in New York from 1971 to 1976.

Siegel was hired as a newscaster for NPR in Washington, D.C., in 1976, and he has held various news and production jobs at NPR since then. In broadcasts prior to the Panama Canal Treaty debates, he was referred to as &quot;Bob,&quot; rather than his preferred &quot;Robert.&quot; From 1979 to 1983 he was based in London, making him the first NPR staffer to be based overseas. Upon his return to America, he became the director of the News and Information Department, and was responsible for overseeing production of both &quot;All Things Considered&quot; and &quot;Morning Edition&quot;, as well as the creation of &quot;Weekend Edition.&quot; Starting in 1987, he was a host of &quot;All Things Considered&quot;. He took a short break in 1992 to host &quot;Talk of the Nation&quot;, NPR&#x27;s call-in talk show. In 2010, Siegel was presented with the John Chancellor Award for Excellence in Journalism by the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. Siegel won three Silver Batons from Alfred I. DuPont-Columbia University and the American Bar Association&#x27;s Silver Gavel Award.

In April 2017, Siegel announced he would end his time with &quot;All Things Considered&quot;. His last day on the program was January 5, 2018.

Siegel has made cameo appearances in several television shows, including &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, &quot;Northern Exposure&quot;, &quot;BoJack Horseman&quot; and the film &quot;Yesterday Was a Lie&quot;.

For the weeks of June 5, 2018, and February 17, 2020, Siegel guest-hosted NPR&#x27;s &quot;On Point&quot;.

== Personal life ==
In 1973, Siegel married Jane Claudia Schwartz, who worked for the United States Department of Commerce. They have two daughters, Erica Anne Siegel and musician Leah Siegel.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Robert Siegel at NPR
* 
* Silver Screen articles at Blu-ray.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2855841" start="0" end="21" title="Robert Siegel" label="Robert Charles Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="118" end="139" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837534" start="171" end="192" title="All Things Considered" label="All Things Considered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098911" start="473" end="495" title="Stuyvesant High School" label="Stuyvesant High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588578" start="511" end="547" title="Stuyvesant Town—Peter Cooper Village" label="Stuyvesant Town—Peter Cooper Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q982189" start="617" end="632" title="Mordechai Yoffe" label="Mordechai Yoffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="670" end="676" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="738" end="757" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569677" start="775" end="791" title="Columbia College (New York)" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149908" start="861" end="889" title="Columbia University protests of 1968" label="1968 Columbia demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707668" start="920" end="927" title="WKCR-FM" label="WKCR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q844673" start="941" end="990" title="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism" label="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743025" start="1074" end="1078" title="WGLI (New York)" label="WGLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461796" start="1082" end="1099" title="Babylon (village), New York" label="Babylon, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="1179" end="1188" title="Top 40" label="Top Forty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952516" start="1270" end="1274" title="WLTW" label="WRVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1351" end="1367" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7679686" start="2066" end="2084" title="Talk of the Nation" label="Talk of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="2103" end="2120" title="talk radio" label="call-in talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225679" start="2161" end="2182" title="John Chancellor Award" label="John Chancellor Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q844673" start="2219" end="2268" title="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism" label="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722910" start="2287" end="2299" title="Silver Baton" label="Silver Baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516033" start="2383" end="2401" title="Silver Gavel Award" label="Silver Gavel Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="2627" end="2639" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q301345" start="2653" end="2670" title="Northern Exposure" label="Northern Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17733404" start="2684" end="2699" title="BoJack Horseman" label="BoJack Horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052987" start="2725" end="2744" title="Yesterday Was a Lie" label="Yesterday Was a Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960244" start="2844" end="2852" title="On Point" label="On Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="2947" end="2983" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="United States Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509256" start="3041" end="3052" title="Leah Siegel" label="Leah Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="3112" end="3115" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276553" wikidata="Q1501845" url="?curid=276553" title="Governor-General of Finland">
<text>The governor-general of Finland was the military commander and the highest administrator of Finland sporadically under Swedish rule in the 17th and 18th centuries and continuously in the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland between 1809 and 1917.

==Swedish realm==

After the final abolition of the Duchy of Finland and related feudal privileges in the late 16th century, the king of Sweden sporadically granted most or all of Finland under a specially appointed governor-general, who took care of the matters in the eastern part of the country more or less according to his own best judgement.

The best-known of these officials is Count Per Brahe the Younger, who served as Governor-General of Finland in the 17th century. His tenure, remembered as a period of reforms and progress in both economy and education, is referred to in Finnish as &quot;kreivin aika&quot; (&quot;the count&#x27;s era&quot;). Over the centuries, the phrase has taken on a new meaning and is now commonly used to describe something happening just in time, as in the expression &quot;&quot; (&quot;You arrived at the perfect moment&quot;).

===List of Swedish governors-general of Finland===
Translation in 

==Grand Duchy of Finland==

During the time when Finland was ruled by the Russian Empire as a grand duchy, the governor-general&#x27;s position was permanent. He was viceroy of the emperor, who was not personally present in Helsinki, but resided in St Petersburg, just outside of Finnish borders. The governor-general was constitutionally the chairman of the Senate of Finland, the government in the autonomous grand duchy. The chairmanship he represented, with two votes in the Senate, belonged to the grand duke of Finland, a title held by the emperor of Russia. The governor-general was the highest representative of the emperor and received his instructions directly from the imperial government in Saint Petersburg.

Finnish citizenship was not required of the governor-general, contrary to all other highest positions such as senators and the minister-secretary of state. Most governors-general were Russians, men whom the emperor trusted as counterparts of potential Finnish separatism. Many of them, up to Baron , however were also made Finnish subjects, by granting them a Finnish nobility rank.

Many of the governors-general were disliked by the Finnish population. The first man on the post, Georg Magnus Sprengtporten, resigned after only a year. Another, Nikolai Bobrikov, was assassinated in 1904 by the Finnish nationalist Eugen Schauman. On the other hand, several governors-general worked in a way that guaranteed the Finnish autonomy in face of the interests of ministers of the imperial court.

The governor-general between 1831 and 1855, Prince Menshikov, sojourned his entire term in St Petersburg, being simultaneously the Russian minister of navy. Gubernatorial duties in Helsinki were cared for by the deputy governor-general. For most of the term, in that position was general .

===List of Russian governors-general of Finland===
Translation in 

==See also==
*Grand Duke of Finland
*Duke of Finland
*Diet of Finland
*Governor-General in the Swedish Realm
*Monarchy of Finland
*Finnish Minister Secretary of State
*List of Finnish rulers

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501845" start="4" end="31" title="Governor-General of Finland" label="governor-general of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12375230" start="113" end="131" title="Finland under Swedish rule" label="under Swedish rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="198" end="220" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q502432" start="297" end="313" title="Duchy of Finland" label="Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="374" end="388" title="king of Sweden" label="king of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q472692" start="637" end="658" title="Per Brahe the Younger" label="Per Brahe the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1258" end="1272" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="1408" end="1416" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1433" end="1446" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881775" start="1543" end="1560" title="Senate of Finland" label="Senate of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257510" start="1687" end="1708" title="Grand Duke of Finland" label="grand duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618625" start="1730" end="1747" title="emperor of Russia" label="emperor of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778055" start="2033" end="2060" title="Finnish Minister Secretary of State" label="minister-secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8095230" start="2229" end="2244" title="Finnish subject" label="Finnish subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349149" start="2266" end="2282" title="Finnish nobility" label="Finnish nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548588" start="2388" end="2414" title="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten" label="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten"/>
<link wikidata="Q380350" start="2453" end="2469" title="Nikolai Ivanovich Bobrikov" label="Nikolai Bobrikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="2475" end="2487" title="assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q525893" start="2523" end="2537" title="Eugen Schauman" label="Eugen Schauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q374393" start="2743" end="2759" title="Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov" label="Prince Menshikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622106" start="2830" end="2854" title="Naval Minister of Russia" label="Russian minister of navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257510" start="3072" end="3093" title="Grand Duke of Finland" label="Grand Duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q502432" start="3095" end="3110" title="Duke of Finland" label="Duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348725" start="3112" end="3127" title="Diet of Finland" label="Diet of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654694" start="3129" end="3166" title="Governor-General in the Swedish Realm" label="Governor-General in the Swedish Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734969" start="3168" end="3187" title="Monarchy of Finland" label="Monarchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778055" start="3189" end="3224" title="Finnish Minister Secretary of State" label="Finnish Minister Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q10814377" start="3226" end="3248" title="List of Finnish rulers" label="List of Finnish rulers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276559" wikidata="Q3190068" url="?curid=276559" title="Juniper, New Brunswick">
<text>Juniper (2001 pop.: 450) is a hamlet in Carleton County, New Brunswick, Canada. Juniper is located in Aberdeen Parish. It is situated on Route 107, which runs from Route 105 at Bristol, northeast to Juniper, and then bends southeast towards Napadogan and Deersdale. Geographic coordinates: 46° 33&#x27; North, 67° 13&#x27; West; elevation 899 ft.

Juniper is named for the low growing juniper shrub which allegedly grows in the boggy spruce forest near Juniper Station.

The local economy is largely forestry-based, which employs roughly half of the population. In November 2006, the village started experiencing trouble keeping its paper mills open due to a decrease in the price of paper.

The economy also benefits from some hunting and fishing-related tourism, as the village is on the South Branch of the Southwest Miramichi River, renowned for its salmon and trout fishing.

The nearby Juniper Barrens String Bog, the largest bog in the area, covers 12 square kilometres, and is home to the White Fringed Orchid (&quot;Platanthera blepharglottis&quot;), an uncommon type of Butterfly Orchid, and the sedge (grass) &quot;Carex eburnea&quot;. The peat is two to three metres deep. The bog is one of several unique sites in Maine and the Maritime Provinces of Canada, featured on the Irving Forest Discovery Network.

Juniper&#x27;s post office dates from 1918.

==History==

==Religion==
The village has three churches, Roman Catholic, United Church of Canada, and a United Pentecostal Church.

==Education==
The village is in School District 14 and has one public school, Juniper Elementary School, formerly Juniper High School.

== Transportation ==
A line of the Canadian national Railway passes through Juniper.

==Notable people==
The best known resident of the village was the Right Honourable Hugh John Flemming, Premier of New Brunswick and Canadian Federal Minister of Forestry, who was the son of Sarah and the Right Honourable James Kidd Flemming, a Premier of New Brunswick himself. He went to work at his family&#x27;s mill, Flemming and Gibson, in Juniper at the age of fifteen, but retired to a home near Woodstock, New Brunswick, after retiring from Parliament in 1972, and also in Fredericton, New Brunswick.

Flemming&#x27;s wife, Aida Flemming, founded the International Kindness Club for Children, a club to teach children to love and be kind to animals, and was active in a number of charities.

The New Brunswick Kindness Club now has members in many provinces and countries, including every Canadian province, the Yukon Territory, the United States, India, England, France, Norway, the West Indies, Belize, Ireland, Australia, Korea, Japan, and many countries in Africa. Doctor Albert Schweitzer, famous for his medical and humanitarian work, served as an Honorary President of the International Kindness Club, before it was incorporated into the Humane Society of the United States (HSUS), of which Mrs. Flemming became an honorary board member.

==See also==
*List of communities in New Brunswick

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3190068" start="0" end="7" title="Juniper, New Brunswick" label="Juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429216" start="40" end="55" title="Carleton County, New Brunswick" label="Carleton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="57" end="70" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296641" start="102" end="117" title="Aberdeen Parish, New Brunswick" label="Aberdeen Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443516" start="137" end="146" title="New Brunswick Route 107" label="Route 107"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418426" start="164" end="173" title="New Brunswick Route 105" label="Route 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074056" start="177" end="184" title="Bristol, New Brunswick" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964805" start="241" end="250" title="Napadogan, New Brunswick" label="Napadogan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="255" end="264" title="Deersdale, New Brunswick" label="Deersdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="385" end="398" title="juniper" label="juniper shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="428" end="431" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="434" end="440" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="453" end="468" title="Juniper Station, New Brunswick" label="Juniper Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="728" end="735" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="740" end="747" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="756" end="763" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571323" start="810" end="835" title="Southwest Miramichi River" label="Southwest Miramichi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="854" end="860" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="865" end="870" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="1151" end="1155" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1577" end="1602" title="Juniper Elementary School" label="Juniper Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1670" end="1695" title="Canadian national Railway" label="Canadian national Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142270" start="1804" end="1822" title="Hugh John Flemming" label="Hugh John Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12270252" start="1824" end="1848" title="Premier of New Brunswick" label="Premier of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161204" start="1942" end="1961" title="James Kidd Flemming" label="James Kidd Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559651" start="2124" end="2148" title="Woodstock, New Brunswick" label="Woodstock, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696641" start="2253" end="2266" title="Aida McAnn Flemming" label="Aida Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233195" start="2294" end="2307" title="Kindness Club" label="Kindness Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="2698" end="2722" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Doctor Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636612" start="2874" end="2909" title="Humane Society of the United States" label="Humane Society of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111821" start="2989" end="3025" title="List of communities in New Brunswick" label="List of communities in New Brunswick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="276560" wikidata="Q681970" url="?curid=276560" title="Orf (disease)">
<text>Orf is a farmyard pox, a type of zoonosis. It causes small pustules in the skin of primarily sheep and goats, but can also occur on the hands of humans. A pale halo forms around a red centre. It may persist for several weeks before crusting and then either resolves or leaves a granuloma. There is usually only one non-painful lesion, but there can be more. Lymph nodes may also become swollen.

It is caused by a &quot;Parapoxvirus&quot;. It can occur in humans who handle infected animals or contaminated objects. One third of cases may develop erythema multiforme. Once resolved, a person can still be infected again.

Generally, once infected, treatment options are limited. Injecting the lesion with cidofovir or applying imiquimod has been studied. However, it is sometimes required to excise the pustules.. The vaccine used in sheep to prevent orf is live and has been known to cause disease in humans.

The disease is endemic in livestock herds worldwide. A recent outbreak emerged in southwest Ethiopia between October 2019 and May 2020.

==Humans==
Orf is a zoonotic disease, meaning humans can contract this disorder through direct contact with infected sheep and goats or with fomites carrying the orf virus. It causes a purulent-appearing papule locally and generally no systemic symptoms. Infected locations can include the finger, hand, arm, face and even the penis (caused by infection either from contact with the hand during urination or from bestiality). Consequently, it is important to observe good personal hygiene and to wear gloves when treating infected animals. It may appear similar to cowpox and pseudocowpox.
While orf is usually a benign self-limiting illness which resolves in 3-6 weeks, in the immunocompromised it can be very progressive and even life-threatening. One percent topical cidofovir has been successfully used in a few patients with progressive disease. Serious damage may be inflicted on the eye if it is infected by orf, even among otherwise healthy patients. The virus can survive in the soil for at least six months.

==Other animals==
Orf is primarily a disease of sheep and goats although it has been reported as a natural disease in humans, steenbok and alpacas, chamois and tahrs, reindeer, musk oxen, dogs, cats, mountain goats, bighorn sheep, dall sheep, and red squirrels.

===Sheep and goats===
It has been recorded since the late 19th century and has been reported from most sheep-or goat-raising areas, including those in Europe, the Middle East, the United States, Africa, Asia, South America, Canada, New Zealand and Australia. Orf is spread by fomites and direct contact. In some environments, infection is injected by scratches from thistles of both growing and felled plants. Symptoms include papules and pustules on the lips and muzzle, and less commonly in the mouth of young lambs and on the eyelids, feet, and teats of ewes. The lesions progress to thick crusts which may bleed. Orf in the mouths of lambs may prevent suckling and cause weight loss, and can infect the udder of the mother ewe, thus potentially leading to mastitis. Sheep are prone to reinfection. Occasionally the infection can be extensive and persistent if the animal does not produce an immune response.

A live virus vaccine (ATCvet code: ) is made from scab material and usually given to ewes at the age of two months, but typically only given to lambs when there is a confirmed outbreak. outbreak. The vaccine can cause minor cases of orf when used in humans.
In sheep and goats, the lesions mostly appear on or near the hairline and elsewhere on the lips and muzzle. In some cases the lesions appear on and in the nostrils, around the eyes, on the thigh, coronet, vulva, udder, and axilla. In rare cases, mostly involving young lambs, lesions are found on the tongue, gums, roof of the mouth and the esophagus. It has also been reported a number of times to cause lesions in the rumen. In one case it was shown that a severe form of orf virus caused an outbreak involving the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, heart, as well as the buccal cavity, cheeks, tongue and lips. Another severe case was reported pharyngitis, genital lesions and infection of the hooves which led to lameness and, in some cases, sloughing of the hoof.

More typically, sheep will become free of orf within a week or so as the disease runs its course. Sheep custodians can assist by ensuring infected lambs receive sufficient milk and separating out the infected stock to slow down cross-transmission to healthy animals. It is advisable for those handling infected animals to wear disposable gloves to prevent cross infection and self-infection. A veterinarian must be contacted if there is a risk of misdiagnosis with other, more serious conditions.

== See also ==
* Ecthyma
* List of cutaneous conditions
* List of immunofluorescence findings for autoimmune bullous conditions
* Imiquimod
* Cidofovir

== References ==

== External links ==




* Farm Health Online: Disease Management of Orf Virus in Sheep</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q681970" start="0" end="3" title="Orf (disease)" label="Orf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435955" start="9" end="21" title="farmyard pox" label="farmyard pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="33" end="41" title="zoonosis" label="zoonosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="59" end="66" title="pustule" label="pustule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="75" end="79" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="93" end="98" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="103" end="108" title="goats" label="goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="276" end="287" title="granuloma" label="a granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812166" start="420" end="432" title="Parapoxvirus" label="Parapoxvirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363732" start="547" end="566" title="erythema multiforme" label="erythema multiforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q423445" start="705" end="714" title="cidofovir" label="cidofovir"/>
<link wikidata="Q423417" start="727" end="736" title="imiquimod" label="imiquimod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270448" start="792" end="798" title="Debridement" label="excise"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1003" end="1011" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="1068" end="1076" title="Zoonoses" label="zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="1077" end="1084" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075150" start="1189" end="1196" title="fomites" label="fomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829829" start="1233" end="1241" title="purulent" label="purulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q997862" start="1252" end="1258" title="papule" label="papule"/>
<link wikidata="Q8392" start="1461" end="1471" title="bestiality" label="bestiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066011" start="1613" end="1619" title="cowpox" label="cowpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975674" start="1624" end="1636" title="pseudocowpox" label="pseudocowpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="1726" end="1742" title="immunocompromise" label="immunocompromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q423445" start="1818" end="1827" title="cidofovir" label="cidofovir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2185" end="2190" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q368033" start="2193" end="2201" title="steenbok" label="steenbok"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="2206" end="2212" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q131340" start="2215" end="2222" title="chamois" label="chamois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130200" start="2227" end="2231" title="tahr" label="tahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="2234" end="2242" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184004" start="2244" end="2251" title="musk ox" label="musk ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="2255" end="2258" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="2261" end="2264" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="2267" end="2280" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="2283" end="2296" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q576112" start="2298" end="2308" title="dall sheep" label="dall sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388" start="2314" end="2326" title="red squirrel" label="red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075150" start="2606" end="2612" title="fomite" label="fomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q538906" start="2696" end="2703" title="thistle" label="thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q997862" start="2757" end="2763" title="papule" label="papule"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="2769" end="2776" title="pustule" label="pustule"/>
<link wikidata="Q167896" start="2794" end="2800" title="Muzzle (anatomy)" label="muzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q206718" start="2878" end="2882" title="teat" label="teat"/>
<link wikidata="Q835061" start="3090" end="3098" title="mastitis" label="mastitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="3256" end="3263" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192093" start="3265" end="3271" title="ATCvet" label="ATCvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="3706" end="3711" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q499" start="3724" end="3730" title="axilla" label="axilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="3842" end="3851" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="3921" end="3926" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="4018" end="4040" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461972" start="4071" end="4084" title="Buccal space" label="buccal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085267" start="4144" end="4155" title="pharyngitis" label="pharyngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q470701" start="4782" end="4789" title="Ecthyma" label="Ecthyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q246809" start="4792" end="4820" title="List of cutaneous conditions" label="List of cutaneous conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623899" start="4823" end="4892" title="List of immunofluorescence findings for autoimmune bullous conditions" label="List of immunofluorescence findings for autoimmune bullous conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q423417" start="4895" end="4904" title="Imiquimod" label="Imiquimod"/>
<link wikidata="Q423445" start="4907" end="4916" title="Cidofovir" label="Cidofovir"/>
</links>
</doc>
